VOL. XXX JULY 1 NO. 13 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

The Good Tidings Spreading in Africa 195 

Brother Booth Reports Favorably 195 

Brother Brink Writes Also 195 

Persecution Follows 196 

Brother Russell's European Tour 196 

Western Convention Tour 199 

The Ransom and The Sin Atonement 201 

The Three Burnings— Sacrifices 202 

He Appeared for Us 203 

The Scape-Goat's Part 204 

"This is My Blood-Drink Ye All Of It" 205 

The Field of Battle (Poem) 205 

Samples of Interesting Letters 206 

Brooklyn Bethel Hymns for August 206 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 207 

page 194 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



VOW POST-CARDS 

We now have a very handsome folding post-card containing 
the Vow in prose and poem form, in gold letters on colored 
back-grounds, at 20 cents per dozen, postpaid. 

We still have a goodly supply of the Vow Mottoes. 

WITHDRAWAL LETTERS 

For those responding to the Lord's exhortation in Rev. 18:4 
these are excellent. They state the cause and purpose 
of one's withdrawal in very concise and clear terms that the 
motive may not be unnecessarily misunderstood. We supply 
them in any quantity needed, free, for the asking. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER IN DUTCH 

We have a large supply of the "Do You Know?" tract 
in the Hollandish language for use among your Dutch neighbors 
and friends. 

SWEDISH AND NORWEGIAN VOLUNTEER MATTER 

We still have an ample supply in both languages for Volunteer 
purposes. 

HELL BOOKLET AND VOLUNTEER MATTER IN GREEK 

A treatise of the Scripture teaching on Hell, in the Greek 
language, at 10 cents each. Also seven different Greek tracts, 
excellent for Volunteer matter. 

OUR LORD'S GREAT PROPHECY IN ITALIAN 

Treatise on Matt. 24th chap, (as in 4th vol.), at 10c each. 



R4421 :page 195 

THE GOOD TIDINGS SPREADING IN AFRICA 
BROTHER BOOTH REPORTS FAVORABLY 



RESPECTING the work in and around Pretoria it 

is very encouraging in many respects. While 

as yet not many of the English people are 

taking hold of the Harvest truths, the reception of them 



by the native Christians is very gratifying. On my first 
Sunday here I entered one of the large native compounds 
and began singing in several of the native languages 
successively. The dwellers responded as by an electric 
shock and gave close and joyful attention as they grasped 
some of the simpler features of the message. 

At this writing several of the natives who work at the 
mines and other places are so situated and so interested 
that they are going out from Saturday p.m. to Monday 
a.m. delivering tracts and teaching in the various compounds 
for thirty miles around Johannesburg and Pretoria 
of the Harvest-time and Restitution truths to the 
250,000 natives and Indians and some 20,000 Chinese 
cooped in from noon Saturday till over Sunday. They 
are overjoyed at having the same message brought here 
which they have heard was being proclaimed up in their 
home country, Nyassaland, by Brother Elliott Kamwana. 

One who has been here only three months tells that 
he saw Elliott baptise 300 in one day; another gives 
advice that in one place there are 700 adherents. And 
I am further informed that there are towards 3,000 in 
that country in about 30 separate places who have 
accepted the Divine Plan as preferable to Presbyterianism 
and the Church of England. Brother Elliott himself 
reports that there are about 9,000 who are interested 
somewhat, though not all of them to the extent named 
above. 

The method chiefly employed is singularly applicable 
to the conditions of the native towns. Every village 
has a Bwalo for the hearing of matters of public interest. 
The itinerant brother reading English translates the 
paragraphs in simple style into the vernacular of the 
people. Questions are entertained, etc. 

The native brethren are sending in subscriptions for 
"The Watch Tower" for points in Nyassaland to the 
number of 76. King Lenanika and the Prince Letitia, 
his son, and their Prime Minister, from 600 miles north 
of the Pretoria Falls, have sent highly educated Christian 
representatives for the whole six volumes. They 
wish this message to be fully studied and proclaimed 
through their country, and throughout that of their 
friends, the great Basulu chiefs of Basululand. 

Nor are the Europeans being neglected in this vicinity. 
Brother Brink and self are giving a series of lectures, 
gradually covering the message, in English and Dutch. 
Two sisters at Krugersdorp, 12 miles out of Johannesburg, 
are working up an interest and circulating "Dawn-Studies." 
These, like Brother Sargent, of Johannesburg, 
came out boldly in a street meeting in Cape Town. 

BROTHER BRINK WRITES ALSO 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 
May God bless you and keep you and spare you. I 



am overwhelmed by the most glorious Gospel, the love 
and majesty of God, the Father, that is being revealed 
from God's grand Book in these latter days of this 
Gospel Age through your instrumentality. 

"Glory be to God in the Highest, on earth, peace, 
good will to men." This was the theme of one of my 
trial sermons before I came out as minister of the 
Divine Word in 1897. But only now, since I read your 
"Studies in the Scriptures," the six volumes (Millennial 
Dawn edition), and since yesterday "The Watch Tower" 

R4422 : page 195 

(Vol. XXIL, January 15, 1901, No. 2), kindly lent me by 
Brother J. Booth, who arrived here a few days ago, do I 
realize the full import of that grand anthem of the 
heavenly hosts. 

I am lifted up into mid-heavens, and even higher, by 
this grandest of all Gospels, and day and night I am 
pleading with the Father in the heavens and his Christ 
to accept of me and my life and whole-hearted services 
and to facilitate my promulgating the same. 

I am endeavoring all I can to disseminate these truths, 
but am grievously hampered by personal indigence 
since I resigned my parish charge and salary already 
in the beginning of 1903, and worked and preached since 
then without income or remuneration, and besides lost 
all my property to the extent of L4,000 by political and 
ecclesiastical persecutions. I am further hampered by 
the indigence of the masses and the indifference of others. 

To Europeans I preach through and with the delivery 
of your volumes and tracts. But to natives of about 
twelve different denominations I preach these truths in 
their pulpits and churches and through your volumes 
and tracts. They, too, are amazed and overwhelmed, the 
Spirit of God co-operating. Many a native minister has 
Vol. I. from me and is reading and preaching these 
truths in Pretoria and elsewhere since I met them. 

I am doing the work by bicycle and have to traverse 
the same grounds several times, which proves rather 
fatiguing, with small monetary results. 

I am burning to get the books into the possession 
of every minister in the state, also the tracts and the 
special issue of "The Watch Tower." But I am too impotent 
and indigent; I cannot finance that matter. The 
great plunderer has been let loose on me, and since 
1903 has succeeded in completely circumventing me. I 
am practically bound hand and foot in respect to finances. 
Otherwise I am free from all sect prejudice and trammel. 
Thanks to God for that. My supplications are now day 
and night to Father "that I may know and be enabled 
to do Thy will." There are millions in South and Central 
Africa within easy reach prepared for these glorious 
truths. 

R4422 : page 196 



There, now, my dear brother, you have the true situation 
in a few words. Do as the mind and will of God 
may direct you. I am waiting and in the meantime will 
do what my hand finds as opportunities may offer. 
There is no time to waste. 

Believe me, sincerely yours in The Christ. 



DEAR BROTHER BRINK:- 

We are glad to hear from you and to note the influence 
of the Truth upon your heart and life and that 
you are glad to press your every energy into the Lord's 
service. We are glad to co-operate with you as we 
may be able. Our Society is small and poor as this 
world's affairs go, nevertheless the Lord has supplied all 
our needs thus far. No doubt you will yet see that the 
loss of your property was indirectly a favor and blessing 
from the Lord to direct your heart nearer to him and 
to prepare you the better for his service. 

We are enclosing you some assistance and ask of you 
a candid statement of what your income is at the present 
time and what you would need in order to sustain you 
in a self-sacrificing manner. It would be far from our 
thought to accept monies from the friends of the Truth 
here at considerable sacrifice to themselves and then to 
dispense it to missionaries or others who might use it 
extravagantly. Hence our feeling that it is necessary 
for us to inquire carefully of you respecting the facts— 
not with a desire to pry into your affairs, but with a 
desire to assist you and to fulfil our own responsibilities 
to the Lord and his cause. 

In your next please give us some particulars respecting 
the numbers and classes to whom you are permitted to 
minister the Truth in the English and in the African 
languages. 

Yours in the love and service of our Redeemer and 
King, C. T. RUSSELL. 

PERSECUTION FOLLOWS 



Since the above is in print we learn that Brother 
Elliott Kamwana was arrested and deported by the 
government at the instigation of the Calvinistic Scotch 
Missionaries of Bandawe, Lake Niassa, who were greatly 
surprised that their work of years could be so quickly 
lifted to the higher plane of our teachings. 

Seven at once volunteered to follow Kamwana in 
his preaching and if necessary to prison also. One of 
these is Brother Brink, the other six are of Kamwana's 
tribe, "Alonga." We cabled acceptance of the offer of 
Brother Brink and of the others, who also had been 
preachers previous to learning the Truth. We also 



sent five hundred dollars for expenses. 

We have written a protest to the British Commissioner, 
and to the American Consul a request for his 
good offices for peace and righteousness. 

Brother Kamwana baptized 9,126 in past year. 



R4422 : page 196 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S EUROPEAN TOUR 
IN SCANDINAVIA AND GERMANY 



OUR steamer "Neptune" reached Bergen, Norway, 
at 2 p.m., Monday, May 17. On the quay stood 
our dear Brother Luttichau, the Society's representative, 
who had come from Copenhagen to be our 
interpreter. With him to welcome us were about 20 
dear fellow-disciples. After a hearty greeting came the 
3 o'clock meeting. It was well attended by the friends— 
about 50— and others to the number of about 400. We 
spoke on "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire" for about 
two hours. Next came a luncheon and then an evening 
session— a Question Meeting for the interested, which 
lasted three hours. We were pleasantly surprised at 
the intelligence displayed in the questions asked. Eyes 
and hands expressed to each other our mutual joys in 
the Lord and his Truth, emphasizing the words spoken 
through the interpreter. 

Tuesday morning early we took the train for Christiania. 
By 8 p.m. we reached Glucken, where in summer 
the journey is continued for 28 miles by lake 
steamer. But the ice was still in the lake and hence 
navigation not opened. We made the journey quite 
comfortably in a one-horse, two-wheeled vehicle wrapped 
in a fur coat hired for the occasion by one of the 
friends. By two o'clock at night our party (some ten 
of the Bergen friends accompanied Brother Luttichau 
and myself to Christiania) had again reached the railway, 
and by 10 a.m. were at Christiania. 

Here, also, we had a most cordial reception from 
Brother and Sister Lindquist (who entertained us) and 
all of the dear household of faith— all of whom have the 
one spirit because they have the one faith and one 
baptism into Christ. The Norwegian people reminded 
us of the Scotch in general appearance and also in mannerisms. 
Indeed, we found that those who could speak 
and understand English would have understood us better 
if we had a little of the Scotch brogue. 

Wednesday and Thursday were well filled with enjoyable 
services for "the brethren" and for the great 
"Elder Brother" and for the "Father of us all." Some 
of the sessions were for the public and were crowded 



with intelligent looking and attentive hearers (about 
500 to 600). Other sessions were specially for the interested- 
including a Question Meeting. We had a 
fellowship dinner provided by one of the friends. Over 
one hundred participated— all of them deeply interested 
in Present Truth. 

OREBRO AND STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN 

We left the dear Norwegian friends at 6 p.m. Thursday 
and reached Orebro 8:23 a.m. Friday. Four of the 
dear friends met our train a few stations ahead, and as 
we alighted at Orebro probably a hundred and fifty were 
on the platform singing and waving their handkerchiefs 
and hats. Here again flowers were presented while we 
shook hands and presented our greetings through our 
interpreter, Brother Lundborg, the Society's representative 
for Sweden. We learned that some of these dear 
friends had come a journey of over one thousand miles 
for the spiritual privileges of this Convention. How 
our hearts flowed together in the Lord, notwithstanding 
the impediments of speech, none but the spirit-begotten 
can understand! 

The time was filled full. At 10 o'clock we gave a 
discourse on the Covenants, which lasted more than 
two hours. Then came general dinners at three restaurants. 
From 3 to 5 p.m. we preached on Baptism and 
its import, following which 53 were immersed, understandingly, 
including an ex-Baptist minister. About 
200 attended all these meetings for the interested. 

The State-College Auditorium had been secured for 
the addresses for the public in the evenings. It was 
full to overflowing and many stood for fully two hours. 
Attendance 800. Our topic was "The Overthrow of 
Satan's Empire." 

Saturday was similarly full of blessed fellowship 
and service. At 10 a.m. we had a Question Meeting 
until 12: 15; then a general dinner at restaurants. The 
afternoon session was a "Colporteur Meeting," but as 
usual it took up in general the harvest work and the 
privilege of each of God's children in some of its departments 

R4423 : page 197 

as under-reapers— colporteurs, sharp-shooters, 
volunteers. As the evening meeting would be for the 
public, this one closed the Convention proper. We sang 
together, "God be with you," while all who were Elders 
of Congregations, by invitation stood on our either 
hand (about 20 in all) and the Congregation singing 
filed past and gave a farewell hand-shake and greeting. 
The evening meeting was a duplication of its predecessor, 
except that a still larger crowd stood— probably 
160— and that our topic was different, "Where are the 
Dead?" 
After a good night's rest refreshed us we took the 



6 a.m. train Sunday morning, which brought us to 
Stockholm just in time for the 1 1:30 morning meeting. 
We would have been late had not friendly arrangements 
provided an automobile. The auditorium was packed 
before we reached it, and some, refused admittance, 
were still lingering near the door when we arrived. 
The attendance was about 700 to 800, about 100 standing. 
Our topic was "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 
We closed at 1 :30 and greeted the friends of the Truth. 
The same dear friends who entertained us six years 
ago had a cab awaiting us and entertained us at 
luncheon. 

A meeting for the interested was held from 3 to 4:15, 
when the doors were thrown open for the 4:30 public 
service on "Where are the Dead?" Again the auditorium 
was crowded and many stood until 6:20. An interlude 
of singing gave opportunity for strangers to depart, 
and then a special meeting with the interested lasted 
until 8:15, when we departed for our train accompanied 
by nearly a hundred of the friends, who gave us a final 
goodby and requested that we come soon again. Brother 
Lundborg accompanied us to Copenhagen. 

Monday morning brought us to Copenhagen. Here 
we were met by about thirty or forty dear friends at the 
depot. They were headed by Brother Luttichau, who 
parted our company at Christiania in order to prepare 
our way at Copenhagen. A cab soon brought us to the 
office of our Dano-Norwegian WATCH TOWER, maintained 
by our Society. By 10 o'clock about 100 of the 
interested had gathered there and we addressed them 
for two hours on "The Covenants." Then followed a 
general dinner provided by the friends in an upper 
room. Our seat was at the head of the table with 
Brothers Luttichau and Lundborg on either hand. 
Close by was a little girl of ten years, reported to have 
made a full consecration four years ago. She had read 
the DAWNS and had come a journey of about 300 miles, 
using therefore small sums of money given her last 
Christmas and since, so anxious was she to meet us and 
to enjoy the anticipated spiritual feast. 

In the afternoon about 100 sat for a photo, and then 
we had a two-hour Question Meeting. 

In the evening we had a session for the public. The 
house was crowded, many standing, about 600 present. 
We had closest attention for two hours. The earnest 
singing of the hymns assured us that our hearers were 
of the devout sort aside from those specially with us in 
the Truth. Indeed, all of our experiences in Scandinavia 
were very encouraging. The people as a whole 
impressed us as much more reverential than the masses 
of our beloved America. We believe that God has 
much people amongst the Scandinavians. We shall 
expect great things there during the next few years. 

Our train was to leave shortly after midnight and 
probably sixty of the friends remained after the meeting 
and took a cup of tea with us, and accompanied us 



to the railway station, where they sang for us in English 
a specially-learned hymn and sent greetings to the 
friends we would meet in Germany, Great Britain and 
America on our tour, at the same time urging us to 
come again and soon. 

HAMBURG, BERLIN, DRESDEN, BARMEN 

Our train brought us to Hanover about 1 1:30. We 
were met by Brother Koetitz, the Society's representative 
for Germany; with him were about eight local 
friends and two from outside places to greet us. We had 
a pleasant and profitable hour; then said farewell and 
started for Berlin, Brother Koetitz accompanying as 
interpreter. 

At Berlin three dear brethren awaited our coming 
and welcomed us and escorted us to the home of one of 
them, at which a congregation of about 50 was already 
waiting for us. Our chair and table were festooned with 
evergreen and forget-me-nots and back of us was the 
text: "I will bless thee and make thee a blessing."— 
Gen. 12:2. 

We had a delightful meeting of two hours considering 
the Covenants and then followed a Question Meeting 
full of interest to all. 

The evening session was for the public, and the 
brethren, although few in number, had so thoroughly 
advertised it that the room was crowded, so that nearly 
150 were obliged to stand for the two hours of the meeting. 
We had excellent attention and trust that some 
were impressed with the Truth. 

A good night's rest refreshed us and we took train 
Wednesday morning for Dresden, which we reached 
about noon. Four brethren awaited us at the depot 
and escorted us to a dining hall, where nearly one 
hundred greeted us with a song and an address of greetings, 
to which we responded, giving the greetings of 
others sent with us as well as our own. Next came an 
address to the interested on "The Covenants"; then a 
Question Meeting; then tea; then the public meeting in a 
larger hall had our attention on the topic, "The Present 
and the Future in the Light of the Bible." Although 
the evening was very wet the Auditorium was full- 
about 600— and we had excellent attention. We were 
entertained most hospitably by Brother and Sister 
Wentzel, and, refreshed, we started next morning 
on an all-day journey for Barmen, where we arrived 
just in time for an evening meeting at 8:30 o'clock. 
A crowd of the Barmen friends met us at the depot 
and escorted us. It was a public meeting. About 
800 were present, many of these standing. The interest 
evidenced by the singing was good and spiritual. All 
seemed to sing, and with their whole hearts, so that the 
Auditorium rang. If close attention and keen eyes are 
an indication, many who heard were interested and 
should be heard from later. 



Friday forenoon we inspected the Society's new 
quarters, wrote some letters and conversed with Brother 
Koetitz and family. The afternoon was devoted to a 
Question Meeting. It was deeply interesting. The Vow 
and the Sin-Offering, and how opponents of these 
should be regarded and treated, were among the interesting 
questions. Our replies were taken by a brother 
who is a stenographer and may appear later in these 
columns. In the evening we discussed The Covenants. 
At the close about 180 friends sang to us, "God be with 
you," and we waved each other goodby with our handkerchiefs, 
and departed for the 10:50 train for London. 

On the railway platform about 60 of the friends 
gathered to give us a parting greeting with the hand 
and by song and later with their handkerchiefs. We 
surely have a very warm place in our heart for our 
German friends, and in answer to their request promised 
to do what we could to visit them ere long again. 

R4423 : page 198 

THE LONDON CONVENTION 

A night and a day by boat and rail brought us to 
London at 5 p.m., May 29. About 200 of the friends, 
headed by Brother Hemery, the Society's British representative, 
greeted us at the railway station, singing, 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts" and waving us 
the Chautauqua salute with their handkerchiefs. We 
returned the salutations, and a little later expressed to 
the assembled Convention our appreciation of the privilege 
of being with them and the greetings we brought 
from the friends in America, Norway, Sweden, Denmark 
and Germany. We noted the oneness of spirit 
and joy in the Lord of all those walking in the light of 
Present Truth. 

The Convention had already begun; an excellent 
Testimony Meeting had been held, and Brother Bundy 
had given an interesting address in the afternoon. 
Brother Hemery spoke very acceptably in the evening, 
and we had an excellent opportunity for a little rest in 
preparation for the Sunday services. It was at this 
service that Brother Hemery announced, publicly, that 
from the time the Vow first was promulgated he had 
made it his own, in spirit, but that now finally he had 
taken it formally to the Lord, in the fullest sense. He 
felt that already he had a blessing through this tighter 
binding of his sacrifice to the altar. Many others informed 
us that they had taken the Vow but had not 
written us of the matter. We requested them to send 
us at least a post-card of information, as we desire as 
full a list as possible. 

There were three sessions on Sunday. In the 
morning a Praise, Prayer and Testimony Meeting gave 
excellent opportunity to the dear friends to tell the 
Lord and each other of their appreciation of Present 



Truth, and of their resolutions respecting further faithfulness 
in the service of the King, and his message, 
and his brethren. 

The Sunday afternoon meeting was attended by 
about 800 to 900, who gave closest attention to our two-hour 
presentation of "The Covenants." The evening 
service was the public one. The hall was crowded, 
about 1200 being present. We discussed "Where are 
the Dead?" and had closest attention. 

Monday forenoon was devoted to an immersion 
service. One hundred and twenty-nine symbolized 
their consecration (66 brethren, 63 sisters) all adults. In 
the afternoon we discoursed for an hour on the Ransom 
and the Sin-Offering, and then for an hour answered 
questions on the subject, apparently to the satisfaction 
of the hearers. The evening session was similarly devoted, 
the first hour to a discourse and the next to the 
answering of questions. 

On Tuesday afternoon we had a Symposium on the 
graces of the holy Spirit, in which six speakers participated, 
evidently to the pleasement of the attending 
friends. Then came the closing service of the Convention. 
We addressed the dear friends in a general way, 
pointing out the trials of the "narrow way" and the 
propriety and necessity for loving sympathy one with 
the other in love, forgiving one another and encouraging 
one another, after our Lord's example. Then came 
the Love Feast. We stood in the centre, Pilgrims 
Hemery and Bundy on either side and the Elders of the 
London Church on either side of these. Brothers Bundy 

R4424 : page 198 

and Hemery held the plates of bread. The congregation 

singing familiar hymns filed past, giving and receiving 

parting hand-grasps and words of cheer. It 

was an inspiring and affecting scene long to be remembered. 

Many said, "Pray for me that I may meet you 

in the Great Convention— the General Assembly of the 

Church of the First-Borns; I always remember you." 

Many remarked that they had taken the Vow, but had 

not yet sent us word of it, but would do so. Thus 

closed our best British Convention and one of the best 

ever held anywhere. 

On Wednesday we had a look about London in 
search of a more favorable general meeting place for 
the friends there. On Thursday we had a conference 
with the London Church Elders respecting the general 
interests of the work, and suggested that if a more 
central meeting place were found we might consider it 
a leading of the Lord's Providence for a return next 
October to endeavor to give the work in the world's 
metropolis a further boost— so greatly are we impressed 
with the wonderfully ripe wheat-field, of which 
London is the centre. 



BELFAST, DUBLIN, AND HOMEWARD 

Traveling by night we reached Belfast Friday and 
were entertained as on our last visit by Brother and 
Sister McComb. The afternoon was spent with the interested 
in their usual meeting room and was very enjoyable 
and we trust profitable. The evening meeting 
was for the public. About 450 were present, of whom 
about 100 stood for two hours. Great interest was 
manifested, many remaining for a Question Meeting 
until 11 p.m. 

After a good night's rest we started for Dublin, 
where we were met by a committee of four representing 
the Church and were hospitably entertained. Here we 
preferred a Church-meeting only. It lasted from 4 p.m. 
to 11:10 p.m., tea being served in the same room. 
The Dublin company is not in a most happy condition; 
several of the dear friends have become afflicted with 
"independent thinking," and claim "new light," which 
we tried to show them is really the "outer darkness" in 
which Christendom in general is discomforted. Our 
discussions of these differences were conducted in a 
most kindly manner, yet we fear not to any great profit 
to the disaffected, who seemed determined to hold to 
and to magnify their differences rather than to prefer 
harmony and seeing eye to eye. The beauties of the 
Divine Plan, once seen, they saw no more and seemed 
not to desire to see them again. We urged upon all the 
cultivation of love and humility and prayer and study 
as being all that could be counseled under the circumstances. 
The loyal ones expressed themselves as greatly 
strengthened, and incidentally mentioned that they had 
taken the Vow, while, so far as they knew, none of those 
who had turned aside had done so. 

We reminded them that we must not think strangely 
of such matters; that we know that we are in the harvest 
time of testing and separation and have already been 
forewarned that "a thousand shall fall" at our side, and 
that it is indeed a question "Who shall be able to stand?" 
rather than who shall fall? 

Notwithstanding our protests five of these dear 
friends accompanied us to the station at 3 a.m. Sunday, 
when our train left to connect at Queenstown with our 
steamer "Mauretania," which we boarded at 8:30 a.m. 
homeward bound. 

We had a pleasant homeward journey and, thanks 
to God's Providence in sending with us Brother Huntsinger 
(stenographer), we were enabled to write articles 
for the WATCH TOWER columns covering the points 
principally treated at the London and other conventions. 
We had but one opportunity for a public address on the 
steamship, but through it got into communication with 
several passengers, some of whom, we trust, may develop 
"hearing ears." 

Our vessel landed us at New York on June 1 1, a 



R4424 : page 199 

month and seven days from time of departure. Much 
as we had enjoyed our visit to the friends abroad and 
their fellowship, we were glad to be back— to re-engage 
in the services at the Brooklyn Tabernacle and Bethel. 

THE HOME RECEPTION 

As our steamer docked we discovered on the pier 
some of the friends waving with their handkerchiefs a 
welcome home. Some of them had been waiting for us 
for three hours. We reached Brooklyn Bethel at noontime 
and the entire family, gathered in the parlor and 
study, sang to us their welcome in some words composed 

page 199 

by Sister Land, as follows:— 

R4424 : page 199 

THE FAMILY WELCOME 

Welcome home to those who love you— welcome, Brother dear! 

Daily have our hearts been with you o'er the sea! 
E'en the ocean cannot separate between God's children here, 

Bound by cords of love divine to him and thee. 

We behold gross darkness gathering all around us here below, 
Men's hearts failing them through dread and doubt and fear; 

We rejoice with you to send out Truth's pure light of hope, 
Until nations, kindreds, tongues may God revere. 

CHORUS 

When we bade "Farewell— God speed thee! 
Bear his harvest message true 

To the dear ones waiting on that foreign shore," 
Then our fervent prayers ascended, that grace might still 

abound— 

Bring you safely back to home-ties as of yore. 

Noble heart! May God sustain you and rich blessings send 
While you're striving Truth's fair banner to uphold; 

God hath guided and preserved you for this special time of need, 
And through you hath sent us mercies manifold. 

So this day our hearts are glowing and in gratitude ascend 

To the one who kept you in his tender care; 
May the angel of his presence guard you to the end, 

And God crown you in his Kingdom— is our prayer! 

We returned the greeting, telling them of how the 
Lord had blessed our journey and encouraged us on the 
way and that we brought them the greetings of the 



friends in England, Ireland, Scotland, Norway, Sweden, 
Denmark and Germany. 

We briefly rehearsed the blessed season we had enjoyed 
with the friends abroad, telling them in few words 
of the forty-nine addresses given and the Lord's watchful 
care over all our interests in the long but speedy 
journey. 

Then followed another surprise and blessing. 
Brother Rutherford placed in our hands a bundle of 
papers, explaining that during our absence a number 
of other friends had concluded that it would be the 
Lord's will that we should be relieved of certain burdens 
and annoyances which have been our portion for some 
time, in connection with Mrs. Russell's request that the 
monthly allowance be increased from $40 to $100, which 
was allowed by the Court, but which we were unable to 
comply with, because all of our property, except that 
which brought the income of $40 per month (which Mrs. 
Russell had been receiving), had been donated to the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. The dear 
friends concluded to surprise us on the return home by 
clearing off these obligations. They handed us receipts 
aggregating over $9,000, showing a payment of Mrs. 
Russell's alimony into 1913, with Court costs, attorneys' 
fees, etc. Our heart returned thanks to the Great Giver 
of every good gift for this, a fresh manifestation of his 
loving care and for such evidences of brotherly love. 

What shall we render unto the Lord our God for all 
his benefits to us? We will take the cup of salvation. 
We will partake of the blood of the New Covenant. We 
will call upon the Lord for grace to help. We will pay 
our vows unto the Most High.— Psa. 110:12-14. 

Incidentally we remark that numerous false rumors 
have gotten abroad amongst the dear friends— to the 
effect that the Society's property in Allegheny had been 
sold and that its property in Brooklyn was attached, etc. 
There is no truth whatever in any of these rumors. 
Nevertheless we believe that the dear brethren who so 
nobly came to our relief did well. They surprised us 
with surprise, too, in that they did not seek a compromise, 
but paid every penny that was or could be asked, 
believing this to be the wisest plan and the one most 
pleasing to the Lord. 

Next our attention was drawn to stacks of mail 
awaiting our attention. Many of these were kind 
Christian greetings from individuals and Churches all 
over the United States— hundreds of them. One from 
Chicago was signed by the Elders and Deacons and 
other friends there to the extent of 167 names. The 
Boston Church, to be sure that their greetings would 
reach us in time, sent them by wireless to the ship, 
reaching us a day before our arrival. As a sample of 
the kind expressions received we give the following:— 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The occasion of your return from a foreign shore, to continue 



your faithful ministry of the holy Word to the Lord's 
"little ones" at home, gives me opportunity to express my 
heart gratitude for the Master's blessing at your hands. 

Words but feebly tell the thankfulness of hearts made 
free in Christ. Hand-clasps and written phrase are human 
means by which we seek to show in part our love, our joy, 
our deep esteem. 

Please accept, Beloved Brother Russell, this humble expression 
of my continued appreciation of the Harvest Work 
and of your faithful service and my whole-hearted sympathy 
in, for and with you in this noble service of the Lord— my 
pledge of a deeper zeal and a quickening of the spirit of sacrifice 
as I witness your untiring devotion as you so unsparingly 
seek to "lay down your life for the brethren." "Your labor 
is not in vain in the Lord." God bless you! 

Yours in Christian love, 



[As we cannot possibly answer all of these letters 
by pen, we request that this be accepted as our 
acknowledgment of them and of our appreciation.] 



R4425 : page 199 

WESTERN CONVENTION TOUR 

WASHINGTON, D.C., JULY 7, EVENING MEETING 

PIEDMONT, ALA., JULY 8-1 1 

Other Speakers are provided for the 8th, 10th and 1 1th, 
Brother Russell being present on the 9th with Morning 
address to the interested at 10:30, and afternoon address 
to the Public at 3 o'clock. Subject: "The Overthrow of 
Satan's Empire." Ask ticket agent for reduced rates on 
Certificate Plan account of Bible Students' Convention. 
If for any reason these cannot be obtained, investigate 
the round-trip rates to either Borden Springs or Piedmont 
Springs, which are near. Very low rates can be obtained 
for meals and lodging. Those desiring accommodations 
address Mr. Geo. W. Henderson. 

MEMPHIS, TENN, JULY 10, 11 

Morning Rally for Prayer, Praise and Testimony at 
10:30 o'clock, and afternoon session for the interested at 
3 o'clock, in Italian Hall, Cor. 2d Street and Lincoln 
Avenue. Evening meeting for the Public in Jefferson 
Theatre, Madison Avenue, near Fourth Street. Subject: 
"The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." Bro. J. F. Rutherford 
will serve on July 11. Further information from 
Mrs. N. Turner, 734 Union Avenue. 



NEW ORLEANS, LA., JULY 1 1 

Morning meeting for Rally, Praise and Testimonies. 
Afternoon meeting for the interested at 3 o'clock. Evening 
meeting for the Public at 7 o'clock in the Athenaeum; 

R4425 : page 200 

topic: "Where are the Dead?" For particulars 
address Mrs. N. O. Pedrick, 6120 Perrier Street. 

HOUSTON, TEX., JULY 12, 13 

All sessions in Beach Auditorium, 1 106 Main Street. 
Rally meeting at 10:30 a.m. and address to the interested 
at 3 p.m. Evening meeting for the Public at 8 
o'clock. Subject: "The Thief in Paradise, the Rich Man 
in Hell and Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." Brother 
J. F. Rutherford will speak on the 13th. For local particulars 
apply to Mr. S. H. Huston, Box 647. 

SAN ANTONIO, TEX., JULY 13, 14 

Morning Rally— Praise and Testimonies, at 10:30 
o'clock at 424 Soledad Street. Meeting for the interested 
at 3 p.m., and Public meeting at 8 p.m., subject: "The 
Thief in Paradise, the Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus in 
Abraham's Bosom," in Grand Opera House. Brother 
Rutherford present on the 14th. For further information 
apply to Mr. W. T. Sessoms, 418 Warren Street. 

LOS ANGELES, CAL., JULY 16-18 

Brother Russell expects to be present the afternoon of 
the 16th till 5 p.m. of the 17th. Excellent programme, 
including Brother Rutherford, is provided for the other 
sessions. Purchase reduced rate tickets account of "Elks 
Convention." Further details from Mr. E. D. Sexton, 
214 O. T. Johnson Building. 

OAKLAND, CAL., JULY 17-19 

Saturday, the 17th, addresses by Brothers Sullivan and 
Bundy. Brother Russell in attendance the 18th and 19th. 
For further particulars address Mr. W. L. Dimock, 3418 
School Street, Fruitvale, Cal. 

PORTLAND, ORE., JULY 21, 22 

Morning Rally for Prayer, Praise and Testimony at 
10:30. Afternoon address to the interested at 3 o'clock. 
Evening meeting for the Public at 7:30 o'clock. Subject: 
"Man's Past, Present and Future in the Light of 
the Bible." Brother Rutherford will speak on the 22d. 
For local information address Mr. L. F. Shinaman, 348 
Seventh Street. 



SEATTLE, WASH., JULY 22-25 

Sunday, July 25th: "Question meeting at 10:30, conducted 
by Brother Russell, in Armory Hall. Meeting for 
Public at 3 p.m. Subject: "Where are the Dead?" 
Evening meeting for the interested at 7:30 o'clock. Week 
day sessions in Christensen's Hall, Cor. Broadway and 
Madison, arranged as per Programme. For further information 
address Mr. F. A. Acheson, Box 543, Ballard, 
Washington. 

SPOKANE, WASH., JULY 26 

Morning session for Rally, with Prayers, Testimonies 
and Songs, at 1 1:00 o'clock. Address to the interested 
at 3 p.m. Discourse to the Public at 7:30 p.m. Subject: 
"Thief in Paradise, the Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus 
in Abraham's Bosom." For incidentals address Mr. 
M. O. Field, E. 2127 Sprague Avenue. 

BUTTE, MONT., JULY 27 

Morning meeting for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 
o'clock. Afternoon address to the interested at 3 o'clock. 
Evening session for the Public at 7:30. Subject: "Where 
are the Dead?" Particulars from Miss Alice L. Crossman, 
1024 South Wyoming Street. 

DENVER, COLO., JULY 29-AUG. 1 

Sessions in Central Christian Church, Cor. 16th Avenue 
and Lincoln Street. Afternoon of Thursday, the 29th, address 
by Brother Russell to the interested, and in the 
evening, at 8 o'clock, discourse to the Public on the 
topic, "Where are the Dead?" Friday morning at 10:30, 
a Question meeting. Purchase one-way first-class ticket, 
on July 26, 27 or 28, and ask for Certificate receipt. This 
when presented at Convention will secure you return passage 
at one-fifth regular fare to practically all points in 
Colorado. Watch, however, for any cheaper rate, special 
Tourist rate, or otherwise. Further items from Mr. F. L. 
Hall, 3559 Zuni Street. 

ST. JOSEPH, MO., JULY 29-AUG. 2 

All meetings will be held in the Auditorium, Cor. 4th 
and Faraon Streets. Take Union Depot and Stock Yards 
Car going north from Union Station. Full programme is 
provided, together with opportunity for immersion. The 
Sunday afternoon meeting will be for the Public, addressed 
by Brother Russell, with the topic, "Where are 
the Dead?" Inquire of Mr. Wm. Wild, 820 Dewey Avenue, 
for particulars. 

ABERDEEN, S. D., AUG. 1-3 



Meeting on Tuesday, August 3, at 3 p.m., in Gottschalk 
Auditorium. Subject: "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 
Evening meeting for the interested at 7 o'clock. 
Secure "Certificate" receipt when purchasing railway 
tickets. Good eating and sleeping accommodations may 
be had at reasonable prices. Any unable to provide their 
own entertainment will be arranged for by addressing Mr. 
Geo. Draper, Conde, S. D., before the Convention. 

TOLEDO, OHIO, AUG. 3-5 

The friends in this vicinity have also requested the 
privilege of a Convention, and since it was directly on the 
homeward journey, it has been granted. Brother Russell 
expects to be present on the 5th. Further particulars 
later or from Mr. E. W. V. Kuehn, 20 Produce Exchange. 

ALLEGHENY, PENNA., AUG. 6 

At the Bible House Chapel, 612 Arch St., at 7:30 p.m., 
Brother Russell will address the friends. 

RAILWAY SCHEDULE-Note Changes 

July 7 Lv. Brooklyn, N.Y 12:45 p.m. 

Arr. Washington, D.C 6:16 p.m. July 7 

July 8 Lv. Washington, D.C 9:00 a.m. 

Arr. Atlanta, Ga 5:00 a.m. July 9 

July 9 Lv. Atlanta, Ga 6:30 a.m. 

Arr. Piedmont, Ala 9:16 a.m. July 9 

July 9 Lv. Piedmont, Ala 7:30 p.m. 

Arr. Memphis, Tenn 7:30 a.m. July 10 

July 10 Lv. Memphis, Tenn 1 1:40 p.m. 

Arr. New Orleans, La 10:55 a.m. July 1 1 

July 1 1 Lv. New Orleans, La 9:00 p.m. 

Arr. Houston, Tex 10:15 a.m. July 12 

July 12 Lv. Houston, Tex 12:25 Night 

Arr. San Antonio, Tex 7:35 a.m. July 13 

July 14 Lv. San Antonio, Tex 9:00 a.m. 

Arr. El Paso, Tex 8:30 a.m. July 15 

July 15 Lv. El Paso, Tex 7:45 a.m. 

Arr. Los Angeles, Cal 1:30 p.m. July 16 

July 17 Lv. Los Angeles, Cal 7:30 p.m. 

Arr. Oakland, Cal 2:02 p.m. July 18 

July 19 Lv. Oakland, Pier, Cal 8:50 p.m. 

Arr. Portland, Oregon 7:15 a.m. July 21 

July 21 Lv. Portland, Oregon 12:15 Night 

Arr. Seattle, Wash 7:30 a.m. July 22 

July 25 Lv. Seattle, Wash 10:30 p.m. 

Arr. Spokane, Wash 12:20 noon July 26 

July 26 Lv. Spokane, Wash 9:55 p.m. 

Arr. Butte, Mont 11:18 a.m. July 27 

July 27 Lv. Butte, Mont 11:40 p.m. 

Arr. Billings (N.P.), Mont 8:25 a.m. July 28 

July 28 Lv. Billings, Mont 9:10 a.m. 



Arr. Denver (C.,B.Q.), Colo 11:30 a.m. July 29 

July 30 Lv. Denver, Colo 1:15 p.m. 

Arr. St. Joseph, Mo 9:30 a.m. July 31 

Aug. 2 Lv. St. Joseph, Mo 1:45 p.m. 

Arr. Huron (C.&N.W.), S.D 7:00 a.m. Aug. 3 

Aug. 3 Lv. Huron, S.D 8:40 a.m. 

Arr. Aberdeen, S.D 11:55 a.m. Aug. 3 

Aug. 3 Lv. Aberdeen, S.D 8:35 p.m. 

Arr. St. Paul (C.,M.&St.P.), Minn 8:10 a.m. Aug. 4 

Aug. 4 Lv. St. Paul, Minn 8:45 a.m. 

Arr. Chicago, 111 9:00 p.m. Aug. 4 

Aug. 4 Lv. Chicago (Wabash), 111 11:00 p.m. 

Arr. Toledo, Ohio 7:00 a.m. Aug. 5 

Aug. 5 Lv. Toledo (Penna.), Ohio 10:15 p.m. 

Arr. Pittsburg, Pa 6:00 a.m. Aug. 6 

Aug. 6 Lv. Pittsburg, Pa 9:40 p.m. 

Arr. Brooklyn, N.Y 8:15 a.m. Aug. 7 



R4426 : page 201 

THE RANSOM AND THE SIN ATONEMENT 

"For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into 
the sanctuary (Most Holy) by the high-priest for sin, 
are burned outside the camp."— Heb. 13:11-13. 

WE ALL recognize that the Bible teaches that sin 

is in the world; that sin entered the world 

by father Adam's disobedience, and that until 

a Ransom-price had been paid there could be no complete 

reconciliation between God and man. There must 

be a Ransom as a basis for reconciliation. We understand, 

therefore, the Scriptures to teach that our Lord 

Jesus, when he laid down his life, laid down the Ransom 

price. The word Ransom signifies corresponding price; 

and because our Lord Jesus did not have a nature that 

was the same as Adam's nature, it was necessary for 

him to leave the glory that he had with the Father before 

the world was, to humble himself and to take upon 

him the form of the human nature, that he, by the grace 

of God, could taste death for every man. And so we 

read in the Scriptures, "A body hast thou prepared me." 

There was no human being that had such a body 
as would be a sufficient sacrifice for the sins of mankind, 
because all were sinners. Had there been a perfect 
man he might have given his perfect life a ransom, but 
there was no perfect man. Therefore, as represented 
in the Psalms, "no man could give a ransom for his 
brother." Hence it was necessary for God to find one 
who would have the ability, who would have the necessary 
thing to offer for man. The Lord shows us through 
the Law that his law calls for "a life for a life, an eye 
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth"; that this was the basis 
of Justice on which God was operating in this matter. 



And so, because it was a man that had sinned, the 
death of an angel could not be his redemption price; 
it must be a like, or corresponding price. It was a 
human life that was lost, and it must be a human life 
given to constitute the redemption price. It was not 
sufficient that there should be bulls and goats slain 
during the Jewish time, because these, the Apostle explains, 
were only figures and types of the "better sacrifices" 
which God intended in due time to present. 

So the Apostle assures us that the man Christ Jesus 
came to our relief. He left the glory of the heavenly 
nature and took the human nature, for the very purpose 
of sacrificing it in order that he might be our Redeemer; 
because Justice required a man's death to 
redeem the man (Adam) who had sinned. 

When our Lord "died, the just for the unjust," it 
was that he might bring us to God; not only that he 
might bring us, the Church, to God, but that he might 
bring to God all of humanity who might desire to come 
to God. But his death did not bring us to God. His 
death was merely the laying down of the price, and 
that price was necessary to be found first. To illustrate: 
Suppose you had an obligation to meet— five thousand 
dollars. And suppose that you owned a property worth 
five thousand dollars, which you could sell. The price, 
or value, of the property would be a price exactly corresponding 
with the debt that was owing. You sell 
this property in order that you may have its value as a 
ransom price. But when you sold the property, you had 
not cancelled your obligation; you had merely sold the 
property, and obtained the price, which later you could 
apply. 

Such was the effect of our Lord's death. When he 
"died, the just for the unjust," he laid down "a corresponding 
price." Thus it is stated that "by one man's 
disobedience sin entered the world and death as a result 
of sin," and thus the death sentence and all its concomitants 
passed upon Adam's race, because all were 
infected by the disease of sin, and therefore were all 
under the sentence of death. Our Lord, in order to redeem 
us, laid down our Ransom-price, his own life. 
That Ransom-price was a sufficient price for Adam, or 
for any other member of Adam's race, or for all— just 
as he might subsequently apply it. No less than that 
would have paid for any one. If the Lord had purposed 
to redeem one individual alone and leave all the remainder 
of us out, it would still have taken his life, and 
nothing short of it; because it was man's life that was 
forfeited, and man's life must be the penalty. 

Because this condemnation came through the one 
man, Adam, therefore in meeting the penalty for one it 
could be so applied as to take in the whole human 
family. So we see the philosophy of this great doctrine 
of the redemption, and how God had fixed the matter 
purposely so he might be able to settle the debt to his 
own Justice by the one sacrifice of his Son. 



Now that, simply told, is the story of the Ransom, 
—and all of it. If Jesus, when he ascended up on high, 
had chosen to use that Ransom-price, or Ransom-value 
(which he then had in his hand), on behalf of all mankind, 
then indeed it would have been a sufficient price 
for all. But he did not do so. The story of how he 
does apply it is elsewhere told, and that is called the 
atonement for sin. The account of how our Lord applies 
his Ransom merit is shown in the typical sacrifices 
of Israel's Atonement Day. 

We are not to think of the Ransom and the Atonement 
as being the same thing. We are to remember 
that the Sin-Offerings are not Ransom sacrifices. We 
are to remember the Ransom sacrifice was not the Sin-Offering 
They are two separate propositions. But 
one view of Christ's work is presented from this standpoint 
of the Ransom price: that Christ's death was the 
Ransom-price, and was necessary, no matter how it would 
be applied; it must be given in offset for the one life that 
was forfeited and condemned by the Almighty's law. 
According to the Scriptures our Lord Jesus, in his sacrificial 
work, met various requirements: For instance, 
he was "born under the Law." What difference did 
that make? The Apostle explains that if Jesus had not 
been "born under the Law" his sacrifice would not have 
applied to the Jews, because God had previously separated 
the Jewish nation from other peoples by the Law 
Covenant which he made with them. 

That Jewish nation, under its Law Covenant, was 
on trial and failed to keep that Law Covenant after 
accepting its provisions, saying, "All these things we 
will do." Under their Law Covenant God offered them 
eternal life if they would keep his Law, but if they 
violated it the penalty would be eternal death. Thus 
they came a second time under the divine sentence: the 
first time with the rest of us under Adamic condemnation, 
and the second time through failure to keep their 
Law. Hence, the Apostle says that "the Law which 
was ordained unto life they found to be unto death," for 
"by the deeds of the Law could no flesh be justified in 
God's sight." Hence it was necessary for Christ to be 
born under the Law, to be a Jew, that he might redeem 
all the Jews under that Law Covenant arrangement. 

God has all these very different features in his 
plan, nevertheless Christ is the central point from which 
every one of these variations of the Divine programme 
radiates— the Jews to be redeemed specially, also the 
whole world of mankind aside from these; and besides 
God's purpose in connection with the Church, the elect, 
the Body of Christ. In order to keep ourselves from 
getting confused, we must do with these pictures of our 
Lord's work just as we do with the symbolical pictures 

R4426 : page 202 

of the Church he gives us in the parables. The parables 



furnish a variety of pictures of the Church. The Church 
is likened to the living stones of the Temple; to the 
members of his Body; to a flock of sheep; soldiers under 
Christ, "the Captain of our salvation"; and again likened 
to the Bride of Jesus the Bridegroom. 

Now, if we mix these all up, and ask, How could 
the Bridegroom marry the members of his own Body, or 
how could the Captain marry his own soldiers, or marry 
the stones of the Temple, you see what confusion we 
would have. Each picture, therefore, must be recognized 
as more or less separate and distinct if we would make 
any progress in understanding the Scriptures. In each 
picture there is a lesson, but we must not mix it up 
with other pictures. So, then, get distinctly in mind 
what the Ransom is, and leave it where it is; do not 
take it away from there and mix that thought with that 
of atonement or mediation. The Ransom was that 
which our Lord gave, and which could not be given 
by anybody else, and which needed not to have any 
repetition. But it did not show the application of Jesus' 
merit. He merely "gave himself a Ransom, to be testified 
in due time." 

How the blessing will begin and proceed is shown 
by the sin-offering. The sin-offering is the special feature 
of our topic, as represented in our text. 

SIN ATONEMENT BY SACRIFICE 

The Apostle in our text is discussing sin atonement. 
He points us to one particular picture illustrating his 
subject. In the typical service the Jews made various 
offerings and sacrifices— thank-offerings, peace-offerings, 
sin-offerings, etc. The sin-offering picture is the only 
one of these we are now looking at and discussing. 
The sin-offering for the nation was made annually, on 
the 10th day of the 7th month, which is styled the Day 
of Atonement. The offerings or sacrifices for sins, 
through which the Atonement or Reconciliation with 
God was effected, were made on this Day and lasted 
as valid for a year, at the end of which the whole procedure 
was repeated. The Apostle refers to this offering 
of bulls and goats year by year continually and tells 
us of the "better sacrifices" made by our Lord Jesus, 
which need no repetition, because actually canceling 
sin. We are to remember, however, that this one sacrifice 
of himself, which forever perfects all who come unto 
God through him, began with the sacrifice of our Lord 
Jesus in his own person and has been continued by him 
throughout this Gospel Age in the persons of his Church, 
his followers. These are invited to present their bodies 
living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God and their 
reasonable service. As the High Priest accepts any of 
these sacrifices the consecrated one is begotten of the 
holy Spirit and henceforth counted as a member of the 
Body of The Christ— a member of the Body of the High 
Priest, who is doing the sacrificing. In this sense of 



R4427 : page 202 

the word the "better sacrifices" of the High Priest, which 
began eighteen centuries ago, when he offered up his 
flesh, continue in his followers as they offer up their 
flesh, which is acceptable in sacrifice, because of the 
High Priest— in his name, in his merit, as his sacrifice. 
In this sense of the word the whole work of the Day 
of Atonement is the day of sacrifice— though in another 
sense of the word, as shown by the type, it is divided 
into two parts— the sacrifice of the Head and the sacrifice 
of the Church, the members of his Body. 

THE TYPICAL PICTURE OF ATONEMENT 

In Leviticus 16th chapter we have the divinely 
arranged picture of the Day of Atonement and its 
sacrificial work. The high priest took a bullock, which 
was for himself— which represented himself— and slew 
(sacrificed) it. The bullock represented our Lord as 
a man; as expressed in the Scriptures, "A body hast 
thou prepared me." (Heb. 10:5.) Subsequently two 
goats were brought and tied at the door of the Tabernacle. 
These were taken from, or represented the congregation, 
the people of Israel, and were typical of the 
household of faith, the Lord's consecrated people— two 
classes of them, the "little flock" and the "great company." 
How beautifully the type shows that these have 
not bodies especially prepared for sacrifice. This is 
particularly shown in the statement that the goats were 
taken of or from the congregation of the children of 
Israel for a sin-offering, while no such statement is 
made respecting the bullock. In other words our Lord, 
by reason of his miraculous birth, was perfect, actually 
so— "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 
We, his disciples, however, imperfect, are of the world, 
children of wrath, even as others. Taken from the 
world our imperfections are reckonedly covered by the 
merit of Christ's sacrifice— by the first part of his sacrifice, 
atoned for by the blood of the antitypical bullock, 
the blood of Christ. We remind you that the Apostle 
points out that our Lord's sacrifice took place at the 
beginning of his ministry and was finished at its close; 
who could not be the sin sacrifice until his thirtieth 
year, under the Law. And it is written that just as 
soon as he became thirty he made the sacrifice: "Now 
when Jesus began to be about thirty years of age he 
cometh to John at Jordan to be baptized of him." We 
may be sure that he arrived in time to present himself 
in sacrifice to the Lord, at the very earliest possible 
moment. There it was, the Apostle tells us, that he 
fulfilled the prophecy, "Lo, I have come, as in the volume 
of the Book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God. 
Thy law is written in my heart." "There," says the 
Apostle, "he taketh away the first that he may establish 



the second." In other words, there he began to set 
aside the typical for the "better sacrifices." The offering 
of himself was instantaneous, but the presentation of 
his body to the trials and difficulties of life continued 
throughout the three and a half years of his ministry 
and finished on Calvary. He consecrated himself in 
a moment, to give up all, even life itself, in the Father's 
service. But the actual giving of time, influence, strength, 
vitality, lasted three and a half years. From the moment 
of his consecration at baptism he was reckonedly 
dead and, at the same moment, begotten of the holy 
Spirit. He was reckonedly alive as a new creature, an 
embryo spirit-being, during the three and a half years, 
the flesh being consumed and the new nature growing 
strong in the Lord, developing in harmony with the 
Divine will. At the cross the sufferings of the flesh, the 
consumption of the sacrifice, was complete, finished; and 
on the day thereafter the new nature was raised to 
perfection by the Father's power, a glorious spirit being, 
invisible to the dead world, but manifested to the disciples 
under various forms and under various circumstances, 
to prove to them that he was no longer dead, 
and the other fact, that he was no longer the man Jesus, 
but the glorified spirit Jesus. Thus the Apostle says, 
"He was put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the 
spirit." 

THE THREE BURNINGS-SACRIFICES 

In the type the fat, etc., were put upon the brazen-altar 
in the Court and all the remainder was burned, except 
the blood, outside the camp. The high priest took 
the blood, and his two hands full of incense and the fire 
from the altar and passed immediately into the holy, 
into the light of the golden candlestick. On the altar, 
which stood between the candlestick and the shewbread, 
he placed the fire and then crumbled the incense 
upon it. We read that the incense penetrated into 
the Most Holy. This was necessary. The significance 
of the statement is that the incense offered by 
the high priest was another picture, as seen by the 
Almighty. It was a sweet incense to God. It went 
before our Lord into the Most Holy and there rested 
upon the mercy-seat. Notice, then, the three burnings. 
The one in the Holy represented the Divine view of the 
sacrifice of Christ during the three and a half years of 
his ministry. The burning of the fat on the brazen-altar 
in the court represented our Lord's sacrifice as 
seen by his disciples and faithful followers, the justified 

R4427 : page 203 

ones— about five hundred brethren. And all who since 
have come into this condition of justification have by 
faith seen that same sacrifice. The burning of the 
carcass outside of the camp represented our Lord's sacrifice 



as viewed from the standpoint of man. To them 
it is an improper use of time and energy. To them 
his life had an evil odor, as they considered him a companion 
of publicans and sinners. The three burnings, 
outside the camp, inside the court and in the first of 
the holies, together represented our Lord's sacrifice from 
these widely different standpoints. When one ended, 
all ended— when our Lord was crucified. His sacrifice 
was finished then. He passed beyond the veil in the 
resurrection to follow. Yet our Lord's work was not 
finished at Calvary in another sense. It was merely 
begun. He had finished the first part of his sacrifice— 
the sacrifice of his own person, the body prepared. But 
he had a larger work yet to do, namely, according 
to the Father's plan, the acceptance and sacrifice of a 
Church class— "the Church of the firstborn, whose names 
are written in heaven." The Head of this Church had 
finished his sacrifice and become the Lord of glory, 
but the remainder had yet to pass through similar 
experiences to his— walking in his footsteps. 

HE APPEARED FOR US 

In the type when the high priest had finished the offering 
of the incense, he took the blood of the bullock and 
entered with it into the Most Holy, stooping under the 
second veil, which pictured our Lord's three days in the 
tomb. He arose the other side of the veil a spirit being 
and later ascended up on high, "there to appear in the 
presence of God for us." Looking at the type and tracing 
its fulfilment we find that this signified the sprinkling 
of the blood upon the mercy-seat and before the mercy-seat. 
When the Apostle says he appeared for us we find 
that this fulfilment was typified by the priest's presentation 
of the blood on behalf of himself and his house— the 
Church, which is his Body; the "great company," the 
"household of faith," the antitypical Levites, or the house 
of Levi. 

Next look at the other part of the type or picture. 
After offering the blood of the bullock the high priest 
came out and laid his hands upon the goats, as already 
described, and accepted one of them as the Lord's goat 
for sacrifice and the other as a scape-goat for destruction. 
The casting lots indicated that the high priest had 
no choice as to which should be the sacrifice. Even so 
all who make consecration to the Lord are eligible to 
sacrifice and the Lord is no respector of persons, but willing 
to accept all who are faithful to their covenant obligation. 
Those two goats, as we shall show, represented 
or typified the consecrated Church of this Gospel 
Age, who from the world have presented themselves to 
the Lord. The Lord's goat represents the members of 
the Body of the High Priest; the scape-goat represents 
the less faithful of the Church, the "great company," 
the antitypical Levites. In the type we read that the 
high priest laid his hands upon the Lord's goat and 



smote it, killed it, and took of its blood and did therewith 
even as he had done with the bullock, while its fat 
was similarly placed upon the brazen-altar and its flesh 
burned outside the camp. This fact illustrates the 
Church having part in Christ's sufferings and filling up 
that which was left of his afflictions. This is true not 
only of the apostles, but also of all who have since sacrificed 
their all in the interests of the Lord, the Truth 
and the brethren. 

In our text the Apostle identifies the Lord with the 
bullock and his faithful people with the goat. He reminds 
us that no other sacrifices than those of the sin-offering 
were ever burned outside of the camp, and no 
other sacrifices ever had their blood sacrificed and 
sprinkled in the Most Holy to make atonement for sin. 
Then the Apostle says, "Let us go with him (Jesus) 
outside the camp, bearing the reproach with him." 
These, then, are the "better sacrifices" which do take 
away sin, as explained by St. Paul. The effect of this 
great sacrificing work of the high priest during this one 
sacrifice Day of Atonement will never need repetition. It 
will thoroughly accomplish the Divine purposes. It will 
effect the full reconciliation of the world. The merit, of 
course, is in the sacrifice of the bullock. The bullock 
represented our Lord Jesus, while the goat represented 
a multitude of 144,000. The laying down of our lives in 
the Lord's service accounts nothing of real value— nothing 
that would of itself ever take away sin. The entire 
merit of our sacrifice is through the justification which 
first applied to this goat class through the merit of the 
bullock's sacrifice. 

The type tells us that the high priest counted this 
blood of the goat as a part of his one sacrifice, the one 
sacrifice by which all will be blessed who ever attain 
to everlasting life. The high priest presented the blood of 
the goat for a highly different purpose than that for which 
he had previously applied the blood of the bullock. The 
blood of the bullock was for the high priest and the 
members of his household. The blood of the goat was 
for all the remainder of the people of Israel. In the 
antitype the blood of Christ avails for his consecrated 
saints, the "little flock," the "royal priesthood," and for 
the Levites, the "great company," while the sacrificial 

R4428 : page 203 

merit of the Church, the Body of Christ, he applies on 
behalf of all the people, the world— as many of the world 
as desire to avail themselves of the glorious opportunities 
of reconciliation. 

When the high priest had finished the first sacrifice 
and the offering of his blood he came forth. He manifested 
himself at Pentecost and symbolically laid his 
hands upon the Church in the Pentecostal blessing, by 
which sacrifice his followers were enabled to be conformed 
to the terms and conditions of his sacrifice. But 



after offering the blood of the goat the high priest is 

represented as having finished his work. He puts off his 

sacrificial garments and puts on his garments of glory 

and beauty, typified by the glorious qualities of Christ's 

character and the honorable mission to which he had 

been anointed as the world's Prophet, Priest, King, Judge 

and Mediator. Thus coming forth he represents our 

Lord's Second Advent and assumption of divine glory 

and power, at which time the Church will be with him as 

members of his Body, to cooperate in the dispensing of 

the blessings of the New Covenant to Israel and to all 

the families of the earth. As on the Day of Atonement 

the people of Israel put on sackcloth and ate no pleasant 

food, but fasted and waited for the coming out of the 

high priest in his garments of glory and beauty, so it 

has been throughout this Gospel Age. The whole world 

lieth in the wicked one, overwhelmed in sin and death 

and corruption. Of them St. Paul declares, "For we 

know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth 

in pain together until now. For the earnest expectation 

of the creation waiteth for the manifestation of the sons 

of God" (Rom. 8:22, 19)— waiting for the High Priest, 

Head and Body, typified by the glorious garments of the 

Jewish high priest. Following the picture a little further 

we see that the high priest in his glorious garments 

went to the Altar and lifted up his hands and gave his 

blessing to the people— the blessing of the New Covenant, 

the blessing of the forgiveness of sins, the blessing of 

pouring out of the holy Spirit upon all flesh. If in the 

type a blessing is portrayed, how much greater will be 

the blessing in reality! As in the type the people arose, 

threw off their sackcloth and fasting and rejoiced in 

their forgiveness, so in the Millennial morning the world, 

coming to an appreciation of the great High Priest and 

the sacrifices of Atonement, will arise from sin and degradation 

and death and rejoice in divine favor and in the 

realization of the many blessings of restitution set 

before Israel, as declared by the mouth of all the holy 

prophets since the world began.— Acts 3:20. 

WITH HIS OWN BLOOD 

In the context the Apostle says, "Wherefore Jesus 
also, that he might sanctify the people with his own 
blood, suffered without the gate." (Heb. 13:12.) Are 

R4428 : page 204 

we asked what people Jesus would sanctify with his own 
blood? We answer, in the broader sense of the word, 
"All people— all who ever will accept sanctification, 
cleansing, reconciliation through him." We read that he 
gave himself a ransom for all. It matters not that he 
did not apply it at once for all, but merely for us, the 
Church, the "household of faith." The intention of his 
sacrifice was for all. This does not alter the fact that 



thus far the merit of Jesus' sacrifice extends not beyond 
the "household of faith." In due time through the 
Church his merit will extend to every creature. Thus it 
is written, "They shall obtain mercy through your 
mercy," and we obtain our mercy through Jesus' death, 
as he by divine grace, tasted death for every man. 

THE SCAPE-GOAT'S PART 

Some, without mature thinking, have remarked that 
the scape-goat cannot represent a spirit being class, because 
it never went into the Holy nor Most Holy. We 
reply that neither did the bullock nor the Lord's goat 
go into the Holy nor Most Holy. It was merely the 
blood of these that was taken into the Most Holy, and 
the blood represents the surrender of earthly rights and 
privileges and life willingly, in pursuance of the divine 
will or arrangement. The scape-goat, or "great company" 
class, consists of those who made an offering of 
themselves and were accepted, but who failed to fulfil 
the conditions of their sacrifice. Failing to become members 
of the High Priest's Body and sharers of his glory 
on the divine plane, these would have had nothing, had 
the Lord not specially provided for them an experience 
of tribulation for the destruction of their flesh, that the 
spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. They 
had been accepted of the Lord because of their faith and 
their consecration unto death. Failing to make good 
their consecration and holding on to the present earthly 
life, they would lose all, were it not for the arrangement 
thus made on their behalf for the destruction of their 
flesh. Nor are we to think of these as a dishonorable 
class, an unfaithful class, an undeveloped class. None 
can gain eternal life under the divine arrangement on 
any plane of being except as he shall be transformed and 
be brought to the condition of perfect loyalty to God and 
his righteousness. Any who do not come up to the highest 
standard of obedience to God would not be accounted 
worthy of eternal life in the "great company," or in any 
other. Having been begotten of the holy Spirit they 
could not reassume their earthly rights and restitution 
blessings. Those once consecrated and sacrificed are 
gone forever. If the spirit life be not attained the implication 
would be the Second Death. 

This "great company" class has nothing whatever to 
do with sin atonement, for the scape-goat was neither 
burned outside the camp, nor was its blood brought into 
the Most Holy. What, then, is signified by the statement 
(Lev. 16:21) that Aaron laid his hands upon the head of 
the scape-goat and confessed over it all the iniquities 
of the children of Israel and all their transgressions in 
all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat? 

The sin atonement effected by the blood of the bullock 
and the blood of the Lord's goat represented the atonement 
for original Adamic sin and all the weaknesses 
and imperfections traceable directly thereto. Since the 



blood of these two animals made satisfaction for all such 
sins of all the people, it is manifest that none remained 
to be confessed upon the head of the scape-goat. What 
sins, then, were those which Aaron confessed upon the 
scape-goat's head? We reply that they were such trespasses 
as those our Lord taught us to pray for, saying, 
"Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who 
trespass against us." If we freely forgive those who 
trespass against us, God will freely forgive us our trespasses. 
But he did not forgive original sin, but instead, 
sentenced us to death on account of it and provided 
his Son as our Redeemer. These trespasses are short-comings, 
imperfections, etc., as represented in carelessness 
or indifference or wilfulness or any other failure to 
do the Lord's will the very best we know how. The 
Lord represents that he keeps a very strict account of all 
the world's affairs. He explains that the severe tribulations 
which came upon the Jewish nation in the close of 
its harvest time was a retributive experience. In that 
awful trouble with which their age ended, as our Lord 
foretold, the Lord required all the righteous blood shed 
from the time of righteous Abel down to about that time. 
In a word, every injustice cries out for vengeance, for 
retribution, for penalty. The great original sin, whose 
penalty is death, our Lord Jesus has paid, dying, the 
just for the unjust. But there are many sins, many injustices 
of the past, as well as of the present, which are 
still unaccounted for to justice. For instance, in Revelation 
we read that the souls under the altar cried, "How 
long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and 
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" 
(Rev. 6:10.) Justice is merely waiting for the full number 
of those persecuted for righteousness sake to be 
completed and then the punishment will come. The great 
time of trouble with which this age will end will, like 
the time of trouble which closed the Jewish Age, signify 
a time of settlement of the claims of Justice. The "great 
company," failing to sacrifice during the acceptable time, 
will be permitted to share a considerable measure of 
that trouble coming upon the world— to cancel, if you 
please, a measure of the troubles due to come upon 
humanity in general. When that time shall come these 
dear friends, represented in the "great company," will 
rejoice in their share of suffering and destruction of the 
flesh, that they may be saved as spirit beings in the day 
of the Lord Jesus. And what they shall suffer of the 
iniquities of the world will mean that much less for 
others in that day of trouble. 

"FELLOWSHIP IN HIS SUFFERINGS" 

That our Lord suffered, the Just for the unjust, the 
Scriptures clearly set forth— not merely the amount 
of pain which he experienced, or, in old English suffered: 
he suffered death on account of sin. We suffer with 
him. We are partakers of his sufferings. Our Lord's 



most severe sufferings were probably in Gethsemane, 

where, we read, that he was in a great agony and that 

"Of the people there were none with him;" even the 

faithful, beloved eleven apostles were drowsy and could 

not watch with him at that hour. But they could not 

comprehend his trouble— that the programme of the next 

few hours meant so much to him. He knew that in his 

covenant made at Jordan he had given up his earthly 

rights and privileges. He knew that now his entire dependence 

as respects a future life rested upon a resurrection 

from the dead and he knew, too, that if he had not 

performed the divine will perfectly, completely, that he 

could not be granted the glorious resurrection change 

and the eternal glory on the spirit plane. Thus we read 

that he offered up strong crying and tears unto him who 

was able to save him out of death and that he was heard 

in that thing which he feared. He feared death— not 

that he doubted the heavenly Father's promise that if 

his sacrifice was faithfully performed he would be 

granted a glorious resurrection. He feared that unintentionally 

he might have made some error, might have 

failed to perform some portion of his consecration vow. 

He feared, therefore, lest there had not gone the full 

measure of the cloud of incense into the Most Holy to 

R4429 : page 204 

cover the mercy-seat and to indicate that he had been 

faithful to the last degree in his sacrificing. Then it was 

that the angel appeared to strengthen him. What the 

strengthening was is not revealed, but most evidently it 

pertained to the things which he feared. Undoubtedly 

the angel, as the Father's representative, assured him 

about his faithfulness; that his sacrificing had been acceptable 

in the Father's sight. At once a great calm 

came, in which the great storm of anguish, which had 

threatened but a moment before to wreck his mortal 

body, subsided. Thenceforth we behold him the calmest 

of the calm— before the high priests enduring the contradiction 

of sinners against himself in the presence of 

Pilate and the rabbis. Led to the cross he was the most 

R4429 : page 205 

self-possessed of all of whom we have any knowledge on 
the occasion. When his disciples forsook him, it was he 
who interposed that they be not pursued, but let go their 
way. When Peter denied him, it was he who calmly 
looked towards Peter, reminding him of the prophecy. 
On the way to Calvary it was he who spoke words of 
peace to the weeping women, saying, "Weep not for me, 
but rather for yourselves." How different are the experiences 
of Christ's followers! We have him not only 
as an Example and as a Teacher, but as our Protector 
and as our Advocate. We may indeed have strong consolation 
because he has assured us that he has not only 



appeared for us, but that he is able to succor us in every 
time of need. He is still Head of the Church, which is his 
Body. He is still supervising the interests of all of his 
members. He is still saying to us, as he did to his disciples 
of old, 

"THIS IS MY BLOOD--DRINK YE ALL OF IT" 

Whoever fails to clearly see that the Church at the 
present time are the members of the Body of Christ 
can never understand how the Church is to share her 
Lord's sacrifice, as represented in his cup. After our 
Lord at the last Supper had himself partaken of the 
fruit of the vine, he handed the cup to his disciples, saying, 
"This is my blood of the New Covenant, shed for 
many for the remission of sins. Drink ye all of it." 
Not only did our Lord drink of the symbolical cup before 
giving it to his disciples, but he drank of the same 
actual cup, the partaking of which he requires of us as 
an evidence of our loyalty as his disciples. This is the 
cup of shame, of sorrow, of indignity, of self-denial on behalf 
of others. The Master spoke of it as the cup which 
the Father had prepared for him. He left some of it for 
us, that we might have the privilege of sharing in his 
sufferings and of the glory that shall follow as soon as 
the last member of his mystical Body shall have been 
glorified. When he passed the cup to his disciples at 
the Memorial Supper, his words, "Drink ye all of it," not 
only meant that all who would be his disciples must 
drink of that cup, but also meant that his followers must 
drink all of it, must leave none of it. In other words 
the sufferings of Christ belong exclusively to this Gospel 
Age, marked by his own sufferings at its beginning and 
terminating with the revelation of his glory in the Kingdom. 
There will be none of the sufferings of Christ for 
the world to drink of during the Millennial Age and 
there will be no opportunity for any of them to become 
joint-heirs with the Redeemer. The Master said that this 
cup was the blood of the New Testament— the new will, 
his will or Testament, by which he is bequeathing his 
earthly rights and earthly honors to the earthly seed of 
Abraham and to the world of mankind through them. 
It is his blood that was necessary for the sealing of the 
New Covenant and we were invited to share his cup, to 
share the sealing, and to share the dispensing of the New 
Covenant blessings to Israel and the world. Whoever 
does not drink of this cup, whoever does not share in the 
sufferings of Christ— the same sufferings which he experienced, 
as members of his Body— cannot share with 
him his Millennial throne of glory, by means of which the 
New Covenant blessings will be established with the 
world. 

Mark this intimation that his followers must be sharers 
with him in his sufferings and mark the declaration that 
the same must participate in the same sufferings if they 
would sit with him in his throne. Hearken to the two 



disciples as they inquired of him just before his death if 

they might sit, the one on the right hand and the other 

on the left in his Kingdom. Jesus replied, "Ye know not 

what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall 

drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am 

baptized with? They say unto him, We are able." (Matt. 20:22.) 

When they asserted their willingness to die 

with him he assured them that they would indeed share 

with him his throne and indeed drink of his cup and 

share his baptism of death and have place in his 

Kingdom. 

Let us hold fast to these precious promises. If others 
lose their hold and claim that they can no longer thus 
see with us, our pity should be for them that the light 
that they had has gone from them. Let us not smite the 
blind, but rather be kind and generous toward all. The 
greater the number of the blind, the greater is the blessing 
and privilege of those who do see. Let us rejoice 
in our privileges and use them. Let us remember the 
Master's words, "If the light that is in thee become darkness, 
how great is that darkness." Such are in a more 
pitiable condition than the world who never saw. Let 
us remember, too, that all kinds of blindness are more or 
less contagious and let us guard our spiritual sight as 
one of the most precious boons given of the Lord. 



THE FIELD OF BATTLE 

To grasp the two-edged sword, and forward rush upon the foe, 
To hear the Captain's cry, to see the flash of answering eyes, 
To feel the throbbing hearts of battling comrades in the 

ranks— 
That rapturous inspiration know, of warring for the Right, 
The holy joy of following him who points and leads the way! 

Ah, yes ! 'tis glorious thus to fight the goodly fight, and yet, 
Methinks, beyond the firing line, beneath those snowy tents, 
A fiercer conflict rages, day and night, where trembling hands, 
Wan lips and fever-lighted eyes do battle with a host 
Of deadly foes— grim giants, Doubt and Disappointment, 

fierce 
Despair— before whose fiery darts the bravest well might 

quail! 
They also hear the call, and hoarsely cry, "Lord, here am I!" 
They strive to reach their swords, to struggle to their feet, 

but back 
In helpless agony of weakness on their pallets fall, 
With brain afire, and reason tottering on its throne, their 

tears 
Of anguish flow. Sometimes the noise of battle sweeps 

beyond 
The range of those poor straining ears, and then the spectre 

Fear 
Stalks through the room, and lays an icy hand upon each 



heart: 
The awful thought, Our Captain hath forsaken and forgot, 
Our comrades forge ahead, they leave us here alone to die! 

But, no! the Lord of Battles is most merciful, he sends 
A swift-winged messenger: "Yea, though a mother may 

forget 
Her sucking child, yet will I not forget!" Then, like the calm 
That cometh after storm, sweet peace and quiet reign within 
Those troubled breasts; and so he giveth his beloved sleep. 

Ah, then! true-hearted comrades in the forefront of the fight, 
Remember that the wounded to God's army still belong, 
And send betimes to them a white-winged messenger of 

cheer. 
Oh, give Love's roses now, nor keep them for the coffin's lid, 
(A single flower is sweeter far than thousands by and by). 
Take time to speak a tender word, to shed a pitying tear, 
Or breathe, at least, a prayer throughout the watches of the 

night, 
And thus prove more than conquerors through the power of 

deathless love! 

G. W. S.-Jan., '09. 



R4429 : page 206 

SAMPLES OF INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am sorry to hear that the untruthful statement has 
been circulated that you are denying the Ransom. Of 
you it can be said emphatically that you are the great 
defender and expounder of the ransom— from the year 
1872— and especially from 1878 even to this day. 

For centuries the doctrine of the ransom held a 
prominent place in orthodox theology, but there was 
no distinction made between the act of providing the 
ransom price and the act of paying that price over to 
Justice. This is most convincingly set forth in your 
writings. The "anti lutron" did not remove the sentence 
of death from the world; this is to be done by the 
hilasmos act. In your writings the act of presenting 
the ransom price as an offset for sins in the heavenly 
court of justice is divided into two parts— the Atonement 
for the Church and the atonement for the world; 
that the legal atonement for the Church was made on 
the Ascension day, and when the "ransom money" shall 
have been stamped with the image and with the superscription 
of the death of the Church, it will be paid over 
to Justice and God and the world will be at one— legally 
only. God cannot be reconciled to sinners; they must 
first be brought into a perfect condition ere they 
can enjoy the friendship of God; hence the necessity of 
an effective covenant. 



With greatest interest and pleasure I have followed 
you in your explanation of the three Covenants. I was 
used to speak of this Gospel Age as the New Testament 
time and of the Gospel Church as the New Testament 

R4430 : page 206 

Church, but you made a clear cut of it, declaring that 
the New Covenant is not yet in existence, that it belongs 
to the Millennial Age. This declaration dispelled the 
mist and caused me to see the wondrous doings of our 
God more clearly. The Seed promised in the Abrahamic 
Covenant is to bless Israel and all nations by the arrangement 
of the New Covenant. The New Covenant 
will be established as soon as its Mediator, Christ Head 
and Body, shall have been completed. Then will begin 
the great transaction. Christ as the High Priest 
shall enter into the Most Holy with the blood of the 
Church to justify God in his act of letting the world go 
from the chain of death— legally. God will then be at 
liberty to exhibit his wisdom, love and power toward 
mankind. The work of the atonement will then be 
finished and Christ shall come forth as the Mediator. 
The antitypical Ishmael, the Jewish nation, shall come 
from the wilderness condition to the promised land, 
even to Mt. Zion, the center from which God will rule 
the world during the Millennium. The New Covenant 
will be sealed and the precious work will begin— the 
work of taking away the sins of Israel and the taking 
away of the sins of the world, and the writing of the 
law of God in the hearts of the children of Israel and 
in the hearts of the people of other nations. 

You have brought wonderful things to my attention. 
I am taken captive by these things. What am I that 
I should come under the offer of getting the choicest 
portion of the Abrahamic Covenant? I remember the 
days when I was reading and thinking of the two Covenants 
mentioned by Paul in Galatians 4, but I did not 
understand, so I have watched and received eagerly 
whatsoever has come from your pen along the line of 
the Covenants. How precious it is to walk under the 
light shed upon them! Precious, sanctifying truths 
indeed they are. Daily I remember you and all your 
dear colaborers at the throne of heavenly grace. 

Yours in love of the Truth, 

K. P. HAMMER, -Can. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have wanted to write and tell you 
how greatly I have been blessed since making the Vow 
my own, which I did at 11:15 p.m., January 9 last. 
Words fail to express the peace of mind I experienced 
as soon as I registered it with our heavenly Father. I 
am happier now than I have been since I came into 
Present Truth, and can truthfully say, each day I have 
received more light and knowledge and have increased 



joy in the Lord and in his service. My heart overflows 
with gratitude and extreme thankfulness to our heavenly 
Father for his goodness to me. 

Dear Brother Russell, I grieve very much when I 
think of the things I believed and thought of you. I 
am very deeply impressed by the way in which you have 
taken this trial and by your love for the brethren amid 
such terrible persecution, and I want you to know you 
have my heartfelt sympathy. I pray that those who 
are still in opposition may also have the eyes of their 
understanding opened before it is too late. 

May the Lord's blessing be with you all in "Bethel 
Home." May I ask you to pray on my behalf? With 
much Christian love to you all, 

Your sister in the blessed Lord, 

M. L. JAMES,-Pa. 



DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I rejoice to tell you that Saturday, April 24th, the 
anniversary of the day I registered my "Vow" to the 
Lord, found me "safe in the arms of Jesus," much grace 
having been obtained in time of need. I love the Vow's 
sanctifying power and protection. The Lord bless thee 
abundantly. With sincere love and prayers, 

By his grace, C. WHITE,— Texas. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

"Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father, 
and the Lord Jesus Christ." "We give thanks to God 
always for you, making mention of you in our prayers 
"daily," "Remembering without ceasing, your work of 
faith and labor of love, and patience of hope in our 
Lord Jesus Christ"; making request that your trip 
among the dear ones abroad may be prosperous and 
assist in "building up many in the most holy faith." 

I want to tell you what a great blessing the Vow 
has been to me— and especially so since Brother Brown 
went home and I have had no earthly one to lean upon. 
The dear Lord has been very near, guarding and 
strengthening me for the daily battle with "the world, 
the flesh and the Adversary." 

"May he who is able to guard you from stumbling 
and to set you before the presence of his glory, without 
blemish, in exceeding joy," be with you to the end of 
your life's journey. 

Your sister in the Anointed, 

MARGARET REID BROWN. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 



After the singing of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow unto the Lord," then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text for the 
date is read and questions and comments considered. 
Finally, just before leaving the table, the MANNA comment 
is read. Desiring that all share the blessings, we 
commend the plan to others. The hymns for Aug. are 
indicated below to permit all who so desire to join with us: 

(1) 4; (2) 61; (3) 236; (4) 280; (5) 215; (6) 9; (7) 286; 
(8) 152; (9) 110; (10) 334; (11) 105; (12) 141; (13) 139; 
(14) 328; (15) 155; (16) 117; (17) 119; (18) 8; (19) 35; 
(20) 130; (21) 47; (22) 273; (23) 7; (24) 125; (25) 246; 
(26) 19; (27) 194; (28) 14; (29) 88; (30) 71; (31) 325. 



page 207 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V. 

—Supposed Objections Considered 

AUGUST 1 

(1) Where do we read, "The holy Ghost witnesseth 

in every city, saying, that bonds and afflictions await me"? 
Page 277. 

(2) What does this signify? Give details and cite the 
Scriptures. 

(3) How did the holy Ghost make the Elders of 
Ephesus overseers in the Church? P. 278. 

(4) The Apostle speaks of his own preaching as being 
"not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but 
which the holy Ghost teacheth." Where are these words 
found? What do they imply? P. 279. 

(5) We read that "the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God," etc. Where is the Scripture? 
What does it signify? Give the philosophy of the matter. 
P. 279, par. 3. 

AUGUST 8 

(6) Read 1 John 2:20,27. What thought is suggested 
in the words "unction" and "anointing" in these texts, 
and how are they applicable to the Church. P. 280, 281. 

(7) What does the word unction signify? What is the 
Greek word rendered unction and its import? P. 281, par. 2 

(8) Could these words, unction and anointing of the 
Spirit, apply to a person or only to a power or influence? 
P. 282, par. 1. 

(9) Who is the Holy One in the expression, "An unction 



from the Holy One"? P. 282, par. 2. 

(10) Cite other Scriptures which speak of the pouring 
out, shedding forth, anointing, etc., of the holy Spirit. 
P. 282, par. 2. 

(11) In this Scripture the wording implies that those 
who have the unction "know all things," are all-wise. 
What about this statement? Give a preferred translation. 
Is it here as in the oldest manuscripts? P. 282, par. 3. 

AUGUST 15 

(12) What is the truth and meaning of the words, "Ye 
need not that any man teach you"? P. 283, par. 1. 

(13) As it stands in our common version, would not 
this passage be in conflict with many others? Quote and 
cite some of these. P. 283, par. 2; P. 284, par. 1,2. 

(14) About when is it supposed that John wrote this 
epistle? Tell something of the world's condition at that 
time. P. 285. 

(15) To what class did the Apostle refer as "Them 
that seduce you"? (V. 26). P. 286, par. 1. 

(16) Give a paraphrase of the 27th verse on this text. 
P. 286, par. 3; P. 287, par. 1. 

(17) Where is it written that "The Spirit itself 
maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot 
be uttered," and what spirit is here referred to? P. 287, 
par. 2. 

(18) How is this Scripture generally misunderstood? 
P. 287. 

(19) With the theory that it is the holy Spirit, one of 
three equal gods, is it reasonable to suppose that there 
would be anything too hard for it to utter? 

(20) Is the popular thought that we must approach 

the Father and the Son through the holy Spirit as another 
person a reasonable one or in accord with other Scriptures? 
P. 287, par. 3. 

(21) If the groaning cannot be uttered, how would 
there be groanings at all? Wherein is the error of the 
ordinary view of this text? Give a detailed explanation 
of it and cite the Scripture. P. 288, 289, 290. 

AUGUST 22 

(22) We read of the holy Spirit, "He will reprove the 
world of sin and of righteousness and of judgment." 
Where are these words found, and why is the holy Spirit 
referred to by the masculine pronoun he? P. 291, 170, 
171. 

(23) Does this Scripture imply that the holy Spirit 
operates in sinners for their reproof and their reformation? 
P. 291, par. 1,2. 

(24) If it operates only in the Church, the spirit-begotten, 
what would this text signify? P. 291, par. 3. 

(25) Explain how the holy Spirit reproves the world, 

what influence it exercises and how and the outward evidences 
thereof. P. 292. 



(26) In what sense are the Lord's people "children of 

light" and whom do they enlighten and what is the enlightening 
power? P. 293. 

(27) Mention some of the things which the holy Spirit 
reproves through the children of the light. Is such a reproving 
of the world the chief work of the holy Spirit in 

this Age, and the chief work of the Church, or not? 
P. 294. 

(28) Give illustrations of how the light of the holy 
Spirit in the children of the light might become darkness. 
P. 294, par. 2. 

AUGUST 29 

(29) In what verse of the Bible is the Spirit of God 
contrasted with the spirit of antichrist? P. 295, par. 1. 

(30) Is the spirit of antichrist a person? If not what 
would be the inference as respects the Spirit of God when 
thus used in comparison. P. 295, par. 2. 

(31) How should we "try the spirits"? And are both 
the spirit of the Truth and the spirit of error personated 
through human agencies, teachers, etc.? P. 295, par. 2. 

(32) Give one general Scripture text as respects false 
faith and true and false teachers which refers to the 
spirit of antichrist as not confessing the coming of Jesus 
in the flesh. P. 296. 

(33) Give illustrations of teaching which deny that 
our Lord came in the flesh and which, therefore, should 
be classed as anti or against, opposed to, the doctrines of 
Christ. P. 297. 

(34) What objection is sometimes raised to the common 
version of this text? Explain the matter in detail 

and show that our common version is well sustained. 
P. 297, last par. 

(35) Give Prof. Rinehart's definition of the Greek text. 
P. 298, 299. 

(36) Is it necessary to believe that Christ came in the 
flesh to logically believe in the Ransom? If so, how and 
why? P. 299. 



*Five years ago DAWN-STUDIES, VOL. V., was reset, and 
unfortunately the type was not exactly same size as before; and 
hence page for page they differ. The references given in these 
Berean Studies apply to the present edition, a copy of which 
postpaid will cost you but 30c. But keep your old edition, 
for unfortunately the new Bible Helps refer to its pages. 



page 208 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 



ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

GLEN FALLS, N.Y., JUNE 27 

At 10:00 a.m. Praise and Testimony Meeting in G.A.R. 
Hall, Corner Glen and South streets. At 11:00 o'clock discourse 
to the interested. 

At 3:00 p.m. public discourse on the subject: "The Thief 
in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell, and Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom," in the Empire Theatre, Corner Glen and South Sts. 
Get off cars at Monument Sq. 

Visiting friends heartily welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JULY 4 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

Baptismal services will be arranged for if requested on 
first Sunday of any quarter. 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 



Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY 