From Our Readers
Narcolepsy  Thirty years ago I was diagnosed as having narcolepsy. All my life I have lived with the problems that arise from falling asleep at the wrong moment. Because I fall asleep at Christian meetings, others have concluded that I have little appreciation for spiritual matters. Efforts to explain my situation have been in vain. Therefore, thanks for your fine article (April 8, 1991) about the strange sleeping sickness.
R. N., Germany
Honor the Elderly  Thank you for the articles on “Do You Honor the Elderly?” (March 22, 1991) After 40 years of faithful service to God, my mother needed full-time nursing care because of Alzheimer’s disease. The calendar published by the Watch Tower Society proved to be a great help, as her many visitors would write their names on the date of their visit. I was thus able to remind her that I had not been her only visitor, since more than half of the dates were filled with names! Also, she received excellent care from the nursing-home staff because they knew so many were interested in her welfare. Thank you for your concern for us.
W. J. H., United States
My mother, paralyzed from the waist down, suffers from incontinence. Every morning we have to wash her completely and change the bed sheets. She has to be dressed and fed, and she often needs medical treatment. My husband and children are a real support, but the greater part of the responsibility falls on me. I have moments of discouragement, and a spirit of self-denial is constantly needed. It was therefore with immense joy that I read your articles. Thanks from the bottom of my heart.
L. D., Italy
Example for Siblings  Your article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Be an Example to My Younger Brothers and Sisters?” affected me deeply. (April 8, 1991) Being the eldest of three children, I can only say I wish I had read that article in my youth. I now have two children of my own and am relieved that they will have such good counsel to follow.
L. K., Germany
Baby-Sitting  Thank you so much for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Be a Good Baby-Sitter?” (March 8, 1991) I received it in the mail while baby-sitting my six-year-old brother. As I was reading it, I told him to pick up his toys. Then I came to the paragraph where it mentioned that rewarding good behavior may work better than a barrage of threats. I tried this, and it worked! I also appreciated the part where it mentioned that it’s not good to call a child stupid or dumb. I’ve been calling him stupid, and now I realize that this is stupid on my part.
A. L., United States
Asbestos  As a trained Asbestos Project Worker, I would like to say how much I enjoyed the balanced article “The Asbestos Story.” (March 22, 1991) As part of my training, I heard lectures from cancer specialists. One doctor verified that your chances of being adversely affected by asbestos are far greater if you smoke. As usual, your articles are accurate and meaty.
J. M., United States
Lupus  My uncle sent me the article with Robin Kanstul’s story “How I Live With Lupus.” (May 8, 1990) I read the entire magazine and enjoyed it. I too am afflicted with lupus, and doctors never told me half of what the article did. Thanks, Robin Kanstul, for telling. Thanks, Awake!, for publishing her story. I now know I’m not alone, and I’m learning to cope.
R. B., United States

