Young People Ask . . .
How Can I Protect Myself From Gang Attack?
ONE cool autumn evening, 12-year-old Tom went to the neighborhood store to pick up a few items. Tom was nervous because he was on the turf controlled by a local street gang, and his fears soon proved warranted. Without warning, several members of the gang descended on him, throwing him to the ground under a hail of fists.
Because of the predicted “increasing of lawlessness,” many live in neighborhoods too violent even for the authorities to control. (Matthew 24:12) And if you live in an area where gang activity is prevalent, Tom’s experience may be all too familiar. Consider, for example, the situation in Los Angeles County, U.S.A. According to Maclean’s magazine, of the 257 gang-related fatalities that occurred there in 1988, half involved unprovoked gang killings of nonmembers! Thus, youths who live in areas where gangs are active face a real challenge: protecting themselves.
A previous article showed the folly of joining a gang.a It was explained that gang membership actually increases the risk of your being injured, arrested, or even killed. And as for carrying a knife, a gun, or any other kind of weapon, this runs counter to the Bible’s counsel at Isaiah 2:4 and Matthew 26:52. Besides, doing so is more likely to escalate a conflict than defuse it. The same can be said for studying the martial arts, such as judo or karate, as a means of self-defense. Better it is, then, to avoid a gang confrontation in the first place. But how?
Gangs and Their Colors
First, consider your dress, grooming, and bearing. Many gangs wear distinctive clothing, colors, or paraphernalia that distinguishes them from other gangs. A bandanna or even the way a hat is worn may establish gang membership. Oftentimes, gangs adopt certain gestures and their own vocabulary and posture.
The problem is that gang colors and other such trademarks often become fashionable among youths in general​—including nongang members. Observed the Canadian newspaper The Globe and Mail: “Some adolescents ape part of the dress of certain gangs, even though they are not members. . . . They may be trying to impress other teen-agers.”
Some youths apparently feel that the special garb will make them look tough. Others reason that being decked out in gang colors may provide them a measure of protection. They reckon that some will feel less inclined to offend them, assuming they are associated with a certain gang. Is this sound reasoning? Not at all. The Globe and Mail put it bluntly: “They run the risk of being beaten up if spotted by real gang members.”
Bernard, once a gang member but now one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, confirms this assessment. Recalling the former days, he says: “If someone dressed like one of us and he was not one of us, most likely he would be a target. Either he would have to join our gang or get himself hurt.”
It Pays to Be Different!
Knowing this should guide your choice of clothing. After all, does not the way we dress say something about us​—even identify us? This was true thousands of years ago when the Bible was being written. In the book of 2 Kings, we read of some messengers who reported back to King Ahaziah of Israel. They told of meeting a man who gave them a certain message. The king asked, “What was the appearance of the man?” When they described his garments, the king immediately said, ‘It was Elijah the prophet!’ How did he know? Because Elijah wore the distinctive garment of a prophet. (2 Kings 1:5-8) Today, just as then, the way we dress can link us up with certain classes of people, even though we may not practice what they practice or believe what they believe. Others will tend to assume that we at least sympathize with the class of people who dress that way.
Michael, a former gang member quoted in Sports Illustrated, says: “The shoes, the jackets and the hats are just symbols . . . I can drive down the street and point out a gang member just by the way he or she dresses.”
How unwise it would be, then, for a Christian youth to groom himself, dress, walk, talk, or even assume a posture like members of a street gang! Jesus’ counsel to be “no part of the world” would be particularly applicable here. (John 17:16) Indeed, gang members usually have little difficulty spotting those who are not of their sort. Michael recalls: “We see a guy in some dress slacks, a nice sweater, loafers. You couldn’t convince me that he’s a gang member.”
Bernard, earlier quoted, adds: “Gang members often tend to dress in the latest fashions.” In view of this, care and caution should be observed before adopting styles of dress and grooming that may be popular at school or in your neighborhood but that could easily make you a target of gang violence due to mistaken identity. Dressing in a modest fashion may prove to be a protection.​—Compare 1 Timothy 2:9.
Be careful, too, about the kind of language and vocabulary you use. If you try to prove that you are in by using slang expressions commonly used by gang members, you may very well attract the attention of gang members. Avoid trying to project a tough-guy image. Remember: “A live dog is better off than a dead lion.”​—Ecclesiastes 9:4.
Another safeguard is to avoid being “a friend of the world” when it comes to your choice of associates. (James 4:4) You might figure that having a few “tough” friends would work to your advantage. But drawing on his gang experience, Bernard says: “If you have friends who belong to a gang, more than likely you will be pressured to join the gang.” Even efforts to direct gang members on the path to life should be made with due caution.​—Matthew 28:19, 20.
Yes, your best avenue of protection might very well be your reputation as an exemplary Christian. True, because you do not ‘run with them in the low sink of debauchery, they may speak abusively of you.’ (1 Peter 4:4) But they may also begrudgingly respect you. At the very least, they will probably consider you an unlikely candidate for gang membership.
Avoiding Danger
Nevertheless, a good reputation is not always enough to keep you from harm’s way. Proverbs 27:12 gives this good advice: “The shrewd one that has seen the calamity has concealed himself; the inexperienced that have passed along have suffered the penalty.” This sound counsel stresses the need to be discerning and alert when faced with potentially dangerous situations. For example, if invited to go out to a certain place or event, ask yourself, Who will be there? Is it a known gang hangout?
One former gang member gives similar advice: “Avoid areas where gangs hang out. Take an alternate route if possible.” Yes, avoid unnecessary travel into areas that are known to be unsafe. And if violence erupts, do not let curiosity get you killed. Proverbs 17:14 says: “The beginning of contention is as one letting out waters; so before the quarrel has burst forth, take your leave.”
But suppose that in spite of all your efforts to avoid trouble, you are confronted by individuals who want you to join their gang. Calmly state that you cannot join them. Youths who are Jehovah’s Witnesses often add that their time and efforts are being used for the Christian ministry. Whatever you say, avoid being disrespectful or antagonistic. Jesus told his disciples at Matthew 10:16: “Prove yourselves cautious as serpents and yet innocent as doves.” Again, your conduct, dress, and grooming must harmonize with the stand you have taken.
Realize, though, that even the most stringent precautions cannot totally guarantee your safety. (Ecclesiastes 9:11) But with reasonable effort, you can likely avoid becoming a victim of gang violence.
[Footnotes]
See the article “Should I Join a Gang?” appearing in the June 8, 1991, issue of Awake!
[Picture on page 19]
Flee scenes of violence. Do not let curiosity get you killed

