R596 : page 1 

VOL. V. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1884. 
NO. 8. 



page 1 

ZION'S 
Watch Tower 
AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 
101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS:— Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps, as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 



we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55: 1,2. 



R596 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The "lenten season" as observed especially by the Roman Catholic 
and the Episcopal Churches, is upon us, and despite the extravagant 
excesses practiced by these ceremonious friends, the season calls 
before the memory of all thoughtful saints, pictures of the last days 
of Jesus. One thing is certain, the remembrance of that time and of 
our Lord's sufferings and death are not calculated to overthrow faith 
in the ransom, nor to lead men to deny that the Lord bought them. 

It was the custom of the early Church to celebrate the Lord's Supper 
and death on the anniversary of the same, every year, and the 
observance yet of "Good Friday," by some, is what yet lingers of 
the original custom of the Church. 

We can but recognize the appropriateness of celebrating any event 
on its anniversary, and for several years past we have enjoyed the 
privilege of thus commemorating the antitypical Passover Sacrifice- 
-the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world. 

The appropriateness of the time has always heightened the interest 
and rendered it more impressively, solemn and real. As we partake 
of the emblems of his shed blood and broken body, it impresses 
upon us the words and scenes of the first Supper, and of the 
sacrifice for sins which it illustrated, and gives us to realize more 
fully the value of the "precious blood" that cleanseth from all sin. 

The Lord's Supper is a reminder of his death, as the Passover was a 
type of it. Jesus fulfilled the latter and instituted the former in the 
same night in which he was betrayed, and told his disciples that 
hence forth they should DO THIS in remembrance of him— not now 
in remembrance of the typical Lamb's death and its results, but in 
remembrance of ME— the true Lamb of God whose sacrifice 
procures still a greater passover and deliverence for the Church of 
the first-born. 

We purpose commemorating the Lord's Supper on its anniversary 
this year also; and suggest to the saints everywhere observance of 
the Master's words— "THIS DO in remembrance of me" (Luke 
22: 12). We can assure you it will be a blessed season of 
communion to all the household of faith, and especially to those 



who are of the "first born" class. Around that hour the memories of 
the year will cluster while the heart sings: 

"Sweet the moments rich in blessing 
Which before the cross I spend, 
Life and health and peace possessing 
From the sinners dying Friend." 

The Jewish "Feast of Passover" commenced on the fifteenth day of 
their month Nisan (answering this year to our April 9th) and lasted 
seven days. This we do not commemorate, but the acts of a day 
preceding it— the killing of the lamb on the 14th of Nisan, which 
beginning at six o'clock Tuesday evening April 8th, will end with 
six o'clock Wednesday evening April 9th, 1884. 

The church at Pittsburgh will meet at 7:30 P.M. Tuesday evening in 
the upper room of No. 101 Federal Street, Allegheny City, and 
break the bread and drink the fruit of the vine in remembrance of 
our Lord and Redeemer, and go forth remembering Gethsemane, 
and Pilate's court, and Herod's soldiers and Calvary, where the 
sacrifice was "FINISHED" at three o'clock P.M. following (April 
9th) over eighteen hundred years ago. 

For a more detailed account of our view of this matter we refer you 
to the TOWER of April last year. We trust to hear of the enjoyment 
of this season by the ones and twos and tens scattered everywhere, 
for "even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us" (1 Cor. 5:7). 



INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Pittsburgh, Texas, March 3, 1884. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am always thirsting for the literature of 
the TOWER before it comes to me every month. Having been 
excluded from the nominal Church about eight months ago for 
endorsing the doctrines as advocated by you, my comfort is in 
reading the Bible with the helps published by yourself. 

As a young minister of the Baptist Church, my preaching was very 
acceptable until I saw the glorious doctrine of restoration, and 
preached it, when I was excluded from the Church which I was 
serving. I pray earnestly, "Thy kingdom come." May God bless you 
(as part of the new mouth-piece, the old being spewed out) in your 
effort to spread the glad tidings of great joy which shall be to all 
people. I get a very clear view of the glorious teachings of the 
shadowy service, believing its glories. "The Tabernacle" tract is 
unsurpassed as an explanation of the Bible on that subject. Still I 
have doubts of my being among the priesthood— the way is so 
exceedingly narrow. Yet I often rejoice when my doubts 
temporarily remove with joy inexpressible and full of glory. I think 



I love my Bible better since the light of the "due time" begins to 
shine on its sacred pages, than ever before. 

My humble prayer and burning desire is that I may be among that 
immortal band. I praise the name of God for the possibility of such. 

Yours in brotherly love, . 

Chicago, Ills. 

DEAR FRIENDS:— Having picked up one of your little books on 
the street, called "Food for Thinking Christians," and "Why Evil 
was Permitted," I became deeply interested in it. It seems very good 
for thinking sinners as well as Christians. I am a reformed man 
now, having been down in the gutter many a time through 
intoxicating drink, though I have not tasted any now for over a year, 
may God help me to keep from it. Having just read the little book, I 
see that you will send others, and by so doing you will oblige me. I 
would like to lead a better life, and become a Christian. I cannot see 
fully into the reality of religion, but may the Lord open my heart 
and eyes to the great love he has for them that fear him. I will try to 
make good use of anything you send. 

Brooklyn, N.Y. 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I thank you for sending me the 
TOWER. It has given me much light and comfort. I presume my 
time for reading will soon close, as I have entered my eighty-fifth 
year; but if you will be kind enough still to send it, I shall be much 
pleased, and will pray for God's blessing to attend you in your 
labors of love. 

I would gladly circulate tracts or leaflets that you may have on hand 
if sent, as I have not much to do at present, and would like to work 
a little in the Lord's vineyard while here, by circulating that light 
which is so freely offered. If you have any tracts on hand, I should 
like much to get a few. I have lent and given away all that I had to 
parties that will make good use of them, and there are others that I 
should like to have read them. I always use caution "not to cast 
pearls before swine" to trample on or destroy. 

I am, dear sir, yours truly, in the bonds of Christian love, 
page 1 

Duncans ville, Pa. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I feel very thankful to God for the light of the 
truth I received from the TOWER and FOOD you sent me. I bless 
God I can rejoice in the truth, but we had a struggle to go through. I 
had been a Methodist for forty years, and my wife and daughter 



members of the Baptist Church. We have withdrawn our names 
from them, and are now forming a little true church in our own 
family. The Baptist minister came to see us, and denounced it as all 
wrong. I gave him my "Food" to look at. He said he wanted to get 
some points out of it. Some of my Methodist friends will not speak 
to me since I withdrew. I do thank God for the comfort I feel. I 
have been for many years trying to live wholly to glorify God, but I 
can now feel an assurance I never knew before. My companion is 
happy in the truth. I shall from henceforth work to bring other 
bound ones out into the large pastures. Pray for us, and may God 
bless you, and make you the means of setting many free. 

London, England. 

DEAR SIR:-I am rather late in ordering the TOWER for another 
year. The reason is, we have had sickness and death in the house, 
and I have been almost dead myself. You may reckon that I am 
dead, when you cease to hear from me once a year. But I hope some 
of my friends would let you know in that case for I should wish to 
thank you at the last minute for all the light and joy and comfort I 
have received through you, and those who have helped you. 

If I gave up the "Tower" views I should also let you know that and 
the reason why, but I am still so interested in it that I always pray 
for its safe arrival, and not one has missed in two years, and each 
one has brought some fresh light. Since I prayed at all, I have 
always prayed that I might understand the Scriptures, and now the 
windows of heaven are opened and there is such a blessing being 
poured out that I have not room to receive it. He said "prove me 
now herewith," and I say it is actually a fact. 

I am able to report a little progress for the last twelve months. 

Our meeting is the most liberal that I know of; brethren who are 
expelled other meetings for change of belief find refuge amongst 
us. 

I have gained the attention of two young men, who live near me, 
and they visit me two or three evenings a week, to enquire "what is 
truth?" One comes oftener than the other and makes more progress. 
He goes and spreads the good news as a steward of the manifold 
grace of God. These two enclose subscriptions with me for the 
TOWER. 

Some time ago I heard read in my presence in a most solemn 
manner 2d Pet. 2:1, in condemnation of "Food for thinking 
Christians." If I had not seen the TOWER explanation of the 
"image of the beast" I should have been frightened out of my wits. 

Your publications have removed more difficulties from my mind 
than any thing else has done. I never could understand why some 
Christians had no appetite for spiritual things, and didn't want to 
know any more truth than that Jesus died for sinners, and why to 



deny themselves for the truth sake, or love a Christian because he 
was a Christian, seemed to be out of the question. I thought if we all 
fare alike in the end, we are "fools for Christ's sake" indeed, and got 
nothing for it. But now it is as clear as daylight. 

Your brother in Christ, . 



Cuba, Kansas. 



DEAR FRIENDS :~I hope to find in some of the papers that you 
send, when our Passover anniversary will occur this year. I expect 
to keep it all by myself. The wine I can buy, and I can make 
unleavened bread myself. 

I am very lonesome sometimes when I cannot find any one to 
converse with me about the glorious news proclaimed in the Bible 
and made plain in ZION'S WATCH TOWER through the Holy 
Spirit. Pray for me, that I may be ready when the Lord gathers his 
jewels. Sometimes a fear fills my heart lest I might be left, but I 
love the Lord, and he will not forget me. 

Franklin, Ind. 

MY DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-We have taken the WATCH 
TOWER during the past year, and I am glad to tell you that it has 
been to us meat in due season. I value it more, very much more, 
than all the preaching and reading I get from any other source. No 
paper or book is read by me so carefully and repeatedly as it is. 
Nothing I read seems to satisfy like it and the "Diaglott." I am 
compelled to believe its teachings in the main, although I cannot 
grasp fully all it contains. How often do we (myself and wife) wish 
we could hear such things from the pulpit! I often read from the 
TOWER or DAY DAWN, and hunt up the references, instead of 
going to church, and I am sure we are blessed in so doing. 

How easy it is, to see the true condition 

page 2 

of the Church with the light as it now shines ! I am trying to 
understand what it is to be a truly consecrated Christian. I earnestly 
desire to belong to the body of my blessed Lord. I am watching and 
hoping; but, oh! the promises are so great! the reward so glorious! I 
fear I can never reach it, so unworthy and so unfaithful have I been 
all these years. The battles of life have been hard to fight, many of 
them. But if my beloved Master will give me the very lowest place 
in his kingdom, the reward will be exceedingly great and glorious. I 
pray to be kept humbly watching and waiting for the time when he 
shall call me. 

I often see the answers to questions I would ask, having been asked 
by others. Please make me a subscriber for another year. I would 
not be without the paper for ten times its cost. Enclosed please find 
$5 to help to spread the glad tidings. 

Yours in Christ, watching and waiting, 

Mt. Lookout, Va. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have been reading the WATCH 
TOWER about one year. I believed some of its doctrines before I 



read, and I have adopted some since; but it advocates some that I 
am not fully prepared to accept. 

I am a Baptist preacher, and live in a Baptist community. I have 
been circulating specimen copies of the TOWER and "Food" 
among thinking Christians, with a request to take the Bible for the 
standard of truth. Many have done so— two are Baptist preachers— 
and they are all astonished at the new revelations of the Bible. With 
this class I have no trouble; they are sincere Bible students. But 
there is another class among us who are so certain that they are 
right, and that these teachings are wrong, that they will not examine 
the Bible. This class is in the majority here, and is troublesome. I 
am alone, or have been almost alone, for one or two years past, but 
the Lord has helped me very recently by opening the understanding 
of a few of my brethren. I was once blinded with denominational 
prejudices, but I think I am clear of that now. I am determined to 
seek for the truth, and follow it whithersoever it leads me. 

Will you please continue to send the WATCH TOWER to me, or 
anything else that you may think proper? May the Lord bless you 
and guide you in your work. 

Fraternally yours, . 



R596 : page 2 

"THE UNION OF PROTESTANTS AND 
CATHOLICS." 

We quote from The Catholic of this city, its reply to the editorial 
under the above caption in the Century Magazine which we noticed 
in our columns last month. Truly the gathering storm is bringing to 
the Nominal Church fearful apprehensions of danger and utter 
wreck. The loud boastings of both these hoary headed and decaying 
systems of error, are only the efforts of each to conceal their unrest 
and to guard against what the fearful forbodings of some term "a 
religious panic." 



"The Catholic" says: 

"Protestantism,— which was and is, a revolt against the divinely 
established authority of the Catholic Church, is seriously alarmed 
by the revolt of one of its own very legitimate children — 
Materialism, Agnosticism, Infidelity, or whatever else the thing 
may be known by— against itself. Having sown the wind it is at last 
reaping the whirlwind. Thoughtful minds are beginning to see and 
recognize the dimensions of the coming storm, and are anxious to 
save themselves from its strength and fury, by an alliance offensive 
and defensive, with the Catholic Church. In the February number of 
the Century Magazine, there is a very suggestive article in the 
editorial department, discussing the possibilities and probabilities of 



"a reunion in the future between the Roman Catholic and Protestant 
bodies. There is a peculiar significance in the discussion of such a 
subject in a periodical, which though secular in tone, yet has for its 
original editor, Dr. Holland, a strict Calvinist; and its present chief 
owner and manager, Mr. Roswell Smith, we understand, is a 
prominent and pronounced Presbyterian. 

We can forgive the "Century" writer, because of his earnestness and 
honesty 

R597 : page 2 

of purpose, which can be traced from the beginning to the end of 
the article, the many serious errors into which his ignorance of 
Catholic teaching and practice, has doubtless led him. 

The four hundredth anniversary of Luther's birth, and the 
discussions that its celebration called forth, supply the writer with a 
text. He says that the Lutheran celebration brought to view the fact 
that "the religious reformation of the last four centuries has not 
been confined to the Church of the reformers. A constant 
reformation in discipline, if not in doctrine," he thinks, "has been 
going on in the Church assailed by the German ex-monk." We need 
hardly remind our readers of the two very grave errors in this 
passage. There can be no reform of doctrine in the Catholic Church. 
Catholic faith is unchangeable, whilst a disciplinary reform is 
always in order, not only during the last four centuries, but 
constantly, from the very beginning. 

But we are more interested, if possible, in the admissions which the 
writer makes, and the present tendencies of Protestantism that he 
notes, than in dealing with the well-meaning mistakes he falls into 
on the Catholic side of the question. This Protestant exponent 
shows that the bonds of sympathy are now joining Catholics and 
Protestants to a degree, which twenty-five years ago, could not have 
been anticipated. He sees the growth of a feeling that these two 
bodies of Christians need to be united to resist the encroachments 
of modern infidelity. Protestantism, twenty-five years ago, was 
boastful and disdainful of the Catholic Church, to-day it is 
powerless and helpless, when its own children— modern infidels- 
are using against itself the very weapons which itself has been 
using for the last four centuries against the Catholic Church. This 
makes all the difference in the world, and our Protestant friends are 
desirous, quite naturally so, of calling to their assistance the aid, 
sorely needed, of their Catholic neighbors. Hear the language of the 
"Century" editor: "As the conflict with Materialism and 
Agnosticism has been waxing hotter and hotter, it must have 
become evident to intelligent Protestants that they have in the 
Roman Catholic theologians a strong body of theologians with 
whom they ought to maintain friendly relations. It is not 
Protestantism, nor the Papacy, nor Calvinism, nor Trinitarianism, 
nor any other secondary Christian dogma, that is now on trial," 
proclaims the writer further on, but "whether there is such thing as 



religion— whether there is a conscious God and a life beyond the 
grave, and a free will, and a moral law." For the last four centuries, 
Catholic theologians and writers have been in vain telling 
Protestants that their principles would land them exactly here. The 
early so-called reformers denied free will, and by their doctrine of 
justification by faith alone, practically discarded a moral law. 

The "Century" readily acknowledges and pays a just tribute to the 
exalted ethical standards of the Catholic Church, and to its courage 
and consistency in maintaining them against all efforts of 
compromise.— For instance, it openly lays down that "the Roman 
Catholic doctrine and practice respecting divorce are much closer to 
the law of the New Testament than those of the Protestant Churches 
have been." It also speaks of an "earnest effort, at the present time 
to bring the practice of the Protestant Churches a little nearer to the 
Catholic standard." Luther and Henry of England made short work 
of the New Testament law regulating the marriage contract. And 
whilst leading Protestant ministers openly countenance and 
recognize the looseness, not to say, shamelessness, of modern 
divorce law and practice, there is little reason to hope that the 
Protestant Churches will be brought any nearer to the Catholic 
standard. 

Whilst we fully recognize the kind disposition and earnestness of 
the writer, who is, doubtless, alarmed by what he, in common with 
many others, is daily witnessing in Protestantism and its tendencies, 
it is simply folly to think of any feasible plan of union between 
Catholics and Protestants, such as this well-meaning writer would 
propose. The only union that can be effected, is for our Protestant 
friends who are desirous to escape from being submerged by the 
deluge of modern infidelity, to seek safety in the divinely fashioned 
ark— the Catholic Church. Against this stately, wonderfully, 
supernaturally constructed vessel, the winds and the waves, and the 
fierce storms of nineteen eventful centuries have beaten in vain, 
because of the abiding presence of Him therein, "whom the winds 
and the sea obey." 



R597 : page 2 

ASSEMBLING TOGETHER. 

Paul says, "Let us consider one another to provoke unto love and 
to good works: not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, 
as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much 
the more, as ye see the day approaching." Heb. 10:24,25. 

The necessity for assembling together for mutual edification, 
encouragement and strengthening, has been very generally 
acknowledged among Christians, yet we doubt if this most 
desirable end is very frequently attained, because we think, in most 
cases, God is not permitted to speak among them, or if so, he is 



limited. The assemblings together most frequently take the form of 
prayer and experience meetings, unless there is one of the number 
who is able to preach, and then the tendency is to depend upon that 
one to a greater extent than is profitable. We think that in meetings 
of Christians, much time should be given to the study of the 
Scriptures. 

The writer attended one of these experience meetings among those 
professing the higher life, where God was almost shut out, and 
poor, weak humanity, ignorant of its weakness as it always is, had 
abundant opportunity to boast itself. At the beginning of the 
meeting, one text of Scripture was read, the context of which all 
were ignorant of, and consequently its true application could not be 
understood. The dear old book was closed and reverently laid aside, 
and a prayer was offered, after which, one after another told how he 
or she felt and acted. One told how before rising in the morning she 
received her morsel of food (a single text of Scripture) on which 
she fed all day. How many do so-taking a text that happens to be 
stored in memory, often interpreting it out of all harmony with the 
context, because they fail to examine it closely, taking a little 
crumb of comfort when the Lord has spread his bountiful table and 
invited them to feast at it. 

Over an hour passed, and the human spirit had magnified itself 
greatly, while the Holy Spirit (Godlike mind) of the "new creatures" 
(for such we believe they were), was almost quenched. A brother 
seemed to perceive that something was wrong, and said, "What 
these meetings want is more prayer," and then proceeded to pray 
for everything he could think of, ignorant of the fact that he asked 
for many things in direct opposition to God's expressed will. And 
so the meeting closed without attaining the object for which they 
met, because God was shut out. 

Again it is the aim of some in their undue desire for harmony, to 
avoid the investigation of any subject which might provoke 
controversy. This, we think, is manifestly wrong. Shall we sell the 
truth to purchase harmony? and are we so puffed up as to be 
offended if God's word should overthrow our former convictions? 
Or shall we limit God to five or ten minutes, and take the remainder 
of two hours to listen to each others experiences, which in nine 
cases out of ten would be better untold? Why not open the doors 
wide, and let the blessed Master come in and lead our meetings? 

It matters not whether there is any one learned or talented among 
you. Let each one bring his own Bible, paper and pencil, and avail 
yourselves of as many helps in the way of a Concordance, Em. 
Diaglott, old and new versions of the New Testament, etc., as 
possible. Choose your subject; ask for the Spirit's guidance in the 
understanding of it; then read, think, compare scripture with 
scripture, and you will assuredly be guided into truth. "And the 
truth shall make you free"— free from error, superstition, and the 
corruption of our perverse nature, and the Holy Spirit (mind of God 



and Christ) if entertained will liberate you from formality as well as 
from self-exaltation. 

Our prayers need not be long or vain repetitions of the same thing, 
since we are not heard for our much speaking. In few and simple 
words we can make known our wants as far as we can estimate 
them; but God has so much more to tell us than we have to tell him. 
Let him speak much and long and often through his Word. 
"Sanctify them through thy truth," thy word is truth, was Jesus' 
prayer; and his admonition, "Search the Scriptures, for these are 
they that testify of me." (John 17:17, and 5:39.) So will we learn to 
delight ourselves in God's Law; it will be our meditation by night 
and by day. (Ps. 1 19:97.) So, also, will he work in us to will and to 
do of his good pleasure. (Phil. 2:13.) 

R. W. 



R598 : page 3 

THE DAY IS AT HAND. 

Poor, fainting spirit, still hold on thy way— 
The dawn is near! 

True, thou art weary; but yon brighter ray 

Becomes more clear. 

Bear up a little longer; wait for rest: 

Yield not to slumber, though with toil oppressed. 

The night of life is mournful, but look on— 
The dawn is near! 

Soon will earth's shadowy scenes and forms be gone; 
Yield not to fear! 

The mountain's summit will, ere long, be gained, 
And the bright world of joy and peace attained. 

Joyful through hope," thy motto still must be— 
The dawn is near! 

What glories will that dawn unfold to thee! 
Be of good cheer! 

Gird up thy loins; bind sandals on thy feet: 
The way is dark and long; the end is sweet. 



-Selected. 



R598 : page 3 



WHEN WILL CHRIST COME? 

(DISCOURSE NO. VI.) 

In our last two discourses we think #e prove scripturally that our 
Lords second coming will be of such a character that at first it will 
not be recognized by the world. They will eat, drink, build, marry, 
etc., as usual, and will not know that the day of the Lord has come. 
Since his presence is that of a spiritual body invisible to human 
eyes he cannot be discovered by the sight of the eye And to guard 
against the deceptions of antichrist, Jesus warned the Church not to 
expect him in any such way, saying, "Wherefore, if they shall say 
unto you, Behold he is in the desert; go not forth: behold he is in the 
secret chamber, believe it not," because he does not so come. How 
important to bear in mind the manner of his coming, as we 
considered it last Lord's day. 

At the first advent he did meet with them in the secret chamber and 
in the wilderness; he was then the word made flesh; he was then in 
the form of a servant for the suffering of deathe But at th second 
advent he comes in the glory of his Father (a spiritual body) which 
no ma hath seen, nor can see. (1 Tim. 6:16). 

Jesus said, "As the lightning, so shall the Son of Man be in his 
day." (Matt. 24:2 ; Luke 17:24). Man can see by the destruction it 
leaves, where the lightning has been: so, in the day of the Lord, 
men will come to recognize by the national trouble and overturning 
that the great day of his wrath is come. 

But while the world moves on in ignorance of the fact that the Lord 
is again present, should we expect the Church of Christ to be in the 
same darkness with reference to a fact of such interest to them? 
Certainly not. We should expect, however, that the great mass of 
those claiming to be of the Church, yet unfaithful t God, would be 
under the same veil of ignorance that covers the world. Those who 
are faithfully watching unto the "sure word of prophecy" will know 
of his presence. "Ye brethren are not in darkness that that day 
should come upon you as a tMef." ( Thes. 5:1-5). 

We have already answered objections against inquiring into the 
time of Christ's coming; and merely remark now that whereas 
neither Christ's disciples, nor angels, "neither the Son," knew of the 
time of his coming when Christ spoke those words, yet, when "he 
comes, with all his holy angels," those angels will know, Christ 
himself will know, and all of the Church who are not in darkness, 
shall know. But, "ifilho shalt not watch, uho shalt not know." The 
Christian who does not watch will be overtaken of that day just as 
the world is overtaken. 

The prophets foretold things which they did not themselves 
understand; for instance, Daniel, having seen a vision reaching 
away into the future, upon making inquiry as to the time, was told: 



"Go thy way, Daniel, for the words are closed up and sealed till the 
time of the end;" then knowledge shall be increased, and the wise 
shall understand, but none of the wicked shall understand." (Dan. 
12:9; 4:10); neither shall the unwatching servant and the unwise 
Virgins, adds our Lord. (Matt. 25). Peter speaks of this, and said 
that the prophets inquired and searched diligently as to what time, 
or what manner of time the Spirit did signify [i.e., whether the time 
given them was literal or symbolic time], unto whom it was 
revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us [the Gospel Church] 
they did minister. (1 Pet. 1:10,12). They were used as God's mouth- 
pieces simply, and laid up treasures of wisdom and knowledge 
which are developed and made manifest during the Gospel age, a 
little at a time, as "meat in due season", by the Holy Spirit sent 
down from heaven, whose office is to guide the faithful Church into 
all truth." 

Our God is a God of order. Everything that God does is in 
accordance with a definitely pre-arranged plan, and the times and 
seasons are no insignificant part of that plan. Notice that Christ was 
born on time— "In the fulness of time" God sent his only-begotten 
Son. (Gal. 4:4). Not before, nor after, but just when the time was 
full. Christ's first sermon was on time. He came preaching and 
saying, the time is fulfilled ...repent and believe the Gospel." (Mark 
1:15). "In due time, Christ died." (Rom. 5:6). He rose again the 
third day, according to the Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:4). During his 
ministry they frequently sought to take him, but could not "because 
his hour was not yet come. " And just as sure as there is a due time 
for the Second Advent, and if now be the due time, the Spirit will 
guide God's faithful children into the truth on this subject. First, 
however, as we shall go largely to the Old Testament Scriptures, we 
stop for a moment to inquire: Have we anything to do with these 
Scriptures, or are we to derive all our instruction from the New 
Testament? I am almost ashamed to raise such a question, and 
would not, but that I am satisfied that many Christian people hold 
this opinion. One of the pastors of this city, a few days since, 
reproved a member of the flock for quoting as of any force a 
statement of the prophets. For shame! O, for shame!! To what did 
Jesus refer, when he said, "Search the Scriptures." Surely to the Old 
Testament, since not one word of the New was then written. What 
Scriptures did the Bereans search daily? The Old Testament. What 
Scripture did Christ explain to the disciples going to Emmaus when 
their hearts burned within them while he opened unto them the 
Scriptures? The Old Testament. In which was "Apollos mighty," 
and of which did Paul say to Timothy, "From a child thou hast 
known the Holy Scriptures." And again, "All Scripture, given by 
inspiration of God, is profitable; that the man of God may be 
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good work." And one reason 
why some men of God are so imperfectly furnished is that they lay 
aside more than two-thirds of God's word, the Old Testament, 
which Paul says would be profitable to them. So highly did Peter 
esteem the prophecy of the Old Testament, that he considered it 



better evidence than his own sight; and after telling of Christ's 
transfiguration "on the holy mount," and that it was given him as an 
evidence of the coming kingdom of Christ, he says, (2 Pet. 1:19) 
"We have a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that 
ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the 
day dawn." 

Peter corroborates Paul's statement that it is profitable; and informs 
us that it will continue to be useful "until the day dawn." The Old 
Testament is a great treasure-house in which God has locked up and 
sealed items of great interest and value to his children, and the New 
Testament is the key by which we gain access to them. Let us now 
examine what the sure word of prophecy says on the time of 
Christ's coming. There are several prophetic claims to which I 
desire to call your attention- one shows the length of the Gospel 
dispensation; but not directly; it does not read right out, the Gospel 
dispensation will close in A.D.— . No, that would not have been 
"sealed up" at all, and not only wise and watching, but all could 
understand that without difficulty. 

No, it is not told so, but while just as plain as that, yet it is under 
cover, and you will see that it could not be understood without the 
New Testament key. 

God has linked together the history of the Jewish and Gospel 
Churches by the peculiar tie of type and anti-type; and this typical 
character of the Jewish dispensation was frequently referred to by 
the Apostles under the direction of the Holy Spirit. 

From them we learn that it was typical in all its features— its laws 
(Heb. 10:1), its ceremonies (Heb. 9:9), its sacrifices (Heb. 10:11), 
its sacred days, its times and seasons (Col. 2:16,17), and also the 
exact length of its duration, as we shall see. 

R599 : page 3 

If God has thus, in the Jewish dispensation, given us an exact 
pattern of the Gospel dispensation, that pattern is itself a prophecy. 
And what a clear revelation of truth should it be to us, who stand 
amid the closing scenes of the Gospel age, when nearly all of that 
prophecy has passed into history! With the keys furnished in the 
New Testament, the faithful student may now clearly read the times 
and seasons indicated. 

Paul shows that the blind, cast-off condition of Israel is to continue 
until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in (Rom. 11:25). Their 
casting off from God's favor, and consequent blindness, began at 
the end of the Jewish age, and will terminate at the end of the 
Gospel age. So if we find the time of returning favor to fleshly 
Israel clearly indicated, we may know that the fulness of the 
Gentiles has been gathered in. [Into what or where will be a 
question for future consideration.] In other words, the end of the 
Gospel age will have been reached. 



We have already seen the teaching of the word of God to be that in 
the next, commonly called the Millennial age, Israel is to be 
restored, Jerusalem rebuilt and reinhabited, and that the Jewish 
nation is to become the chief nation, and "Jerusalem a praise in the 
whole earth." When will this be? Do the prophets tell? Yes. The 
prophets teach that Israel, once God's specially favored people, who 
had "much advantage every way, to whom were committed the 
oracles [O.T.] of God," would reject Christ, and, in consequence, 
would become outcasts from God's favor as a chastisement for their 
national sin, and for the same length of time that they had had his 
special favor; after which time they should again return to God's 
favor and forgiveness. Now let us briefly glance at their history and 
then I will refer you to the prophecy which so predicts. 

The nation began its existence at the death of Jacob, in Egypt. 
While he lived they were not counted a nation, but a family, and in 
his dying blessing for the first time they are called tribes. The 
promise of national blessing and favor was given through Judah. 
"The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a law-giver from 
between his feet, until Shiloh [Christ] come." This God fulfilled, 
and though He often chastised them, and allowed them to go into 
captivity for their sins; yet he always showed them favor, brought 
them back, and preserved their national existence through Judah, as 
he had promised, and did not utterly cast them off from him until 
they had rejected and crucified the Lord of glory, a period of 1,845 
years. Since that time, as they themselves say bitterly, God has 
shown them no favor; they have been outcasts "a reproach and a 
hissing among all people." (Jer. 29:18). Since their chastisement 
was to be of the same length, as the favor previously shown, it will 
be 1,845 years. It began with the crucifixion of Christ, A.D. 33, and 
the 1,845 years of their punishment, consequently ended in 1878. 
But we must not expect too much in a day. As they were 37 years in 
falling nationally-from A.D. 33, to A.D. 70, when their national 
existence terminated: so their rising again to favor and national 
prominence will require the same length of time, and will therefore 
not be complete until 37 years after 1878, or until the close of 1914. 
We also find another and distinctly separate line of prophecy 
(which we will give at another time), teaching that they will not 
obtain full control, of Palestine until A.D. 1914, which gives a 
period of 37 years for their rising, or a parallel to the time of their 
falling. Where is the Scripture which proves that their chastisement 
is equal to the favor that they once enjoyed? you ask. Turn with me 
to Jer. 16:13-18 and read: "Therefore [because of sins before 
mentioned], will I cast you out of this land into a land that ye know 
not, neither ye nor your fathers; and there ye shall serve other gods 
[rulers] day and night; where I will not show you favor." This was 
not the Babylonian captivity, for Abraham came from Ur of the 
Chaldees. Neither could the Syrian captivity be thus referred to, for 
Jacob was a Syrian (Deut. 26:5), and this was to be "a land that ye 
know not, neither do ye nor your fathers. " This was to be their 
punishment: They were to receive no favor from God, but were to 



be driven out of their own land, and, as the next verse shows, were 
to become exiles in every land, just as we now find them. 

They have always looked back to their deliverance from Egypt as a 
great and marvelous sign of God's favor to them; but their 
deliverance, now soon to be consummated, will be so much greater, 
that it will quite eclipse the former one. Let us read— "Therefore, 
behold the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said, 
The Lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel out of the land 
of Egypt; but the Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel 
from the land of the North [Russia, where the greatest number of 
them are found], and from all the lands whither He had driven 
them: and I will bring them again into their land, that I gave unto 
their fathers; and first (before I so bring them back) I will 
recompense their iniquity and their sin DOUBLE"— verse 18. 

The word here translated double is the Hebrew word mishneh and 
signifies, a repetition. The repetition can refer to nothing else than 
the time. It was not a repetition of the same method of dealing with 
them; for he just states that he will deal differently-he will cast 
them off and show them NO favor, etc. And it is now a fact of 
history that the time of their cast-off condition has been an exact 
repetition in length of their time of favor, that is 1,845 years ending 
in 1878. They had 1,845 years favor and 37 years fall. They have 
had 1,845 years without favor, and will have 37 years of rising. But, 
some may think we base a great deal upon that one prophetic 
statement, and inquire, Are there other evidences? Yes, there are; 
but I dare to trust to one statement, of one prophet; for he is a 
mouthpiece of God, who cannot lie. 

Let us hear Zechariah (9:9), he will tell us the very day they were 
cast off. Just five days before his crucifixion, Jesus rode into 
Jerusalem on an ass in fulfillment of this prophecy. "Rejoice 
greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: 
Behold, thy King cometh unto thee: He is just, and having 
salvation; lowly and riding upon an ass and upon a colt the foal of 
an ass." Nationally, they did not receive Him with shouts of 
rejoicing; but the multitude shouted, Hosannah! for "if these should 
hold their peace, the very stones would cry out. " The prophecy 
demanded shouting and must be fulfilled. "Turn you to your 
stronghold, ye prisoners of hope:" Christ was their stronghold, had 
they but received Him; but they rejected Him, and therefore comes 
the denunciation. "Even to-day do I declare that I will render 
double unto thee." [Literal- The other half.] This agrees with 
Jeremiah, and tells us the very day the favor toward them ended. 
Yes, says Paul, "because of unbelief they were blinded." Jesus wept 
over them, and said "If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this 
thy day, the things which belong to thy peace, but now they are hid 
from thine eyes." This was their blindness. Then he begins to 
foretell the trouble coming. (Luke 19:41-44). But another prophet 
has a message on this subject— Isaiah 40:1. Here are the three 
principal prophets, all explaining to us about Israel, but they take 



different standpoints of observation. Jeremiah says, looking down 
future, "I will cast you out, etc." Zachariah's standpoint of prophecy 
was beside Jesus on the colt, and he says, "Even to-day." Isaiah 

R599 : page 4 

takes his stand away down here, where you and I live, after they 
have had their equal time of punishment. Hear him: "Comfort ye, 
comfort ye my people saith your God; speak ye comfortably to 
Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her appointed time [margin], is 
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of 
the Lord's hand double for all her sins." 

"Believest thou the prophets?" I do. And when Jeremiah foretells 
that because of sin and iniquity they would have double, and Isaiah 
that that double having been ended the sin and iniquity is pardoned, 
I cannot help believing it. But let us inquire whether 1878 brought 
any outward sign of God's returning favor? I answer yes. The fig 
tree, which was withered up from the roots (Israel), is beginning to 
"put forth leaves." The year 1878 witnessed an end of Turkish 
oppression in Palestine, and by the treaty of Berlin a Hebrew, as 
Prime Minister of one of the greatest of nations, assumes its 
protection and guarantees its peace. And recently the statement is 
published that the Rothchilds, Sir Montefiore, and other wealthy 
Hebrews, have arranged for the purchase and colonization of 
Palestine. And Russian persecutions are now driving many thither. 
Truly, favor seems to be returning. 

But where is the measure of the Gospel dispensation? Paul 
furnishes us the key for this in the text before mentioned (Rom. 
11:25): "I would not brethren that ye should be ignorant of this 
mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness 
in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be 
come in"— that is, Israel will remain blinded until the full company 
of the Gospel Church-the Bride, being taken out from the Gentiles 
for His name— have been selected, or have come into covenant 
relation with him, and thereby separated from the world. To express 
the same thought differently: while the Jews were cast off as a 
people for 1845 years, from A.D. 33 to A.D. 1878, was the time 
appointed for the selecting of all who will be part of the Bride of 
Christ. 

But as favor continued to individual Israelites, after that house as a 
whole was rejected, so after the rejection of the Gospel house (the 
nominal Church) as a whole, special favor to individual saints is 
still continued. The Apostles and early disciples, the "remnant" of 
Israel (Rom. 9:27) received the increase of knowledge and high 
privileges then due to the Gospel age, while all the rest of Israel 
were blind to them. So here, the 

R600 : page 4 

same class, the meek and faithful of the Gospel house, receive the 
increase of knowledge due in the dawn of the Millennial Age, and 



by means of this clear apprehension of the truth are being 
completed and perfected for their place in the glorious kingdom 
shortly to be made manifest. 

Since the two houses of Israel-the Jewish and Gospel houses- 
stand in relation to each other as type and antitype, let us notice 
some of the parallels: 

The law was a shadow of good things to come, and in the Gospel 
dispensation we find the substance which cast those shadows. We 
must bear in mind also that the shadow is not the substance, but that 
it has strongly marked features of similarity. 

The Jewish house was a house of servants —"Moses was faithful in 
all his house as a servant. " The Gospel house is a house of sons- 
"Christ as a son over his own house, whose house are we." (Heb. 
3:5,6.) The founder of the typical house was Jacob, surnamed 
Israel; the founder of the anti-typical house was Christ, the true 
Israel of God. The typical house was founded on the twelve sons of 
Jacob, the anti-typical on the twelve Apostles. 

In worship also they are pattern and reality. The pattern had a 
tabernacle into which the typical High Priest went every year to 
make a typical atonement. We have the true tabernacle, into which 
the true High Priest has entered for us. (Heb. 6:20.) And, as in due 
time the typical High Priest came out to bless the people typically, 
so the real High Priest will in due time come out to bless all the 
world. 

There were under-priests there, who wore bonnets to indicate that 
they were not the head, or High Priest, while Aaron, their head, 
wore none. So we are told that the true Church, the body or bride of 
Christ, is likewise a priesthood, and that Christ Jesus is the head or 
High Priest of our profession. (Heb. 3:1.) As they offered typical 
sacrifices, so we may offer up spiritual sacrifices, holy, acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2:5. 

They had circumcision of the flesh; we, says Paul, have 
circumcision of the heart. (Rom. 2:29.) They had a temple in which 
God's presence was represented; and Paul tells us that we, the 
Church, are built together a holy temple for the indwelling of God 
through the Spirit. (Eph. 2:22.) In fact everything that they had was 
a type of what we have on the higher spiritual plane. 

Their dispensation ended with a harvest, in which harvest-time 
Jesus was present in the flesh as Lord of the harvest, and the 
faithful disciples who followed in his footprints were privileged to 
be co-workers with him in reaping the fleshly house and gathering 
the ripened grain into the Gospel garner— into the privileged 
condition of the Gospel saints. In the beginning of that harvest 
Jesus said to his disciples, "Lift up your eyes and look on the fields, 
for they are white already to harvest. I send you to reap," etc. John 
4:35-38. 



Just so the anti-typical or Gospel dispensation ends with a harvest, 
at which time Jesus is again due to be present, not now as then in 
the flesh, but in glory, a spiritual being, invisible to human eyes. 
Say not now that there are yet many years and then cometh harvest; 
but, ye faithful children of God, lift up your eyes and look on the 
fields now, for they are white already to harvest. And every faithful 
disciple who now follows in the Master's footprints has the 
privilege now of being a co-worker with him in reaping this 
harvest. Such are the angels or messengers referred to in Matt. 
13:39, who are reaping under his direction. And he directs them 
through the Word by opening their understanding to discern the 
times and seasons there indicated, and the work to be accomplished 
therein. 

Their harvest was a period of seven years, beginning with our 
Lord's ministry; and up to the time of his death (a period of three 
and a half years) special effort was made to enlighten the Jewish 
house, as a whole, with reference to its high privilege. But as a 
people their ears were dull of hearing, and they "knew not the time 
of their visitation." Though this was true of that house as a whole, 
yet there were scattered individuals here and there among them who 
were ready to believe and follow the Master as soon as the truth 
could be made clear to them. To this class the remaining three and a 
half years of harvest work was devoted. The sickle of truth 
presented to them separated them from the rejected and blinded 
Jewish house, and brought them under the Gospel dispensation of 
favor. 

This seven years is the "seventieth week" of Danl. 9. Seventy weeks 
(symbolic time, weeks of years instead of days,) or 490 years, were 
set apart or determined upon Daniel's people, the Jews. Sixty-nine 
of these reach to Messiah, the prince. (Christ came as the Messiah 
at the time of his baptism, when he began his ministry, being thirty 
years old.) "In the midst of the week [the seventieth] Messiah shall 
be cut off [die] but not for himself." ("He was wounded for our 
transgressions.") But, though cut off, and though their Church was 
left desolate, yet, as the prophet had predicted, "He shall confirm 
the covenant [seventy weeks' agreement] with many for one week," 
i.e., until the full limit of the promised seventy. Accordingly, Jesus 
charges his disciples to "begin at Jerusalem" with the Gospel 
message, and it was confined to them until the seventieth week 
ended-three and a half years after Jesus' death. 

So the Gospel dispensation is the anti-type of all this. Its harvest 
also is seven years, plus thirty-three, beginning in 1874, where 
another line of Scripture proves Christ's presence to be due, and 
continuing seven years, in which the ripe wheat is being garnered 
and separated from tares, and thirty-three of consuming and 
removing the nominal system. The fullness (the elect number and 
membership) of the Gospel Church was due to come into covenant 
relation with God in 1878, when Israel's time of favor was due to 
begin; and yet, although the nominal Church was then cast off, and 



that house left desolate, the chosen vessels yet in that house must be 
separated and gathered into the barn, a position of safety and 
security, above the trouble which is coming on the Church nominal. 
That favor, ending in the fall of 1881, found all true wheat 
separated, at least in spirit, from the rejected, lukewarm, fallen, 
nominal Church. And all such gathered into this separate condition, 
will be ready to separate from it in name and person as they 
discover this to be the Lord's will. 

The time of trouble coming on the Church nominal is for the 
purpose of gathering out of his kingdom (Church) all things that 
offend. (Matt. 13:41.) They shall be swept out by the incoming 
flood of infidelity, overthrown by the winds of false doctrine, and 
finally burnt up by the scathing reproach of the world when it 
comes to fully discover Babylon's hypocrisy. Blessed is the man 
who has built his house upon the rock with the gold and silver and 
precious stones of truth. The floods may come and the winds may 
blow and beat upon that house, and the fire may test it, but it shall 
stand. Thus shall long-established and corrupt systems, claiming to 
be the Church of Christ, go down in complete wreck, and above its 
ruins the real, the true and faithful Church— a "little flock"— shall 
with Christ their head establish the glorious reign of righteousness. 

If these things are so, we are living in an important time, and upon 
our present decisions and actions the weighty interests of our future 
hinge. It behooves us, then, to take heed lest our hearts be 
overcharged with the cares of this life. Let us lay aside every 
weight and run with patience. And seeing we look for such things, 
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and 
godliness— as the prospective bride of Christ making herself ready. 



R600 : page 4 

HAS THE MASTER NEED OF MY SERVICE? 

It is a part of the economy of God, as well as of all right-thinking 
men, to seek to accomplish desired ends with the smallest possible 
outlay of expense. While in God, and in all his perfect creatures, 
there is a beautiful balancing of this principle with that of justice 
and benevolence, in fallen man it has generally overleaped the 
bounds of love and justice. 

But in the proper use of this principle of our nature, it is right to 
inquire, Is there any use or necessity for this or that course? 
Recognizing this principle, God does not call upon us to do 
anything that is useless. Though we may not always be able to 
discover the design of his commands, it is a sufficient guarantee of 
their necessity and good to know that he commands. If then, he has 
called us into his service, it is because he has a definite purpose to 
accomplish through us. Since there is actual service to be 
accomplished, and God has chosen to use human instrumentalities 



in accomplishing it, there is then actual need of faithful service, 
though God's resources are by no means exhausted when you or I 
refuse the privilege. In that case the loss is ours, not his. When the 
toil and weariness and sacrifice are ended, we will have no need to 
say, I have labored in vain; I have spent my strength for naught. 

Because there is need for actual service, we are exhorted to be 
faithful, diligent, obedient servants, always abounding in the work 
of the Lord, to make full proof of our own ministry, to so invest our 
one or many talents as to secure the greatest possible advantage to 
the Master's cause. It was because Paul 

R601 : page 4 

and others of similar mould realized the necessity and privilege of 
such service, that they so boldly undertook the great work of 
stemming the popular tide, and proclaiming the glorious Gospel at 
the risk of life and every earthly good. 

Ah, says one, that is placing too high an estimate upon human 
effort. God is able to accomplish his work if I never touch it. Yes, 
that is very true; but, if you do not touch it, some one else will, and 
you will lose the privilege. Did you ever think of that? Beware! Let 
no man take thy crown! O, how easy it is just here to fall short of 
overcoming! 

One will say, Well, I have only this one talent, and I have need to 
use that for myself. It would not bring a very large interest if I 
should invest it for the Lord. If, like some other brother or sister, I 
had many talents, it would seem to be of some use, and I would 
heartily invest nearly all for the Lord. Another, with more talents, 
will cheerfully render much, but hold back part of that which he 
covenanted to give, which was his all. Ah, say they, the Lord has no 
need of that little; he is rich, and can accomplish his work without 
it. Well, that is true with reference to others, but without your full 
and complete sacrifice of all, he cannot accomplish the work of 
bringing you to the glory to which you are called. And so far as 
others are concerned, he will raise up some other human agency 
through which to minister to them. 

It is his purpose to accomplish the great work in hand, largely 
through human agents, under the direction and leading of his Spirit. 
And if one human instrument withdraws from the service, another 
will fill the gap. Whether the Lord could have accomplished his 
work through other means is not for us to surmise; but since this is 
the method that infinite wisdom chose, who are we that we could 
devise a better? Let us see to it then that we work in harmony with 
his plans, faithfully utilizing every available talent in his service. 
"Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall find 
him so doing." Matt. 24:46. 



MRS. C. T. R. 



R601 : page 4 



"SAY YE NOT, A CONFEDERACY." 

ISA. 8:9-20. 

A confederacy is a league or covenant, a compact or alliance for 
mutual support or common action. "In union there is strength," is 
everywhere the expressed serfiment o to-day. Confederacy — 
Union— is the watchword in civil, social, and religious circles. This 
sentiment now s common, has grown out of the felt necessities of 
the times, and the fear of coming trouble and danger. 

The prince of this world (John 12:31) sees the approaching storm. 
He believes and trembles at the sure word of prophecy which 
indicates the overthrow of his power; but with characteristic genius, 
energy and presumption, he arrays himself to oppose, and if 
possible to thwart the plans of the Almighty. At present and for 
some time past he has been actively engaged in planning, 
organizing and arranging his unconscious forces. We are glad in 
one sense to say unconscious, for to be the conscious and willing 
servants of Satan would imply a fearful state of depravity. And yet 
we would that men were not so blinded as to be unconsciously led 
by their wily and deceptive foe. 

Leagues or confederacies are forming all over the world. The 
kingdoms are forming alliances for mutual protection against the 
increasing independence and power of their subjects, while 
communism or socialism is secretly plotting and forming it world- 
wide confederacy to resist enthroned power. Capitalists are forming 
alliances with each other to protect their interests, while the 
laboring classes are also combining their forces for self-protection. 

In religious circles we see the same policy pursued. The two great 
classes most bitterly opposed to one another are so-called 
Orthodoxy and Infidelity. Each is struggling for supremacy and 
power. On the orthodox side are Papacy and Protestantism, while 
the non-religious world stands in opposition. All the various sects 
of Protestantism have formed a confederacy— "The Evangelical 
Alliance"— for mutual support and common action, agreeing to 

R601 : page 5 

almost entirely ignore doctrine, and to preach simply morality, and 
the necessity of union with them, in order to be saved. And now 
friendly relations and proposals of union are beginning to be 
thought of even between Papacy and Protestantism The latter is 
losing all sight of doctrine and sees no special hindrance to union in 
a lower standard of morality, while the former is not slow to speak 
of itself as one of the Christian denominations, and of others as 
their "Methodist and Presbyterian friends, etc.," while both agree 
and unite in branding as Infidel all who oppose their system, no 
matter how firmly their faith may be rooted and grounded in the 
word of God. Infidels are also uniting forming liberal leagues, and 



banding themselves together to resist superstition and to advocate 
morality and benevolence on a basis of common sense and 
expediency. 

While all this seems expedient and necessary to these various 
classes in the world, while human reason says, Surely in Union 
there is strength, shall we as Christians who are by no means less 
interested in the final issues than others, act contrary to such reason, 
and battle singly and alone with the mighty powers of darkness? In 
this as in all matters, we look to the Word of God for instruction. 
And that instruction is given plainly and clearly- "For," says the 
Prophet, taking his standpoint down here in our time, "the Lord 
spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should 
not walk in the way of this people, saying, Say ye not, A 
confederacy to all them to whom this people shall say, a 
confederacy; neither fear ye their fear nor be afraid. Sanctify the 
Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your 
dread. And he shall be for a sanctuary." Isa. 8:14. 

Thus instructed we should have nothing to do with these 
confederacies either civil, social or religious. We are to walk 
separate from all these, joined only to the Lord and loyal to the 
kingdom of God as yet unrecognized by the world. We are to have 
no confederacy, no union with any other. The Lord's Prophet 
speaks most emphatically concerning the outcome of all these 
confederacies. 

Thus we read (Isa. 8:9,10) "Associate yourselves, O, ye people, and 
ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries; 
gird yourselves and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel 
together and it shall come to naught; speak the word and it shall not 
stand. " How plain and forcible these expressions ! They need no 
comment; and only the unbelief in the word of God-the spirit of 
infidelity- in the church nominal, prevents them from 
understanding their import. 

In the Lord of hosts alone is our sanctuary, our defence, and all who 
would walk with him must walk separate from the world. Those 
who thus walk with the Lord are so led into the knowledge of his 
plans, that those things which cause fear and trembling to others, 
are to them but the indications of the development of God's glorious 
plan. 

"Behind his frowning providence 
They see his smiling face." 

While the Lord is thus our defence and rejoicing, he is a stone of 
stumbling and a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel— Israel 
after the flesh and the nominal gospel church. "And many among 
them shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared and be 
taken." They stumble and fall over the truth and are taken in the 
snare of the adversary, their faith shattered and broken; and the 
great flood of infidelity will engulf the church nominal. 



But the Prophet continues, "Bind up the testimony, seal the law 
among my disciples." This is equivalent to Daniel's prophecy "The 
wise shall understand" (Dan. 12:10); and David's— "They shall 
walk O Lord in the light of thy countenance" (Psa. 89:15); and 
Paul's- "Ye brethren are not in darkness." (1 Thes. 5:4.) Yes, to 
those consecrated ones who walk with God separate from the world 
and worldly alliances, the law and the testimony is precious— a 
constantly unfolding treasure-house of blessed promises, inspiring 
such with glorious and blessed hopes which dispel all fearful 
apprehensions. But it is bound up and sealed among these, and none 
of the unfaithful shall understand their glorious import. 

"Praise God from whom all blessings flow." 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R602 : page 5 

NO MAN BUYETH THEIR MERCHANDISE 
ANY MORE. 

REV. 18:2. 

There are already evidences of consternation and forebodings of 
disaster in the nominal Church, because of the general apathy and 
indifference of her membership and the falling off of attendance at 
her services. We hear reports far reaching of flocks without pastors, 
and pastors with rapidly diminishing flocks, and this state of things 
exists not only in this country, but also in Europe and elsewhere, as 
the following clipping from the New York Herald of January 6th 
will show: 

PASTORS WANTED. 

"Much is printed in the religious newspapers on the other side of 
the Atlantic regarding the scarcity of ministers in the United States 
and Canada. It appears that the disease complained of— pastorless 
flocks— is not confined to this continent alone. From a recent 
publication giving some religious statistics for France it is gathered 
that not less than 60,000 Protestants— nearly one-tenth of the whole 
Protestant population of the country— belong to churches which are 
without pastors. One of their churches has been without regular 
pastoral superintendence for twelve years. Eighteen churches have 
been deprived of their pastors during the year just ended. There is 
surely room for improvement here." 

Not many months ago it was stated in the WATCH TOWER, as 
quoted from some other publication, that the Presbyterian Church 
was 500 ministers short, and from the Cleveland Leader of Oct. 25, 
1883, we quote the following report of the P.E. Conference: "There 
are now in the United States 48 dioceses and 15 missionary 
jurisdictions, 67 bishops, 2,500 other clergy, 3,000 organized 



parishes, and more than 353,000 communicants: the report referred 
to the inadequate number of candidates for holy orders." This report 
shows the number of bishops to exceed the number of dioceses and 
missionary jurisdictions, while the number of pastors to parishes 
shows a deficiency of at least five hundred. 

That there has been a much larger decrease in membership and 
attendance at services, we believe, but these cannot be arrived at by 
figures: Observation, however, and the statements of ministers and 
others go far to prove it to be in a very demoralized condition. The 
Rev. Dr. Collyer evidently thinks we are on the verge of a religious 
panic. We quote from his sermon preached on Feb. 3d, and 
published in the New York Herald of Feb. 4: 

PANICS IN RELIGION AND LIFE. 

Rev. Dr. Collyer on the harm done by faithless men in the Church. 

"I notice," said the Rev. Dr. Collyer, in his sermon yesterday 
morning in the Church of the Messiah, "that when I talk with those 
who watch the world's great markets, they say that when there is an 
ever growing fever in the centres of business, if this continues we 
are going to have a panic. And I answer 'God forbid,' for I know of 
but few things in this world and life of ours so cruel and ruthless as 
a panic, or that take the manhood so completely out of men, leaving 
only a mob of poltroons and monsters. It makes no matter what 
form the evil and ugly thing may take, in a public hall or a theatre, 
or in a church where men go to worship God, or in Wall street; and 
it is no matter what our conduct may have been down to the day 
when we were confronted in a moment by this last and most terrible 
test of our manhood. If we have lost on that day the quality Herbert 
Spencer insists on as one of the choicest blessings we can possess— 
"the supremacy of self-control"— it is all over with us the rest of our 
lives. 

I notice that my brethren in their conferences deplore the deadness 
in their churches. I do not wonder at this, but I do wonder a little 
that they should even by inference lay the blame on God and talk 
sometimes as if they believed with the priests of Baal that he was 
asleep in his heavens or had gone on a journey. Because if they 
only look deeper they will see that the whole trouble lies with the 
Christians themselves. I venture to observe, but with no mean spirit, 
God knows, that the most cruel and ruthless blows ever struck 
against our common faith have been made, not by men like Robert 
Ingersoll, but by deacons of good standing in their churches, and 
prominent persons in Christian associations. Where men I will not 
name do things I will not name under the mask of religion— the 
safest mask I know of— it is no wonder so many should go apart and 
say, if this is the fruit I do not believe in the tree. No wonder that so 
many should leave the churches and that we should have what we 
may call a religious panic. And when this panic occurs no words of 
mine or of any one else can estimate the damage it does to the 
world; for it means that men throw aside all religion, all morality, 



all that is really precious in this life. But such panics and desertions 
from religion will invariably take place when we see unworthy men 
who have no real religious life in them assume the high places in 
Christian councils." 

The Rev. Wm. Loyd in a sermon (which we quote below) 
preached on the same day and published in the New York Herald, 
Feb. 4, takes a different and wider view of the situation: he regards, 
we think truthfully, the misrepresentation or malrepresentation of 
God in the horrible dogmatic theology of the dark ages, as the chief 
cause of all that is now transpiring within the walls of that "great 
city, Babylon." 

HINDRANCES TO CHRISTIANITY. 

Dogmatic theology driving people out of the Church and preventing 
its growth. 

"Rev. Wm. Loyd, in the pulpit of the Central Congregational 
church, spoke with more than his ordinary vigor. His congregation 
was a large one, for it had been announced that the pastor was to 
talk very plainly upon the position of the Church and its relation to 
the public at large. Christianity, he declared, had not made the 
progress which it ought to have shown. To-day, after nearly twenty 
centuries of existence, the Christian Church had failed to make 
more than the slightest impression upon the world. The vast 
majority of the inhabitants of the globe were strangers to it, and 
even in countries where Christ was officially recognized fully 
seven-eighths of the people were not connected with the Christian 
Church. The intellectual and cultured classes had withdrawn almost 
wholly from the Church, and those who kept without its pale were 
not people to whose immoral habits and tendencies the teachings of 
the gospel were obnoxious, but people of the most blameless lives. 
These people refused to accept the assertion of the Church that 
Christ was really the Son of God, and that through Him there was 
salvation. They accepted the teachings of morality, but rejected all 
that was of real pith in fixing the divinity of our God and Saviour. 
The thinkers of the age, here and abroad, have in almost every 
instance held to these sceptical views, and now, in place of writing 
their views only for the few who read books of philosophy and 
obstruct thinking, these thoughts were embodied in the popular 
novel and through the current works of fiction, strongly put and 
attractively worded. There is no failure of Christianity in itself, but 
there is a failure of Christianity to get a secure hold upon the 
popular heart and become a guide and mentor in the daily life of the 
people. 

In conclusion Rev. Mr. Lloyd considered the causes which had 
brought about this state of affairs. They were, he said, to be found 
within the Church itself. God had been malrepresented. In place of 
the forgiving Father for all, he had been held up in the frightful 
dogmatic theology of the past centuries as a Creator of countless 
millions of human beings who were from birth doomed to an 



eternity of suffering and woe. Christianity had suffered, too, from 
the secularization of the Church and from Church quarrels. One 
such dispute did more to hinder the progress of Christianity than a 
thousand sceptical tracts scattered abroad over the land." 

Infidelity, skepticism and apathy to religion are but natural results 
of the bad representation of God by the nominal Church, 
notwithstanding that God has little by little, "line upon line," made 
known his true character as exemplified in a great and grand plan 
for the redemption of all his human creatures from the 
consequences of Adam's transgression. The different sects, 
Protestant and Romanist, have so distorted and falsified it at every 
stage that God, whom they say is all-wise, is made to appear 
unwise; and, though they proclaim him a God of love, they make 
his acts appear those of a cruel and vindictive monster, to be feared 
rather than to be loved. 

This, together with the gathering unto her, as into a cage, every 
"unclean and hateful bird," and the love for and conformity to the 
world of her members, in church matters and in social life, have 
caused the Lord to spue her out of his mouth, and to leave her 
desolate. She is unfit to be any longer his mouth-piece. In her 
conformity to the world, and departure from the narrow way, she 
has sought out many inventions- many questionable modes for 
raising money, ostensibly to pay the Lord's bills, but really to 
gratify worldly pride in erecting costly edifices, fine organs, and in 
general display. Her ministers delight in high-sounding titles, 
contrary to the express command of Him who only is the Head of 
the Church— "Neither be ye called masters, for one is your master, 
even Christ." Had these men whose significant remarks we have 
quoted, taken heed unto the words of the Master, they would have 
been able to discern the signs of the times, and would not be 
walking now as blind men. "They shall look unto the earth and 
behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish; and they shall be 
driven to darkness." (Isa. 8:22.) "And he shall be for a sanctuary [to 
the sheep that hear his voice] , but for a stone of stumbling and rock 
of offence to both the houses [Jewish and Gospel] of Israel. " (Verse 
14.) 

R603 : page 5 

Jesus said the tares, the children of the wicked one, and the wheat, 
the children of the kingdom, would grow together until the harvest, 
and he explained that the harvest is the end of the age- 
consummation of the age (Revised version). And Paul says: "In the 
last days perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their 
own selves, covetous, boasters, ...high-minded, lovers of pleasure 
more than lovers of God, having a form of godliness but denying 
the power;... evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, 
deceiving and being deceived." (2 Tim. 1:5-13.) And again he says 
"the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but 
will heap to themselves teachers having itching ears," i.e., teachers 
who would have pleasure in hearing the praise of men. 



Peter, referring to this same time, says, "And there shall come in the 
last days scoffers, in scoffing walking after their own lusts, and 
saying, Where is promise of his presence?" (2 Peter 3:4, Sinaiatic 
MSS.) We have here the testimony of Jesus, Paul and Peter as to 
what would be the condition of the nominal Church in the harvest, 
or last days, and we find this inspired testimony to exactly 
correspond with its present condition. And added to this we have 
the words of Jesus (Matt. 24: 14) literally fulfilled now: "This 
gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a 
witness unto all nations then shall the end come," i.e., the end of the 
Gospel age. Every nation under heaven has heard the Gospel, and it 
was so declared by the Bible societies as far back as 1866. That the 
nations have not received the Gospel testimony is true, but 
witnessing to nations is not witnessing to individuals— not one in a 
thousand have heard, and most of those who have heard have not 
accepted it. 

The nominal Church, in looking for the conversion of the world 
before Jesus comes, is totally at variance with the Scriptures. This 
falsification of the truth, and adulteration of that which should be 
the children's meat, has brought her to her present condition of 
barrenness and confusion. "Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and 
is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, 
and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.... The merchants 
[symbolic— the clergy] of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; 
for [shortly] no man buyeth their merchandise any more:... the light 
of a candle [lamp— the Word] shall shine no more at all in thee; and 
the voice of the bridegroom [Jesus] and of the bride [the Lamb's 
wife] shall be heard no more at all in thee." Rev. 18:2,1 1,23. These 
are not our words, but God's denunciation— the final doom of a false 
system. 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 



R603 : page 5 

LOST AND SAVED. 

For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was 
lost.-LUKE 19:10. 

Nearly two thousand years ago Jesus, then present, affirmed this to 
be his mission; but as yet no visible evidence of its accomplishment 
appears. The world moves on in its downward course now, as then. 
Sin and misery triumph still, and century after century plunges 
successive generations into death. Have we failed to understand the 
import of the Master's words? or has he been unable to accomplish 
his purpose? or may it be that his purpose is so far-reaching as to be 
of future fulfillment? With these queries in view, let us consider the 
subject before us. 



The words lost and saved have a common significance known to 
all: A thing lost is a thing once possessed, and a 

R603 : page 6 

thing saved is a thing once possessed and then lost and finally 
recovered. Jesus said the thing he came to save was the thing that 
men had lost; and the implication is, that since he had come to save 
the thing lost, men were unable to save it for themselves, which 
experience and many scriptures clearly prove. Now if we can 
determine just what man lost, we will know just what Jesus came to 
save. Man could not lose what he never had. Adam, who stood as 
the representative of our race, had a perfect human organism, and a 
right to everlasting continuance of life, on condition of obedience to 
God. He was privileged to enjoy all the delights of his Eden home, 
and the communion and blessings of God; in short, all the 
privileges that everlasting life under perfect human conditions is 
capable of enjoying and looking forward to. 

All this Adam lost through sin, both for himself and his posterity. 
Home, happiness, communion with God, health, and life itself, 
were lost. Consequently, mankind lies in utter wreck and ruin, dead 
and dying. In having lost his right to life he fell under the dominion 
of death, whose successive steps of misery, depravity, sickness and 
pain, end in total extinction of being, from which he can never 
recover himself. 

Jesus came then to save and restore that which was lost; to restore 
man to his original (human) perfection, and to communion with 
God, to give him back his paradise restored, and all the pleasing 
prospects of future blessings that accumulating ages can bestow, 
and that the powers of perfect humanity will be capable of 
enjoying. What! does some one say, Is so much implied in those 
words of our Lord? Yes; this is one way in which our Lord foretold 
the restitution of all things. All this is implied in the word saved. 
Think of it; could the words mean less than this? Certainly not; and, 
from this and many other scriptures, we have learned to trust in the 
living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially of those that 
believe. (1 Tim. 4:10). There is a special salvation for some, as well 
as a general salvation for all men, as Paul here intimates, but we are 
not considering the special salvation now. 

In the above text Jesus was speaking of the general salvation of all 
men-the saving of that which was lost. For God "will have all men 
to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth." (1 Tim. 
2:4.) When men are actually saved, their restored existence will be 
as at first, dependent on obedience for its continuance, which 
obedience will be easy and productive of constant happiness when 
evil and temptation are fully removed, and the great deceiver and 
tempter is bound and finally destroyed, and when the law of God is 
written in their hearts. (Jer. 31:33). 

But, we might inquire, when does our text indicate that Jesus would 
thus save the lost? However crude and indefinite the ideas of the 



Jews and the early disciples at first were concerning the promised 
salvation, they had learned both from the prophets and from Jesus' 
teaching, that it would be accomplished when the kingdom of God 
should come. And when Jesus stated that he had now come to save 
the lost, they at once concluded that the kingdom of God should 
immediately appear. 

Because they had drawn this inference, and, to correct their false 
impression, Jesus spoke a certain parable, the import of which was, 
that he must first go away and receive for himself the kingdom, and 
return; and that they, in the meantime, should, as faithful servants, 
occupy till he would come, using the talents entrusted to them 
according to his directions, and in the interest of his cause and of 
his coming kingdom, patiently waiting for their reward at his 
coming. 

But Jesus implied that in some sense he came at that time, to save 
the lost- "The Son of Man is come," etc. And in one sense it was 
true, for he then purchased them with his own precious blood, and 
though not yet liberated from the prison of death, they may be truly 
reckoned as saved ever since their ransom was paid, for their 
raising out of death was from that moment made sure. Just as you 
might say of a pardoned criminal that he is a saved man, although 
even he himself may not yet know of his pardon nor have yet 
experienced a release. 

Though no one is actually saved now, yet the Scriptures speak of 
believers as now saved by hope, that is, by accepting of God's 
promises as unquestionably sure, they may reckon themselves as 
already fully saved; not as merely awakened from death, but as 
saved from the last vestige of death and sin— as made perfect. "We 
are saved by hope; but hope that is seen is not hope, for what a man 
seeth why doth he yet hope for?" We do not see our salvation yet, 
except by faith. "But if we hope for that we see not, then do we 
with patience wait for it." (Rom. 8:24,25.) Our hope and faith 
would indeed be vain unless salvation means much more than we 
now enjoy. 

The Apostle's statements that "God is the Saviour of all men, 
especially of those that [now] believe," and that God "will have all 
men to be saved and come to a knowledge of the truth," as well as 
many other scriptures, prove to us that all men are to be saved by 
Christ from the degradation, misery and death now upon all through 
Adam's disobedience. And yet they show us two classes of saved 
ones-all mankind and the Church. While all are saved, one class is 
specially saved. That is, by special arrangement, some (all believers 
of the gospel age) are reckoned saved in season to run for the prize 
offered during this age. One class is not more saved than the other; 
both the Church and the world are and will be completely saved 
from sin and its penalty: and the mass of the world will realize this 
in due time in their restoration to perfect human life, while those 
reckoned saved now, as though they had already received the 
perfect human life, are privileged to relinquish their new claim and 



title to it, presenting it as a sacrifice to God, holy and acceptable to 
him when offered in the acceptable time (the gospel age). And 
being thus sacrificed with Christ, they will be privileged to partake 
with him of a new nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) These will receive glory, 
honor and immortality 

R604 : page 6 

—the divine nature; while the world in general will receive the 
glory, honor and blessedness of the perfect human nature, which is 
an image of the divine. (Gen. 1:27.) The former class is thus 
specially saved, severely disciplined and highly exalted that 
through them the blessings of restitution may flow to all the world 
when God's due time shall come. 

We see, then, that while the full import of our Lord's words has not 
been understood by many, and while many believe that he is unable 
to save the lost as he promised to do, that the fact is that his plan 
was so far-reaching that short-sighted, dying men could not 
measure or comprehend it. As now seen, the truth uttered in those 
few words required nearly three thousand years for its full 
accomplishment. At his first advent Jesus gave himself a ransom to 
save all (1 Tim. 2:6); during the centuries since, he has been 
developing the class who have in this time followed him in 
sacrifice, and who are to share with him in the work of saving or 
restoring all things, and within the coming thousand years the work 
of saving men will be completed. "If," then, "when we were 
enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much 
more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life." (Rom. 5:10.) 

Because in God's order men could only be saved by a payment of 
their penalty which would be the BASIS of their reconciliation and 
atonement with God, therefore, as a means to an end, we see that 
Jesus' mission at his first advent was to save in the sense of 
redeeming, while his second advent will complete the work by 
restoring to perfection all the redeemed— all for whom Christ died, 
and by the grace of God he tasted death [sin's penalty] for every 
man. (Heb. 2:9.) 

There is one other thought of special importance in this text. It is 
that the Son of Man came to seek that which was lost. Now we 
inquire, Is there any evidence of very earnest seeking of lost ones 
on the part of our Lord? Some would think not. All men were lost, 
and this text implies, while John 12:47 clearly declares his purpose 
to save all; but he said, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel." (Matt. 15:24.) He did not seek out any of the lost 
Gentiles, and charged his disciples not to do so for some years. But 
Jesus did seek out a certain class-the meek-who were waiting for 
the promised salvation; and it was his purpose to begin with 
Jerusalem, to save such as would believe, and to give to those of the 
seed of Abraham who believed, the first offer of the high calling. 
And during the centuries since, he has only been seeking out and 
saving (reckoning saved) the same class (the meek) among the 



Gentiles, and making to such believing ones the same offer of the 
divine nature —a heavenly calling. 

But a grander time of seeking is yet to come, for all the millions 
that are completely lost in death are yet to be sought out and saved. 
And where shall they be found? Notwithstanding the theories of 
men to the contrary, the Scriptures plainly teach that in death man's 
being is dissolved, that he is destroyed, blotted out of existence, that 
he is nowhere to be found. And with this fact in mind we might 
inquire with the Prophet Job, "If a man die shall he live again?" 
With men such a thing seems quite impossible, but "Why should it 
be thought a thing incredible that God should raise the dead?" (Acts 
26:8.) He that was able to create is also able to re-create those once 
completely destroyed. And through the Prophet Isaiah the Lord 
speaks of the restitution as a new creation, saying, "Behold, I create 
new heavens and a new earth"-not the physical earth, for that 
abideth forever— but the world of mankind is to be re-created. And 
the Lord says: "Be ye glad and rejoice forever in that which I 
create." (Isa. 65:17,18.) That the restored or re-created being will 
recognize himself and also his neighbors of former acquaintance, is 
unquestionably proven by many scriptures (Ezek. 16:61,63; 20:43; 
36:31; Zech. 12:10; Psa. 22:27), and illustrated in the few cases 
where the dead have been measurably restored, as Lazarus and 
others. 

Job answers our question very clearly when he says (chap. 7:21), 
"Now shall I sleep in the dust; and thou shalt seek me in the 
morning, [the morning of the resurrection or restitution] BUT I 
SHALL NOT BE"-I shall be destroyed, blotted out of existence. 
But nevertheless, though thus destroyed, he says, "Thou shalt call 
and I will answer thee." (Job 14:15.) Like Lazarus, at the call of 
Jesus, earth's dead millions shall again spring into existence. David 
declares the same truth when he says, "Thou turnest man to 
destruction and [then] sayest, return, ye children of men." And with 
him we must say, "Bless the Lord, O my soul; who redeemeth thy 
life from destruction?" (Psa. 90:3; 103:1,4.) O that all the world 
could now realize the glorious import of those words of our Lord, 
"The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost." 
It was a glorious truth to realize at his first advent, that the plan of 
God had so far developed that the promised Messiah had actually 
come to save men by the sacrifice of himself. But it is still more 
glorious now to realize that our Lord has come the second time, to 
apply the benefits of that sacrifice, to claim and restore his 
purchased possessions, to actually and completely save that which 
was lost. 

While we have thus stated what we believe to be the Scripture 
teaching concerning the salvation of men, we would yet more 
particularly answer the inquiry of some- 



WHA T MUST I DO TO BE SA VED? 

Perhaps the reader already sees that he has nothing to do. All that 
was necessary to procure your salvation was done long ago, before 
you were born; and in consequence of the redemption provided, all 
mankind, whether they ever knew it, or believed it or not, are going 
to be brought to life again, are going to be saved from the Adamic 
death. God will have all men to be saved; and though they may 
never have known him before, to be then brought to a knowledge of 
the truth. 

Well, we seem to hear some one say, that is a strange answer. I 
thought you would tell me to pray or to get some Christian friends 
to pray for me, that I must try to realize that I am the chief of 
sinners, that I must kneel at a mourner's bench, or something of the 
kind, but you have not even told me to repent or believe. You 
simply say that I am saved, and that I have had, and can have 
nothing to do with it. 

No, friend, we do not say that you are saved, but that you will be 
saved; and that you have had, and can have nothing to do with the 
means which procured your salvation. It is a free gift of God, in 
consequence of which you will be saved in the coming age; but you 
are in no sense saved now unless you have come to believe in 
Christ as your Redeemer. If you do believe this Bible truth, then 
you may through that faith reckon yourself as saved now— saved by 
hope; but you must wait for the actual salvation until God's due 
time. (2 Thes. 3:5.) Of course faith in and reliance on Christ as your 
Redeemer implies a realization of your need of a Redeemer, and a 
repentance and turning from sin. You may have been one of the 
very chief of sinners, or you may not have been so bad as some 
others; however, you were bad enough to merit the just 
condemnation of God's law, for he who offends in one point is 
guilty of all. (James 2: 10.) He is a violator of the law, and as a 
consequence is under condemnation. If you have always lived just 
as morally and as carefully as you could, you have fallen short of 
perfection, because of the weakness of your nature, inherited 
through Adam's fall. (Rom. 5:12.) But though nothing that you have 
done or could do could save you from death, that which Christ has 
done procures your release from it. 

Paul said, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be 
saved." This is the condition on which we receive the reckoned 
salvation now, and it will also be the condition on which the world 
will receive their actual full salvation in the ages to come. We must 
bear in mind that the awakening of men from death is only the 
beginning of their salvation. Not until they have, under the 
discipline of the next age, reached perfection, are they fully saved. 
Although we might truly say men are saved when first awakened 
from death, they are not "saved to the uttermost" until brought to 
full perfection of being. But none will be thus "saved to the 
uttermost" who do not accept of their release from death as the 
direct result of the sacrifice of Christ. And realizing this, they must 



repent of past sins and turn to God. Otherwise they die the second 
death, from which there is no release. 

Well, says our inquirer, this seems true and Scriptural, but what 
advantage is to be gained by being reckoned saved now? Would it 
not be as well to wait and give ourselves no concern about it, but let 
God's plan take its course? O no, we answer, there is an advantage, 
a great advantage to be gained by prompt faith and obedience as 
soon as we can gain sufficient knowledge on which to base our 
faith and obedience. 

The special privilege of those justified by faith (or reckoned saved) 
during the gospel age, has been their right to present themselves as 
acceptable sacrifices to God-joint-sacrifices with Jesus Christ, and 
thereby to become joint-heirs with him of all things. That privilege, 
we believe, began with the day of Pentecost and ended in October, 
1881.* While this special privilege was not offered to any before or 
since that time, another special privilege was granted to believers 
before this age, and we see no reason why a similar privilege may 
not be granted to believers since the gospel age ended. 

Those justified by faith in past ages will have no need of trial and 
discipline in the next age, for their judgment is past; and 
consequently in the instant of 



*It may be proper, to guard against misunderstanding, to say that 
though all had sacrificed to the extent of CONSECRATION at that 
time, all have not yet completed the sacrifice and will not till 
actually dead. 

R605 : page 7 

their resurrection they will be raised to perfect human existence. 

A similar blessing, we believe, is in store for those of the world 
who now repent of sin, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ as their 
Redeemer and rightful Lord, and wholly turn to God. As heretofore 
frequently shown, we find that we are now living in the Day of the 
Lord, in the beginning of the Millennial Age— the Times of 
Restitution. And since our Lord is present for the very purpose of 
restoring life and all things, we think it possible for such to remain 
without ever passing into death. It is just as easy when God's due 
time comes to keep men from going into death as it is to raise them 
out of it. This is not possible in the case of those who are to change 
their nature and become "new creatures"; it applies only to those 
justified ones who never started for the high calling. Therefore we 
should expect that such should in answer to prayer be healed from 
sickness, etc., but they cannot be brought to full perfection until the 
saints are first glorified; for "They without us shall not be made 
perfect." (Heb. 11:40.) 

Probably very few will come to realize their privilege now. The 
tendency of the world is more and more towards skepticism, and 



few can claim this privilege; nevertheless; we believe it to be the 
privilege of any such who have faith to claim it. 

In answer, then, to the question, What must I do to be saved? we 
would say, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be 
saved." Your salvation may begin now, and progress until you are 
restored to the perfection of your being —saved to the uttermost. For 
he (Christ) is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God 
by him." (Heb. 7:25.) 

ED. D. R. 



R605 : page 7 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Question. Please explain Mark 16:15-20. 

Answer. It is very important to observe the times and seasons 
indicated in the Scriptures. This commission was given in the 
spring-time of the Gospel Age, when the all-important work of the 
Church was seed sowing. The commission, Go into all the world 
and preach the gospel to every creature," indicated that it was no 
longer confined to the Jew. 

But seed sowing was not the only work of the Church. They had 
something to do in the way of cultivating the tender plants which 
spring up from the sown seed. 

The spring-time and the summer of the Gospel Age are both past, 
and the autumn with its harvest work is here. "Lift up your eyes, 
and look on the fields, for they are white already to harvest. And he 
that reapeth receive th wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal: 
that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together. 
And herein is that saying true, One soweth and another reapeth," 
etc. 

Jesus spoke these words with reference to the harvest of the Jewish 
Age, but since that age was a pattern of this, it is as emphatically 
true here. The principal part of the sowing of this age was done by 
the early church, while all the reaping is our special privilege. But 
when the golden grain is all gathered in the faithful sower and the 
faithful reaper, who diligently observed the times and seasons, shall 
rejoice together. 

Paul's counsel, "Do good to all men as you have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith," should be continually borne in 
mind. While about our special business of reaping in presenting 
advanced truth to consecrated saints, we should improve every 
opportunity for dropping some seeds of truth among others with 
whom we come in contact. 

But we should not make the mistake of expecting this new seed to 
flourish and come to maturity in this age. There are a thousand 



years ahead of us for this work, and it will be the special work after 
this harvest is ended. But it is consecrated believers only who may 
be developed and perfected now. He that believeth and is baptized 
with the baptism that Christ was baptized with— into death— shall be 
saved now to the high calling offered in this age. But he that 
believeth not shall be damned (condemned) as utterly unfit for the 
high office to which those saved in this age are called. But though 
thus condemned now, they will have abundant evidence for faith, 
and ample opportunity to be saved and brought to human perfection 
in the coming age, when the blind eyes shall be opened and the deaf 
ears shall be unstopped. 

Verses 17 and 18 mention certain signs which should accompany 
believers, and verse 20 shows that the Lord did thus work with the 
early Church, confirming their word with the promised signs. But 
Paul shows us (1 Cor. 13:8-10) that when the necessity for such 
signs is done away they will no longer continue. They were a 
necessity in the introduction of Christianity, but we have now 
abundant and substantial evidence on which to rest our faith 
without them. 

Q. Does Matt. 24:6 teach that "wars and rumors of wars" are a sign 
of the end of the Gospel Age? 

A. No; we think not. Wars and rumors of wars have characterized 
earth's history, with varying frequency and cruelty, ever since the 
fall of man. But the Scriptures assure us that the time of the end of 
the Gospel Age, or end of the dominion of the "prince of this 
world," will witness a more general and wide-spread warfare than 
was ever known before, involving all the powers of earth. The 
indications of such an uprising we now see in the rapid and world- 
wide development of the principles of Communism. Already men's 
hearts are beginning to fail them for fear of those things that are 
coming on the earth, and the cloud, which continues to grow darker, 
is fast overspreading the whole heavens. Before many years the 
storm will burst in all its fury, "and there shall be a time of trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation." Dan. 12:1. 

Jesus tells his disciples that they will hear of many wars and rumors 
of wars, but tells them not to be troubled about it, for all these 
things must come to pass. As long as Satan rules the world strife 
and war and confusion must reign, and you shall be hated and 
afflicted and killed for my name's sake. But amid all these troubles 
the saints, knowing that these things must be so for a time, and that 
"the end is not yet," must patiently endure until "he comes whose 
right it is" to take the kingdom from the usurper and reward his 
faithful saints. 

So also famines and pestilences and earthquakes are not to be 
regarded specially as signs of the end. Though they will doubtless 
be frequent, and perhaps more so in the time of the end, like wars 
they have been a part of Satan's policy from the first. It is not to be 
presumed that the prince of darkness will suffer the binding 



influences of the new Prince, which are now at work to fetter his 
power without a struggle. Without a doubt his rage will spend its 
force in distressing mankind in various ways, for he knoweth that 
he hath but a short time. 

Q. If the punishment of the wicked is merely a blotting out of 
existence, how do you understand that the punishment of the 
wicked is equal to the reward of the righteous? 

A. The Scriptures nowhere state that there will be such equality. 
They do not teach that the misery of the wicked must tally with the 
glory and blessedness of the saints. That idea was promulgated by 
the adversary through Papacy, but has no existence in the Word of 
God. All other punishments except that of the second death are 
designed as corrective, and this final punishment shows that God in 
mercy takes away the being which could only be a source of misery 
to itself and others. In mercy God will blot such out of existence. 
But, "As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death 
of the wicked." (Ezek. 33:11.) 

Q. Please explain 1 Pet. 4:17,18— "For the time is come that 
judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, 
what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? And 
if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the 
sinner appear? 

A. The term judgment may be properly applied to the process of 
trial, or to the result of trial— the decision or verdict. In the former 
sense the judgment of the Church began over eighteen hundred 
years ago, and has been progressing ever since. But in the latter 
sense, it is due in the end or harvest of the Gospel Age. Hence the 
separating of wheat and tares, and also of the ripe and unripe wheat, 
now going on. 

And if the judgment of the Church, as to who is fit or unfit to 
receive the Gospel prize offered to us, has begun, what shall the end 
or decision of this judgment be concerning them that obey not the 
Gospel of God?— not concerning them that never heard, or that had 
no ears to hear it (Rev. 2:11), but concerning them that had a 
hearing ear, that did once hear with gladness and appreciate the 
Gospel, and then, for various reasons, did not obey it-the ungodly, 
not necessarily vicious and in direct opposition and defiance of 
God, but those claiming to be his and yet not fully obedient. There 
are very many such. What shall the end of this judgment be to 
them? 

Let the Psalmist answer: "They are like the chaff which the wind 
driveth away. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the 
judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous." (Psa. 
1:4,5.) Like the chaff they will be carried away by the winds of 
false doctrine, or the storms of opposition; 



R606 : page 7 



they will not be able to stand the test, or counted worthy to be 
gathered with the faithful. But, "blessed is the man that walketh not 
in the counsel of [such unfaithful ones] the ungodly, nor standeth in 
the way of [these] sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful. But 
his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law doth he meditate 
day and night." Though in this judgment a thousand unfaithful shall 
fall at his side, and ten thousand at his right hand, he shall stand, 
and in due time will receive the great reward. 

Verse 1 8 shows that the righteous, or those who pass the judgment 
of this age and win the prize of the high calling, will scarcely, or 
merely, be saved-that is, with difficulty. It will require all their 
faith, and all their effort: those who do not exercise faith and put 
forth all their effort will not be able to stand. 

Q. Please compare Luke 6:29,30, with 1 Tim. 5:8, and tell me how 
both these principles can be carried out. There is a miserly and idle 
class who would completely strip the frugal and industrious if they 
would literally obey Luke 6:29,30; and before long we would find 
the command of 1 Tim. 5:8 impossible, while the class referred to 
would be encouraged in indolence and improvidence. What is duty? 

A. This is a very practical question, and one not unfrequently 
forced upon many. We think, however, that Luke 6:31 settles the 
difficulty. It reads: "And as ye would that men should do to you, do 
ye also to them likewise. " Mark, it does not say, as they would have 
you do to them, but, as you would have them do to you. This makes 
quite a difference. You, as a true child of God, are controlled by the 
highest principles of love and justice, and would therefore only 
desire the same of your neighbor. Love and justice would, if 
possible, feed and clothe your neighbor if he is unable by industry 
and economy to do it for himself. But neither love nor justice to 
him or to yourself would encourage indolence, prodigality or 
meanness. 

Verses 27 to 30 are not in opposition to the principle expressed in 
the golden rule, but teach what should be our attitude towards our 
enemies who hate and despitefully use us. Their simple teaching is, 
Don't strike back or try to get even with them. Show them that you 
are willing to endure hardness, and even to suffer violence and 
injustice if need be. Verses 30-36 teach us to show a spirit of 
liberality that will shame their meanness, and a love and mercy that 
will win their secret respect even while they openly oppose us. The 
kingdom of heaven suffereth violence now, but in due time the 
reward will be realized. 

Q. Please explain the following texts: (1) John 3:36-"He that 
believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not 
the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him." 

A. It is proper to say that we have a thing either when we are in 
actual possession of it, or when we have a clear deed or title to it. 
Thus you might say you have a piece of property in Europe, though 
you are not there to possess it, but you hold the deed signed and 



sealed and made out in your name. Just so he that now believeth on 
the Son of God, the Redeemer who purchased us with his own 
precious blood, has now everlasting life; not that he is in actual 
possession of it, but he holds a clear title to it, signed by Jehovah 
himself and sealed with the precious blood of Christ. 

In the next age, when brought to a knowledge of the truth, all the 
world must likewise recognize Christ as their Redeemer and Lord 
and trust in and submit to his authority, else they shall never see life 
in its fullness and perfection; and God does not recognize as life 
anything short of perfection. The wrath or condemnation of God 
abideth on all others, and will end in final destruction, if not 
removed, either in this age or the next. Only a few are yet free from 
condemnation (1 John 5:19), and many blind eyes must be opened 
and deaf ears unstopped before the mass of the world can believe, 
come into harmony with God, and have life everlasting. 

Q. (2) "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that 
believeth not shall be damned." Mark 16:16. 

A. He that believeth and is baptized in the likeness of Christ's death 
shall be of the special class saved during this age. The advantage to 
the class saved during this age is the high exaltation to a new 
nature— the spiritual. But he that believeth not shall be damned, or 
condemned, as entirely unfit to receive the favor offered during this 
age. Nearly all the world is so damned, or condemned, but they are 
not irrecoverably damned as unfit for any service; for we have seen 
that God has glorious favors in store for them when they shall have 
been brought to knowledge, faith and obedience— even restitution. 

Q. (3) "And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that 
they should believe a lie: that they all might be damned who 
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." (2 
Thes. 2:11,12.) 

A. The preceding verses show that the reference here is to the 
development of the "Man of Sin"— Papacy. But, all who have been 
deceived by the great Papal system were not of the class who had 
pleasure in unrighteousness. The deceptions and errors of Papacy, 
still promulgated through Protestantism, even to-day continue to 
fetter many of God's children to some extent. But, however sincere 
were many of the ignorant and deceived ones who afterward 
formed a part of the Papal system, its "COMING was after the 
working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders, and 
with all deceivableness of unrighteousness." That is, those who 
were instrumental in introducing this system were men who, though 
they knew the truth, received it not in the love of it, but had 
pleasure in unrighteousness. They sought to pervert the truth for 
their own selfish ends, and in so doing they found able support in 
Satan, "the God of this world." 

For this cause God left such, as he always does, where they placed 
themselves, in the hands of the enemy, who strongly deluded them 
into believing the lies they sought to propagate, that they all might 



be condemned who had pleasure in unrighteousness. We have often 
heard it lightly remarked that if one tells an untruth several times he 
begins to believe it himself. This is indeed a fearful fact, and an 
evidence of the increasing power of Satan over such. What a fearful 
condition to be in, especially for any whose judgment is in the 
present age, and whose trial must be completed in this life. [See 
article, "The Judgment," in December issue.] Perilous indeed is the 
condition of those who at any time pervert the truth of God for 
selfish ends; though they do it 

R606 : page 8 

at first with trembling and fear, they will shortly do it with 
boldness, and with a degree of sincerity which gives evidence of 
their strong and awful delusion. 

Q. (4) "Thou believest that there is one God: thou doest well: the 
devils also believe and tremble." James 2:19. 

A. Though it is true that "without faith it is impossible to please 
God," Paul here shows that faith is not the only thing necessary to 
please him. To believe that there is a God is well; that is a step in 
the right direction, but that is not enough. There is no special virtue 
in believing an evident truth; but it is lying and self-deception to 
disbelieve any truth of which we have clear evidence. The devils 
also believe and tremble at the word of the Lord because they know 
his power. Faith must be accompanied by obedience to God in so 
far as the imperfect earthen vessel is able to render it. The daily life 
must give evidence of faith in all God's promises, and of a love and 
gratitude which humbly and gratefully accepts his favors. 

One other thought might be noted here, viz: that the faith of devils 
can only inspire trembling, dread and fear, for having 
presumptuously sinned against God in the face of truth and 
knowledge, so manifest to those dwelling in his actual presence, 
there remaineth no more opportunity for them. That was their 
judgment day, and in it they decided their final destiny, which is 
destruction. And knowing it, they tremble as the time draws near. 
(Luke 4:34; Matt. 8:29.) 

But because of God's gracious promises our faith inspires us with 
hope and joy; for our judgment day is not yet past. But it is a 
solemn thought that it is passing with those who have been brought 
to a knowledge of the truth. And therefore it becomes us, while 
rejoicing in hope, to "take heed lest we fall." 

Q. (5) "Then he [Jesus] said unto them [the disputing Pharisees], I 
go my way, and ye shall seek me and shall die in your sins: whither 
I go ye cannot come." 

A. Jesus was going away to the Father, to a higher condition, the 
divine nature. Had these Pharisees acted differently, they might 
have followed him to that high exaltation. The privilege of 
following him was soon to be offered to the meek and lowly of 
heart. And as a mark of special favor it was to be offered to the Jew 



first; but these Pharisees, in their pride and unbelief, lost their 
opportunity. Not having faith in Christ, they were not even 
justified, and therefore they died in their sins. 

But being blinded-at least partially so, as Jesus said they were 
(Matt. 15:14) —in the coming age their blindness shall be taken 
away, their pride will be humbled, and then will they seek Him 
whom they with wicked hands had crucified and slain, and will 
humbly acknowledge him as both Lord and Christ. And the 
forgiveness sought in Jesus' dying prayer will be granted; but the 
opportunity of following Jesus to the divine nature will have 
forever passed. 

Q. (6) "And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed." 
Acts 13:48. 

A. To ordain means "to set in order," "to arrange according to rule." 
(See 

R607 : page 8 

Webster.) To ordain, or set in order, for eternal life, is partly our 
work and partly God's work. God's part of the work was to provide 
the necessary sacrifice for sin, and to make known to us its efficacy 
and our privilege of sharing its benefits. Our part of the work is to 
believe God, to accept these benefits, and act accordingly. 

If, when men hear, they are not disposed to be sincere and honest 
with themselves, but rather love darkness than light because their 
deeds are evil, they have not taken the first step toward the setting 
in order for eternal life. If they are not even disposed in favor of 
truth and righteousness, how can they believe? The sense of the 
passage, then, is that as many as were disposed, or inclined, toward 
truth and righteousness, believed. The idea is clearly expressed in 
Rotherham's translation— "As many as had become disposed for 
age-abiding life, believed." 

Q. Was the promise to Abram, Gen. 13:14-17, ever fulfilled? If so, 
when- if not, when will it be, and how? 

A. In Acts 7:5, we read that God gave to Abram none inheritance in 
the land of promise; no, not so much as to set his foot on, yet he 
promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his 
seed after him. And in Heb. 11:13, we read: "These all (Abram and 
others mentioned) died in faith, not having received the promises, 
but having seen them afar off were persuaded of them, and 
embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and 
pilgrims on the earth. " As heretofore shown, the promise will be 
literally fulfilled to Abram in the incoming Millennial Age, and will 
soon be realized; for already the fig-tree begins to put forth 
whereby we know, even if we had no other evidence, that summer 
is nigh. 

Q. I have read in "FOOD," page 98, the answer to part of a query 
which arose in my mind while learning of the coming restitution, 



viz.: Would there be room for them on the earth if the billions of 
the dead were resurrected? But while that is fully answered, I still 
query, How would so large a population subsist? 

A. Even if we could think of no way, it should be no obstacle to 
reposing faith in the positive promise of God. Remember Abraham, 
God's promise to him was most improbable (Gen. 18:10, and 22:2; 
17:21), yet he "staggered not" at that, but believed God-so should 
we. But foreseeing this query on our part, our Father has explained 
how it shall be accomplished, saying, "The earth shall yield her 
increase" ; "the wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad, and 
the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose." "In the wilderness 
shall waters break out and streams in the desert." (Isa. 35:1-6.) Thus 
we see that the changes which God has in contemplation, indicate 
that he has foreseen all the necessities of his plan, and will make 
provision for the needs of his creatures in what is termed a natural 
way, and at the same time let us remember that He shall be there to 
superintend who turned water into wine, and with two loaves fed 
five thousand. 

Q. Since we read that God can "by no means clear the guilty," how 
shall we harmonize that with other statements of Scripture which 
show that our sins were imputed to Jesus and he died for them; 
while his righteousness was imputed to us, and we shall live on that 
account, or as elsewhere stated by His (Jesus') stripes we are 
healed? 

A. Suppose a man found guilty of some crime is condemned to 
imprisonment or $1,000 fine. He has no money, and is imprisoned. 
His friends go to the Governor asking his pardon, and get his reply 
thus: I cannot and will not pardon any man who is really guilty. If 
you can show that the law was bad, or that the decision of the court 
was unjust, that would be a reason why I should do him justice by 
pardoning him, and setting aside the penalty. But if it is admitted 
that the "law is good," and the decision and penalty just, then I can 
by no means clear the guilty— I cannot pardon him. 

Suppose, then, that you sold your property, and securing the 
amount of the fine, went and paid it FOR the guilty one. Would not 
this illustrate the sinners case? Jehovah does not clear or pardon 
them, but redeems them by providing the ransom for sin. 

Q. When the Millennium begins, what becomes of those who are 
not Christians? Are all to die and then to have a resurrection, to be 
brought to Adamic perfection? 

A. As you are doubtless aware we understand Scripture to hold out 
very different promises to the true Church of this age, from those to 
the world to be fulfilled in the Millennial Age. Hence we answer, 
your question supposes that you ask concerning the world, which, 
however, includes many nominal Christians who are in a general 
way believers in Christ, but who never have sanctified themselves, 
never consecrated, and who, therefore, are not new creatures, but 



still of the human nature and heirs with the world of those promises 
of restitution and blessing which shall flow to the natural man. 

Among all these, light, knowledge, truth shall increase and bring 
attendant blessings and happiness. For a further answer to your first 
question, we refer you to article entitled "Sanctifying the World," in 
the TOWER for Feb., 1883. 

From your second question we judge that you do not fully 
appreciate DEATH. Death has passed upon all humanity, and all 
are in death and under its control, even before the last spark of life 
becomes extinct. Strictly speaking, everything is in death which is 
perishing; hence only two men ever were fully alive- Adam 
through sin brought death. The sentence against him was, "Dying, 
thou shalt die" (Margin), and as soon as the sin had been committed 
the penalty began to take effect. And Jesus when he became a man, 
like Adam before the fall, had neither death nor cause of death (sin) 
in him, but "in him was life" which he gave as a ransom for ours. 
All others have been in the dead or dying condition. 

Likewise we have seen that resurrection does not merely mean to 
lift men from the tomb with only a spark of life, but includes this 
and all the process following it, which brings them up entirely out 
of the dying condition to the perfection of their human nature. 

Thus seen, there will be no occasion for others to enter the tomb 
when the kingdom of heaven has been fully established in the earth. 
[Which we understand will be about 1914 A.D.] The Great 
Physician-the Christ-will then be among men in power and the 
work of healing and restoring all things, but faintly foreshadowed 
by Jesus' earthly miracles, will commence. The resurrection work 
will progress both with those who are in their graves and also those 
not so far down in the dark "valley of the shadow of death," and all 
will have the strength and help provided, by which they may regain 
the mountain top of human perfection and life which Adam lost the 
right to through sin, but which right was redeemed for all by Christ. 

Q. What am I to do? I am a Baptist. I cannot now agree with them, 
and cannot see how I can consistently remain in the Baptist Church- 
-giving my influence and support to what I now see to be error, 
even though there are good people in it, and some seeming good 
moral influence is being exerted by it. Yet there is no Church here 
holding the views which the WATCH TOWER maintains. Should I 
withdraw? 

A. We can only repeat to you the word of the Lord, quoted and 
expounded in other issues of the TOWER. If his command, "Come 
out of her (Babylon) my people," be not sufficient for you, what 
could we say that would have more weight with you? 

We believe the "Baptists" to have as little error as perhaps any of 
the sects. Back in the days of Bunyan they were evidently very near 
the Apostolic arrangement of the Church, but it has drifted into the 
popular sectarian channel with the others-it now has its creed, 



boundaries and its titled ministry, and ignores the teachings of the 
Scriptures to teach human tradition, and is now as much a member 
of the "Image" (Rev. 13:14-17) as any other sect. We can see no 
other way for you to do than to withdraw your name, influence and 
support from the institution. 

You are probably mistaken about there being no members of the 
Church of Christ [whose names are written in heaven] in your 
place; and as a member of that Church to whom God has given 
greater light, it is your duty, as it should be your joy, to let your 
light shine, and thereby bless the other members. There may be 
some of them with you in the Baptist Church, some in the 
Methodist, Presbyterian, and other sects, who, while really 
consecrated to the Lord, have been deceived as you were into 
rendering to sectarianism the service meant for God. Remember 
that Elijah once thought himself alone, and supposed that all Israel 
was worshipping Baal's image, but God informed him that there 
were seven thousand who had not. So it is to-day, the truth is daily 
seeking out those who are faithful and feeding them. All such will 
heed God's word, and are willing to face the frown of the popular 
sentiment of the nominal Church, and confess Christ and his 
teachings. 

It should be our constant endeavor to seek out such. You know not 
how many starving saints may be hungering for the bread which 
you can supply. Don't expect to find them among the most popular 
Christians-the eminently pious— though there may be some such, 
but as a general thing it is now as it was in Jesus' day, that the poor 
of this world are the rich in faith. May God bless the humble 
messengers and receivers of his glorious truth. 

Q. In the July issue you say "the Jew... could not keep the Law. 
Please tell us what portion of it they could not keep? You also 
mention "the life promised under that Law covenant -but what life 
was promised under that Law? 

A. The Law is one whole law with ten divisions. To keep the Law 
was to meet the requirements of each of the ten items. The promise 
of life was to any who could keep the whole perfectly, and he who 
offended or violated one part was a violator of the Law, and had no 
claim on the life promised to the obedient. (Jam. 2:10.) The 
Apostles and Jesus assure us that none but Jesus ever kept that law 
inviolate, therefore he was the only one who had a right to life, 
hence it is that the Law did not demand his death, but when he died 
it was willingly a sacrifice for our sins. (See 1 Pet. 3:18; 1 John 3:5; 
John 6:51; 10:18.) 

The life promised was a right to continue to live-human life. 

Q. Please explain Rom. 8:14-17. You teach that the Spirit is not 
received by any until sanctification, but these brethren here 
addressed were seemingly unsanctified as shown by Rom. 6:19. 



A. These two Scriptures are in harmony with our teaching, and with 
each other. Rom. 6:4,8,11,12,18, and 22, show that the persons 
addressed were truly consecrated in heart and mind to the Lord. The 
"presenting" vs. 13 and 19, refers not to consecration, but to the 
carrying out or fulfilling of the covenant already made. They had 
covenanted to render, or had presented their minds to the Lord, now 
they must not forget to spend the life and strength of every member 
of their bodies in his service. 

Q. What became of Jesus' flesh when he as a spiritual being 
ascended to heaven? 

A. See "Food for Thinking Christians," pages 61 and 62. If you 
have none you can get a copy free by addressing this office. 

Q. Please explain Isa. 11:11. "And it shall come to pass in that day 
that the Lord shall set his hand again, the second time, to recover 
the remnant of his people which shall be left from Assyria, and 
from Egypt, and from Pathos, and from Cush, and from Elam, and 
from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea." 

A. This prophecy of Isaiah seems parallel to that of Jeremiah 16:14- 
17. "Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be 
said, The Lord liveth that brought up the children of Israel out of 
the land of Egypt; but the Lord liveth that brought up the children 
of Israel from the land of the north (Russia, north of Palestine, 
where the greatest number of that people are now found, and from 
which they are now being driven by fierce persecution), and from 
all the lands whither he had driven them; and I will bring them 
again into their land that I gave unto their fathers." Yes, the 
deliverance from Egypt of the remnant of Israel, who lived to see it, 
was a deliverance they never forgot, but that deliverance will seem 
insignificant when compared to the great deliverance which the 
Lord will accomplish when he sets his hand again, the second time, 
to recover the remnant of that people living in the day of the Lord, 
here referred to. For proof that the day of the Lord is now upon us, 
see "Food for Thinking Christians," and note that these things are 
already beginning to come to pass. This day is this Scripture being 
fulfilled in your ears- whosoever hath an ear, let him hear. 


