VOL. XXIV. DECEMBER 15, 1902. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 371 

The Reapers Not Yet Crying Out 371 

The Agrarians of Germany 372 

A Presbyterian Preacher Looking 
in the Right Direction 372 

What Rev. Hillis Sees 373 

Church Union in Canada 373 

Social Unrest in Russia 374 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society's 

Annual Report 374 

Rejoicing in Tribulation 379 

Requests for Pilgrim Visits in 1903 383 

Extent of Judas' Knowledge 383 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THE WATCH TOWER BIBLES. 



The friends have thus named the wide-margin Bibles with 
DAWN and TOWER references recently gotten out by Holman & 
Co. for us: and since the book needs a special and distinguishing 
name, we may as well let this one stand. 

Some of these Bibles, reserved for friends who hoped to send 
the money before the end of the year, are now released, and can 
go to whoever sends the payment; 124 bound in French Seal, 
divinity circuit, red under gold edges, express prepaid, for $2.00. 

We got out a special edition for foreign shipment, with the 
photo-illustrations of Palestine, etc., separate (so as to keep 
within the foreign-postal limits): these we have held until now 
for our friends in foreign lands, but henceforth they are open 
to general orders from any quarter. Price, same as above (in 
British currency, 9s.); 99 remain. 

No other Bible ever published contains such advantages as 
this one; and the above are all that remain of an edition of 
5,000. There will be no more; and, though open to all, we are 
anxious that these go to friends of the cause, who will value 
them on account of the special features, and make use of the 
same. No Bibles at the price— nor at any price— will compare 
with these. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



Remember, that we have these in good supply at 50c each- 
delivery free. Each Binder will hold two years' issues, and 
they are very convenient for easy reference and preserving the 
papers from injury and soiling. 



R3117 : page 371 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE REAPERS NOT YET CRYING OUT. 



IN VIEW of our interpretation of James 5:1-9* 
and in view, further, of the present prosperous 
times amongst farmers and others in the United 
States and Canada, some are inquiring when and how 
we should now expect the fulfilment of James' prophecy. 
We answer that we are not sorry the American 
farmers are not pinched, but prosperous. No one of 



noble heart could take delight at the distress of others. 
We account for the delay of the pinch and the cries, 
here, as follows:— 

(1) The Spanish war, the Boer war, the Philippine 
war, the China war and several small wars and 
preparations for war, in Abyssinia, Hayti, Colombia, 
Argentine, Peru, and Chili, and the immense naval expenditures 
of Japan, Great Britain, Germany and the 

United States, have put thousands of millions of dollars 
into circulation during the past five years; and 
the effect could not be other than to bring great prosperity 
in manufacturing lines. 

(2) The famines in India and Russia and China, 
and crop shortages in Europe and South America, and 
the drouth in Australia, have all conspired to make a 
great demand for all the cattle and crops of this country, 
and at good prices. 

(3) The deficiency of money (decreased by the 
demonetization of silver) would surely have hindered 
this wave of prosperity from rising as it has risen, 
were it not for the shrewdness of the American bankers 
who have much more than made up for the loss of 
silver by organizing immense corporations and trusts 
whose stocks, like railway shares, are given a money 
value in all banks. The bankers thus make interest on 
loans represented by those shares, and at the same 
time have a firmer inside hold upon all the industries 
of the world. It is to their interest to have just as 

little money afloat as possible— they can the more easily 

control the financial keys of the world's business. 

If there were no money, the bankers' credits would be 

the substitute. The manufacturer would then deposit 

deeds or mortgages or stocks with his banker and 

secure credit and be permitted to issue bank checks 

against that credit; and those bank checks, or representations 

of credit, would pass current instead of 

money, and the bankers would have the entire control 

of the credit and charge interest, or toll, on all 

the business of the earth. Conditions are approximating 

this at present in that probably nine-tenths of the 

world's business is done on interest-bearing credits, while 

actual money suffices merely for small retail transactions. 

But what is the difference so long as we have 
prosperity? The difference is that the treating of stock 
shares as money is bringing fabulous wealth to a numerous 
class; but since many of these stocks are over-valued, 
over-capitalized, it follows that as war-expenditures 
decrease a panic will occur the like of which 
the world has never known. "The mighty man shall 
weep then bitterly"— the rich shall "weep and howl." 
That will be a time of general loss of confidence when 
bankers' credits will be at their ebb. Under the new 
conditions, and with the money and the money-making 
property in the hands of the bankers, it would be unwise 
to attempt to outline or to particularize the character 
of events that will ultimately lead the reapers 



to cry out; but we have confidence in the correctness 
of the prediction and believe that the demonetizing of 
silver and the consequent decrease of the world's 
money will be seen to be at the bottom of that trouble, 
directly or indirectly precipitating it. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. IV., p.392. 
R3118 : page 372 

THE AGRARIANS OF GERMANY. 



Even at present prices of agricultural products, 
the farmers of Germany, contending with poorer soil 
and smaller farms, are "crying out" that they can no 
longer compete with American products, and demanding 
tariff protection. The Government (the Emperor) 
is not averse to the tariff, but fears that even a small 
rise in the price of food necessities would pinch the 
mechanics and laborers of the cities, and necessitate a 
raise of wages which, in turn, would further hinder the 
industries of Germany, which have been much depressed 
for over a year. The Agrarian party in the 
German Parliament has hitherto been the Government's 
standby; but now the Agrarians freely hint 
that if they do not get tariff protection they will oppose 
voting public moneys for the building of new 
warships, and otherwise endeavor to thwart the Emperor's 
will until the tariff is granted. 

The Emperor, who is thus without his regular 
supporters, sees the Socialist party increasing in numbers 
and influence yearly; and now notes the threats 
of the Agrarians, and that many of them favor affiliation 
with their former opponents (the Socialists). 
The Emperor is thus forced to conciliate more and 
more the third party, the Centrists (the Roman Catholic 
party), who are apparently ready and willing to 
trade every other measure in the interest of their 
church. Thus the Pope, through this party, is likely 
to dominate the Emperor very thoroughly: indeed 
under the circumstances it is no wonder the Emperor 
is reputed to have a leaning toward Catholicism. His 
first conviction is that he reigns by "divine right," 
"by the grace of God." His second conviction is 
that those who favor him must be right. 

Present conditions favor Catholicism in Germany 
more than at any time since the days of the Reformation; 
but we are not to look for a religious war; 
rather we may expect a greater equality of all systems, 
with Romanism taking a leading part. Let it 
not be forgotten that this religious fraternization, or 
federation, is to come before the worst of the trouble 



comes: and this evidently is several years future even 
in these days of rapid transformations and aggregations. 

A PRESBYTERIAN PREACHER LOOKING IN THE RIGHT 
DIRECTION. 



At the Presbyterian Synod's session in Joplin, 
Mo., Oct. 28th, Rev. C. C. Hemenway delivered an 
interesting discourse, reported in the Joplin Globe, as 
follows:— 

"Rev. Hemenway preached an eloquent and able 
sermon. The address was a plea for the appreciation 
of spiritual truth, a call to Christians to live more 
deeply in the heart of religious truth. The text was 
taken from Luke 18:8: 'Nevertheless, when the Son 
of Man cometh shall he find faith on the earth?' 

"The speaker said in beginning his address: At 
no time during the present generation has it been so 
easy to be a pessimist, so difficult to be an optimist. 
Whether the interests be political or industrial, sociological 
or spiritual, the same general conditions everywhere 
prevail,— a state of doubt and unrest and fear. 
For such a time assuredly was asked the ambiguous 
question of our Lord of his disciples: Nevertheless, 
when the Son of Man cometh, shall he find faith on 
earth? 

"I do not profess to be able to interpret with 
confidence this searching question of Jesus. I can not 
feel sure of his mind in this conversation. Was it a 
warning to his believers not be lacking in faith as a 
guard against worldly influences, the power of which 
we now perhaps can realize more fully than those 
to whom Jesus was speaking? Was it a declaration 
that the time would come when faith would become 
weak and small in the hearts and lives of men? Or 
was it the pleading voice of a loving Master who 
would win our loyalty by suggesting the possibility of 
our failing in devotion,— as once he said when men 
were deserting him, Will ye also go away? Disclaiming 
any dogmatic zeal in the interpretation of this 
difficult conclusion to a not less difficult parable I feel 
confident that the underlying thought of every possible 
interpretation of this sentence is peculiarly applicable 
to the times in which we now live. Whether it 
be a plea for faith, or a warning not to be wanting in 
faith, or an announcement of a loss of faith, in every 
case there are significant and responsive aspects and 
characteristics of the meaning to be found in the religious 
world today. Nevertheless, when the Son of 
Man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth? If the 
Son of Man should come to the world of this twentieth 
century would he find faith on the earth? If he 
were to visit the church universal, which bears his 
name throughout our land and the world, would he 



find faith on the earth? Answering neither for the 
optimist nor the pessimist, and turning from the theoretical 
to the practical, I ask your serious consideration 
of some of the aspects of modern social and religious 
life most seriously significant of this inquiry of Jesus. 

"Perhaps I can express my fundamental thought 
this evening most clearly by quoting from a report of 
a sermon by President Charles Cuthbert Hall in Highgate 
Congregational Church, London. He was speaking 
on 'The Appreciation of Spiritual Truth as a Primary 
Duty of the Church,' and was reported as saying, 
that the conventionalism of life today creates a strong 
temptation to be more interested in what we do than 
in what we believe, and to get away from the responsibility 
of thinking for ourselves. 'We need, he says, 
to live more deeply in the heart of religious truth, 
and to have a growing appreciation of the beauty and 
nobleness of the fundamental ideas of our religion.' 

"Is there not here a clear and profound statement 
of the religious condition of our time? Are we not 
more interested in what we do than what we believe; 
and have we a worthy appreciation of the beauty and 
nobleness of the fundamental ideas of our religion? 

"With all our zeal and all our activity,— building 

R3118 : page 373 

churches in beauty, like this in which we gather tonight, 
—pushing on the agencies of the church with 
treasuries unburdened with debt; revising and improving 
our creed statements,— with all our zeal and 
activity, are we searching deep into the nature of the 
things of the kingdom of God for a better understanding 
of the fundamental verities of our faith? While 
in science, in biology and chemistry and physics and 
electricity,— men are studying deep into the nature of 
material things, is not the church of God, in the main, 
dealing with superficials and satisfied to live on the 
surface of spiritual things? The call to the revision 
of our creed (a voice which I am not to condemn tonight), 
is a voice to which we may all, perhaps, respond 
Amen; but is the call to revision sounding through 
our great church, out of a new and profounder research 
into the eternal verities of our faith than the 
studies of an Edwards or a Calvin? or is the call 
rather out of a desire to adjust our creed to the times 
in which we live? 

"Far more important than the mere question of 
revision may be the inquiry as to its cause. Far more 
significant to you and to me may be the real spiritual 
condition of the church seeking a revision of its creed 
statements, than the mere question of a verbal statement 
to be desired. We shall never grow strong by 
mere excision or even by addition; but only by securing 
deeper and surer foundations. 

"Rev. Hemenway showed how and why the 



question of Jesus which formed his text, was addressed 
to our day and generation, and showed different 
reasons. First: Within the church: Instead of the 
wonders of creation, the consequence of the fall of 
man, or the mysteries of redemption exciting the interest 
or inquiry, the question of the inspiration, 
accuracy and authority of the Bible— in a word, the 
higher criticism— holds the attention. 

"Second: Pulpit themes; the speaker said, In 
studying the trend of the times, I have found that 
business men say the pulpit has no message for them. 

"Third: The ways of the church; Rev. Hemenway 
made an earnest plea for the old hymns, such as 
'My faith looks up to thee,' 'All hail the power of 
Jesus' name,' and others, as better than the popular 
gospel hymn. He said that much of the modern religious 
poetry is set to music that stirs the feet more 
than the soul. 

"Fourth: The neglect of parents to bring up their 
children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. 
One of the best evidences, Rev. Hemenway thinks, 
that parents do not teach their children religion as 
once they did, is that the candidates for the ministry 
in 1899 were 1433; in 1902 only 810. 

"For reasons without the church: The speaker 
did not attempt a sharp and close discrimination between 
the church and the world, but looked for the general 
evidences of the decadence of faith which, he said, 
appear almost as frequently in the lives of Christians as 
those not professing Christ. He gave as first among 
the causes of this: the character of the present strife 
for wealth. He said, While unscrupulous means for 
acquiring riches have been employed for ages, the 
power of passion for wealth over all is new and of 
our time. We need to turn from the subject of the 
saloon on the Sunday to that of the office on the Sunday. 
The second commandment means no more to 
the community in its struggle for wealth than the 
excise laws to the man of appetite. He said the motive 
for obtaining wealth has changed, and quoted: 

'Gold! Gold! Gold! Gold! 
Bright and yellow, hard and cold; 
Molten, carven, hammered, rolled; 
Heavy to get and light to hold; 
Hoarded, bartered, bought and sold; 
Stolen, borrowed, squandered, doled; 
Spurned by the young, but hugged by the old 
To the very verge of the churchyard mold; 
Price of many a crime untold; 
Gold! Gold! Gold! Gold!' 

R3119 : page 373 

"As a second reason outside the church, was given: 
The love of pleasure, ease and self-indulgence. 



"Third: Unrest under authority. Anarchy, said 
the speaker, flourishes in the home, the school and the 
church. 

"Fourth: The prevalence of suicide. 

"Fifth: The ready acceptance of the various 
forms of new thought." 

WHAT REV. HILLIS SEES. 



Rev. Hillis, successor to Henry Ward Beecher 
now sees some of the things pointed out in the 
WATCH TOWER for the past twenty-three years. The 
public press reports the following from his discourse 
of October 19th:- 

MILLIONAIRES RULE THE COUNTRY. 

"Just now our country is entering upon a crisis 
that is to strain its institutions to the last point before 
breaking. For a generation the tide of illiteracy, 
intellectual and moral, has been slowly rising, until 
the better social element is being submerged by the 
worse. This social deterioration has been progressive. 
A century ago the great figures in the community 
were the magistrate and the minister. In the middle 
of the last century the statesman and the politician 
were the contrasting figures, representing weight of 
intellect. Those were the days of Daniel Webster and 
Henry Clay. Then came an era, about five years ago, 
when the statesman was submerged by the 
multi-millionaire. 

"Wealth, riches, the love of gold and power, 
control our statesmen now. Individuals representing 
hundreds of millions cause the politician to pass under 
an eclipse. This Croesus who can own his private car, 
his private yacht, owns also his private Governor, his 
private Representative, and last summer his private 
Congress. These men, whose millions have enabled 
them to form the trusts, control our Congress and used 
this legislative body to pull their chestnuts out of the 
fire. 

"Men who would solemnly pledge themselves to 
give certain rights to Cuba were forbidden by their 
political masters to fulfil their obligation. Men have 
the authority today who don't have any offices. Men 
rule as Governor who haven't been elected. 

THE DANGER OF THE MOB. 

"The next stage is the multi-millionaire's submergence 
by the numbers of his workmen acting under 
the control of a single will. But the rule of the many 
because they have the votes needed by the Governor 



R3119 : page 374 

who seeks re-election, is a rule of peril that threatens 
every institution that we love. A mob is always controlled 
by the most ignorant and vicious element. Put 
a thousand men in a group; the one man who can control 
the thousand men in the mob is the man who can 
strike the chord to which all will respond. The man 
who has the last fact in the case is nature's uncrowned 
king, who alone has the right to rule. 

"Fortunately, in a democracy, when the people 
make a mistake, it is the people who suffer, so that 
the follies and sins of the Republic cure themselves, 
as Wendell Phillips once said, and this fact makes and 
keeps up optimists." 

A ripple of surprise went over his congregation 
when Dr. Hillis, discussing the percentage of great 
men in America who owe their splendid qualities to 
the clergymen in their ancestry, said: "Henry Clay, 
Wendell Phillips, Daniel Webster, Robert Ingersoll 
and Henry Ward Beecher, five great inspirational orators, 
got their early education and principles of life 
from the clergymen from whom they sprung." 

That Dr. Hillis should mention the names of Robert 
Ingersoll and Henry Ward Beecher in the same 
breath, speaking in the church that was occupied by 
the latter, caused expressions of indignation among 
his hearers. 

CHURCH UNION IN CANADA. 



The Methodist General Conference recently held 
in Winnipeg, Man., near the close of its session passed 
resolutions looking toward a union of all the "evangelical" 
denominations of Canada. It appointed an 
influential committee to confer first and specially with 
Presbyterians and Congregationalists. The Methodists 
of Canada number 847,765; the Presbyterians 
755,326; the Congregationalists 28,157. Commenting 
upon this the Outlook says:— 

"This comprehensive and far-reaching proposition 
was adopted with practical unanimity by the Conference, 
only two or three delegates voting against it. 
This forward movement acquires additional significance 
from the fact that the Methodist and Presbyterian 
churches in Canada are themselves the result of 
the integration of several minor divisions, which has 
been signally marked with the seal of the divine approval. 
It was further emphasized by the cordial 
greetings of representatives of the Presbyterian Church 
—the Rev. Dr. Bryce, moderator of its General Assembly, 
Prof. Kilpatrick, of Manitoba College, and the 
Rev. C. W. Gordon, better known as 'Ralph Connor,' 
author of 'The Sky Pilot,' and the 'The Man from 



Glengarry.' Union sentiment was strongly reciprocated 
also by the Rev. Messrs. Silcox and Hamilton, 
representatives of the Congregational Union." 
The Chicago Interior (Presbyterian) declares:— 
"Were the leading denominational body of the 
Presbyterian, Congregational or Methodist Churches 
in this country to appoint a committee on organic union 
with the other two, the news of it would be put 
by the daily papers in the earthquake column. Yet 
the Methodist General Conference in Canada has done 
precisely that— named a commission of its most prominent 
men to invite the Presbyterians and Congregationalists 
to come in and talk union. We should not, 
indeed, like to believe that there is any more actual 
antagonism among denominations in the Republic than 
in the Dominion; we are certainly learning here in 
the United States to be mighty good friends and 
mighty neighborly neighbors across the old sectarian 
chasms; but of union, other than within the lines of 
our different 'families' of churches, we have scarcely 
thought at all— it hardly seemed possible. But certainly 
these advancing Canadian folks are going to 
make us think about it, and we shall all be watching 
intently from this country to see how they succeed." 

SOCIAL UNREST IN RUSSIA. 



The struggle between the Russian agriculturists 
and the bureaucracy still continues. The members of 
the Zemstvos or local Councils ask for greater liberty 
of speech, and sometimes when this is refused resign 
in a body. They demand also, as a first instalment of 
reform, a revision of the system of taxation, which, 
they say, presses unduly upon the agriculturists. The 
reactionaries are furiously angry at the demand for 
more freedom of speech, and we can understand their 
fear of publicity if the horrible story told to the correspondent 
of the Times is as well founded as he believes. 
In one district of Kharkov some peasants 
were being tried for resisting authority, when their 
counsel asked permission to give evidence as to the 
conduct of the soldiers, who had not only flogged the 
peasants but outraged a great number of their women. 
It was pleaded that they had therefore been punished 
enough; but permission to give evidence was refused, 
and the peasants were sentenced to fines or short terms 
of imprisonment. There had been, in fact, a Dragonnade 
of the locality, and there is no redress.— London 
Spectator. 



R3119 : page 374 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

--ANNUAL REPORT-DEC. 1ST, 1901, TO DEC. 1ST, 1902. 

WE WELL KNOW how the dear friends of the 

Truth watch for these annual reports. Recognizing 

that the Lord of the harvest is using 

the TOWER office as a kind of headquarters for the reaping 

work now in progress this side the vail, they are 

deeply concerned, not only respecting their own services 

in their own quarters, but also respecting the 

entire field as seen from this vantage point. Believing 

that such an interest is pleasing to the Lord and 

profitable to his people, we shall do our best to satisfy 

it. 

(1) The general aspect of the work is favorable. 
The little gatherings for worship and study of the 
Word are more numerous and better attended than 

R3119 : page 375 

ever: and still better than this, the general spiritual 
condition of the flock is favorable; even the financial 
prosperity of the year— an insidious foe to spiritual 
development— has not prevented a great increase of 
love and zeal for the Lord and his Word and his brethren. 
We rejoice in this far more than in the items 
below, indicating the activity displayed by you all in 
the circulation of the harvest message: nevertheless, 
it should not be forgotten that the two are intimately 
related; for as it is the zeal that leads to the service, 
so also does service inspire fresh zeal in ourselves as 
well as in others. 

But while thus rejoicing, let us take heed: let us 
remember that our Adversary is still on the alert, and 
that so long as he is "the prince of this world" it will 
be an "evil world," an enemy's country to all true 
followers of the Lamb until we shall be "changed" or 
until Satan's rule shall be fully overthrown and our 
Immanuel shall have full sway. Our Lord, through 
his Word, forewarns us to expect that neither Satan 
nor the systems of men organized under his supervision, 
or more or less controlled by him, will yield 
peaceably to the new rule; but must be overthrown 
by Christ after a violent struggle;— during which 
Satan will be forced to appear "as an angel of light" 
in order to perpetuate the delusions wherewith he has 
so long deceived the whole world— putting light for 
darkness, and darkness for light.— Compare Rev. 20:3; 

R3120 : page 375 

16:13,14; 13:15; I Tim. 4:1; 2 Thess. 2:9-12. 

While we see good evidences pointing to continued 
prosperity for the Truth during the new year just 
opening, we note many evidences that it is likely to 



be a year of severe testing. These evidences are more 
general, as well as more particular, than heretofore; 
and it is our duty to give a note of warning to all the 
watchers— putting them on guard against our Adversary; 
for "we are not ignorant of his devices." (2 Cor. 2:11.) 
One of his old "devices" (new, however, 
to some) is his denial (through his agents— and he 
always secures and uses the best servants he can for 
his mouthpieces,— Rom. 6:16) of his own existence. 
He comes in a garment of "light;" saying, Your ideas 
of an old devil are all wrong— a part of the general 
delusion from which all the intelligent people of our 
day are getting free— Higher Critics, Evolutionists, 
Christian Scientists, and the educated world all now 
admit this, and you must not lag behind in the mire 
of error. Never mind the Bible's numerous references 
to a personal devil and a host of demons who occasionally 
were cast, by the Lord and his apostles, out 
of those "possessed." Take my word for it; and pay 
no attention to Jesus' declaration that I was "a murderer 
from the beginning and abode not in the truth;" 
nor to the Apostles' warning that I would deceive and 
palm myself off as a minister of the light, denying my 
former self and practices and, instead, working miracles 
to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect. 

Another device in line with the foregoing yet 
strictly new, is that Satan has become a worker of miracles. 
This is a token that his "house" is tottering 
to its fall— else it would not need support so opposed 
to the general policy of Satan— as our Lord declared, 
If Satan cast out Satan his house is divided against 
itself and cannot long stand. (Mark 3:23-26; Matt. 12:26.) 
He has long palmed himself off as a teacher 
—a light-bearer, clothed in light; but Satan in the 
role of faith-healer is a novelty belonging chiefly to 
our day— though, undoubtedly, he has had to do with 
the relic -miracles of Papacy for centuries. The worshiping 
of a relic -bone of St. Anne or of the "holy 
shroud" or of a "nail from the cross" served for less intelligent 
people in a less intelligent epoch; but now, and 
amongst more enlightened people, faith and prayer are 
more apt to deceive, and he is using and blessing these, 
and thus attracting the attention of people away from 
the Truth which is now dawning gradually upon nominal 
"Christendom." 

Do we deny that "faith cures" are performed by 
"Christian Scientists" and "Mormons" and "Spiritualists" 
and "Mesmerists" and "Hypnotists" and 
"Magnetists" and "Comeouters" and "Christian 
Allianceists" and "Elijahites"? Surely no one can 
deny that some cures are performed by all these systems; 
and just as surely none can deny that earnest, 
well-meaning people are to be found in all of these 
systems. Perhaps some of the "very elect" are in 
them and deluded by Satan's substitution of darkness 
for light; if so, we may be sure that the Lord will use 



some means for their deliverance;— we should be glad 
if he would so use this very item of warning. 

We cannot blame "the groaning creation" for 
desiring relief from pain and death; and we are glad 
that we can point them to the real relief which God 
has provided, so near at hand;— the Millennial Kingdom. 
We cannot wonder, however, if the poor world 
in gross darkness fails to see coming restitution clearly 
enough to trust in it and wait for it; but we should 
expect that the New Creation, begotten of the spirit, 
would see that the general blessing and removal of the 
curse is not due until the great Day of Atonement (the 
Gospel age) is fully ended and the Sons of God, the 
"very elect," are all glorified with their Lord and 
Head. These, the saints taught of God, should 
clearly see that now is not the time for restitution, 
but still the time for sacrificing; and accordingly 
should joyfully suffer with Christ as members of his 
body and not ask back the physical powers exchanged 
in consecration for spiritual hopes and promises. If 

R3120 : page 376 

our wily adversary could get us all to coveting and 
striving for physical healing and comfort, and to teaching 
such a gospel to others, it would please him and 
serve his purposes; for time and thought spent thus 
would be turned aside from spiritual interests and 
studies and efforts. Restitution hopes and efforts, 
which will be in order for the world very soon now, 
are surely not the hopes or ambitions of the Church 
called out of the world during this age to be "living 
sacrifices"— to lay down their lives and become "dead 
with him." 

It will be noted that we are not condemning those 
who in the various systems "perform many wonderful 
works," but not by divine power. (Matt. 7:22,23.) 
Nor are we blaming those who have sought and found 
relief— they only followed a natural course. And if 
they gave God thanks for the healing, they have the 
same blessing as though God had performed the cure. 
If sincere, however, to learn better will mean that they 
will not accept healings from such sources again. 
What we now desire to do is to save some from being 
ensnared by these false doctrines by pointing out that 
none of these channels of healing give evidence that 
they are such as God would probably choose. To our 
understanding, Satan uses faith-healings as bait to catch 
the Lord's people and turn them away from the Truth. 

"Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall 
make you free;" and "he that doeth truth cometh 
to the light," are our Lord's declarations. "Ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should 
overtake you as a thief;" is the Apostle Paul's 
prediction. (John 8:32; 3:21; I Thess. 5:4.) Excuse 
may well be made for those who lived and died 



before the dawning began; but for those now living 
and continually brought in contact with the light of 
present truth, what shall we conclude? We must conclude 
that if servants at all they are such as know not 
what their Lord doeth; such, therefore, as we should 
not regard either as favored sons or favored servants 
of God, as our Lord explains.— John 15:15. 

Viewed thus, all of these doers of "many wonderful 
works in Christ's name" (Matt. 7:22) lack the 
proper credentials, in that they do not have the Truth, 
which they surely would have if they were in the 
Lord's favor and confidence. Worse than this, the 
vast majority of them are Christless— deniers of the 
ransom, its necessity and its results— as well as blind 
to the light of present truth. The Elijahites are deceived 
into an anti-Christ position similar to that of 
Papacy; for while the latter's pontiff poses as Christ's 
representative and substitute in ruling authority, and 
misapplies prophecies of Christ's kingly power and 
authority to the popes,* the Elijahites similarly misapply 
to their leader the prophecies which refer to our 
Lord and the glorified Church, as the great "Prophet 
like unto Moses" (Acts 3:22,23), and the "Messenger 
of the Covenant," whose mission, in the flesh, 
failing of turning the hearts of fathers and children 
will result in the "smiting of the earth with a curse" 
—"a time of trouble such as was not since there was 
a nation. "+-Mal. 4:6; Dan. 12:1. 

The Christian Allianceists are thick in the medieval 
darkness, teaching eternal torment and various 
other blasphemies and falsehoods. The "Christian 
Scientists" repudiate all sin, and, hence, all redemption 
from sin, and thus plainly show that they have 
neither part nor lot with Christ or his message or power. 
The Spiritualists similarly deny the foundations 
of Biblical faith. 

The Mormons teach a transmigration of soul, and, 
hence, deny Adam as the head of the race; hence, deny 
the death sentence on all mankind through him; 
hence, cannot logically hold the Scriptural theory that 
all die in Adam's sentence and were redeemed by 
Christ's sacrifice. 

What reason have we to expect that the power of 
healing manifested in these variously blinded peoples 
is of Christ? None whatever. Indeed, they each 
brand the other as deluded servants of Satan, and we 
see no reason to doubt that this is true of them all to 
a greater or less extent. The Lord instructs us to put 
this test, saying: "The secret of the Lord is with them 
that fear him, and he will show them his covenant." 
(Psa. 25:14.) Do any of these miracle-workers see 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
the divine plan and covenant? Surely not, else they 
would be with us heart and voice, declaring the "good 
tidings of great joy which shall be to all people."— 
Luke 2:10. 



The signs by which the Gospel age was introduced 
to fleshly Israel were such as would appeal to sincere 
natural men,— physical blessings typical of greater 
things in the Kingdom. The signs with which the new 
dispensation now appeals to spiritual Israelites are 
spiritual signs, or proofs— the opening of the eyes and 
ears of our hearts to discern in God's plan wonderful 
things which the natural man cannot appreciate. Let 
those whose chief desire is for physical blessings and 
healings take these; Satan will be pleased thus to turn 
them aside;— to turn their faces from the direction of 
the rising Sun of Righteousness and the great and perpetual 
blessings which God proposes, to transient expedients 
and creature consolations, encouraging the 
thoughts that such physical gains are evidences of 
godliness or evidences of divine favor. The New 
Creatures in Christ will follow the footsteps of self-sacrifice 



*See Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., pp. 292-308. 
+Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., chap. 8. 

R3121 : page 377 

and rejoice in the evidences of God's favor 
which the Scriptures warrant. It is our understanding 
that these delusions will be so strong as to deceive 
all except the elect, who will be kept by their clearer 
knowledge of the divine plan. It is our duty to sound 
the alarm, the warning, the caution, even though we 
know that some will, nevertheless, be led away from 
their own steadfastness. Our warning is that the coming 
year means much of trial and testing along these 
lines and that zeal in studying and in serving the truth 
is the only position of safety for any of us. The question 
of the Apostle is apropos, "Who shall be able to 
stand?" Let all who have tasted that the Lord is 
gracious,— all to whom he has shown his covenant, 
stand shoulder to shoulder with each other and with 
the Lord, in defense of the Truth and in aid of one 
another. Thus standing, the opening year will surely 
result favorably to us. 

THE CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT. 

This is an important branch of the service— our 
"Correspondence School." The BIBLE is our text 
book, the DAWNS and TOWERS are our comments, explanations, 
etc., and our mail department enables us 
to point out and emphasize misunderstood parts of 
the instruction. We believe, however, that the references 
and indexes in the new "Watch Tower Bibles" 
will decrease the written communications by enabling 
students to find answers to their queries in DAWNS and 
TOWERS. During the present year we received 42,375 



letters and cards, and sent out 40,601. 

We are always glad of your letters; many a time 
their kind, encouraging words have come like a cup of 
cold water in a dry and thirsty land. Some, indeed, 
are filled with acrimony, and would cause us pain and 
discouragement did not the Lord's grace and truth 
sustain us and show us that Satan and ignorance are 
the real assailants and that the vail of ignorance and 
power of Satan will soon be cast aside and trampled 
upon.— Rom. 16:20. 

THE COLPORTEURING DEPARTMENT. 

The postal ruling which seemed likely to greatly 
interrupt the work has really proved a blessing: it led 
us to renewed efforts to reduce the cost of the clothbound 
DAWNS, which efforts were very successful. 
And these, in turn, are so much more attractive that 
the general sales of DAWNS this year are above our 
highest previous standard— over 93,000 copies of Vol. 
I. alone, and of all volumes, over 128,000. The total 
sales of booklets for the year are nearly 56,000. The 
zeal for colporteuring is increasing, and we hear from 
many who are seeking to adjust their affairs so as to 
be ready to engage in this evangelistic service by 
spring. If these hopes are realized, it will increase 
the above large figures nearly one-half. Our printers 
are increasing their facilities to keep pace with the 
demand. We know of no field of service yielding better 
results than this one; besides, many of these books, 
little cared for now, will, doubtless, be a helping hand 
for many in the time of trouble. 

THE TRACT DEPARTMENT. 

The showing here is equally good;— evidencing 
great zeal for the Master and his Word amongst TOWER 
readers, some of whom circulate the message at 
depots, some on trains and ferryboats and street cars; 
some privately and some by mail. The blessings are 
surely as great to those who give as to those who receive 
them. Total distributed during the year, 
1,895,435. 

The Volunteer work with the WATCH TOWER is 
a part of the same tract work and it alone amounted 
to 1,512,538, or a total of both of nearly three and 
a half million pieces. This would represent 122,432,732 
tract pages. This is a grand showing, in which 
we may all rejoice. 

Is it any wonder that those who attest their loyalty 
to the Lord and his message thus publicly should have 
a special blessing at his hand in return? No; it is in 
full accord with the Lord's general dealings. Them 
who honor him he will honor; them who confess him 
he will own and confess; they who water others shall 
themselves be watered. Not only are those congregations 



which have done volunteering most persistently, 
in the most robust condition, but those brethren 
and sisters who have courageously shown their colors 
are amongst the most clear and most staunch in the 
truth. How glad all will be when in the future they 
look back and note the little services and sacrifices 
they were privileged to make, as an expression to their 
Lord of their love for him and for his brethren! 

The Lord willing, we will have some fresh Volunteer 
matter for next year— ready in the spring. 
We suggest that the various "Captains" send in reports 
for the year, to January 1, as soon as possible; 
and that enlistments for next year be recorded and a 
new election of Captains take place as soon as possible. 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE DEPARTMENT. 

This work is still growing, and we are continually 
seeing new evidences that the Lord is owning and 
blessing it to the spiritual welfare of his dear flock. 
The announcements of routes, etc., in each issue 
of the TOWER tends to quicken the general interest, 
too: the solitary ones can now not only think of and 
mentally fellowship with the Allegheny Church and 
at the One Day Conventions, but also in spirit, travel 
with each of the dear Pilgrims and gather with the 

R3121 : page 378 

various bands of hope and love in sundry quarters. 

During the past year the "Pilgrim" service of 
the Society has been administered through twenty-one 
brethren, who have visited 1208 places, held 1335 public 
meetings and 2057 parlor meetings, covering a total 
of 117,746 miles. This record includes the Editor's 
One Day Conventions and General Conventions. The 
interest in the "Pilgrim" meetings is steadily increasing, 
and many of the friends are learning to cooperate 
with us by appointing some one of their number to 
send us their request for visits, with particulars, which 
we now request, for 1903, on page 383 of this issue. 
In a couple of instances the local leader has seemed a 
little jealous of the "Pilgrims," and fearful that their 
superior knowledge or ability or influence would discount 
his own and undermine it. This is wrong 
every way: vainglory has no proper place in the 
hearts of the Lord's true people; and it should be 
mortified. The "Pilgrims" are humble and earnest, 
and clear in the truth— on the fundamentals, at least 
—otherwise they could not represent this Society or 
travel under its auspices. They will never be found 
trespassing on the rights of the congregations visited; 
but, on the contrary, conservators of the peace and 
liberty of all. Welcome them as Ambassadors of the 
Great King. 

Remember that these services are entirely free, 



traveling expenses and all; and that no collections 

are ever taken up by them. The Society meets every 

expense— except food and lodging, which the friends 

at each place are always glad to provide. Your donations 

to the fund, and ours, are the Lord's provision, 

by which, in this manner, much good is, we believe, 

being accomplished. We again repeat, as last year, 

our suggestion that one half or more of the sessions 

be Parlor Meetings,— specially for the interested. 

THE CONVENTIONS OF THE YEAR. 

The Conventions— Annual and One-Day— are evidently 
entrenching themselves in the esteem of those 
who love the truth, and who love to "speak often one 
to another." The Lord still hearkens, too, and still 
pours out blessings as of yore— abundant and spiritual 
blessings. (Mai. 3:16,17.) These gatherings are 
expensive, both as to time and traveling expense, and, 
therefore, all cannot enjoy their privileges: however, 
all do share their blessings; for we have good evidence 
that those attending carry back blessings to those at 
home. We will D.V. continue these during the year 
1903. Locations have not yet been decided upon: 
these will be announced in due season in the TOWER. 

THE COST OF THIS FINANCIALLY. 



After reviewing the figures foregoing, and rendering 
thanks to God for the privilege enjoyed in the 
service by so many of us— including all who have 
shared in any degree in this wide circulation of the 
good tidings— we naturally ask, What has all this cost, 
in money, additional to the free labor bestowed by so 
many? You will be surprised that it could be done for 
so modest a sum. You would be astounded if you 
could compare these figures and results with those of 
other Tract Societies. 

Receipts. 

From Good Hopes and all other sources $28,284.80 

Expenditures. 

For Pilgrim expenses $ 4,621.08 

" Publishing matter, 

circulated free 13,983.51 

" Expense, Insurance, etc., 

acct 5,742.10 

$24,346.69 



Surplus $3,938.11 



We request that all who in any manner have 
co-labored with us to the attainment of these results 
—either by contributing money or by circulating the 
literature, or both— will, after reading and digesting 
this Report, join with us in a prayer of thanksgiving 
to our Lord, the giver of every good, for the privileges 
enjoyed in his service. 

REPORT OF BRITISH BRANCH. 



We give Bro. Hemery's very interesting and satisfactory 
report below, merely remarking that its 
items are all included in the foregoing. 

LONDON, NOV. 14, 1902. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have much pleasure in sending you the enclosed 
report of the British Branch operations, and I am sure 
it will give pleasure to you also. From a perusal of 
the statement of Tracts circulated you will find that 
there is quite an increase on the figures of last year; 
and the same will be noticed from the figures relating 
to the DAWNS, nearly 2,000 more of these having been 
sold than were sold last year. I am sure you will be 
glad to note this increased activity on the part of the 
brethren here. The circulation of the DAWNS has increased 
despite the fact that the Colporteurs are less in 
number than last year. Much has been done through 
the year by those who have been able to devote only 
a little time to the work; sometimes this has meant 
that part of a holiday has been given to it; sometimes 
that the home work or home life has been arranged 
that time might be obtained. Much still remains to 

R3122: page 378 

be done, and the time is short. Many of the large 
towns of England are practically untouched, either 
with Volunteer literature or DAWNS. We continually 
pray the Lord of the Harvest that he will send more 
labourers into the vineyard. 

The Volunteer work, and the general distribution 
of tracts, has been eagerly pushed forward by the 
brethren, and, for their encouragement, we would say 
that the work is having an effect in gathering the 
Lord's "Jewels." You will see, too, that the donations 
to the Tract Fund show a considerable increase on the 
previous year, nearly L100 more being received than 
last year. I have already reported concerning some 
of these donations. 

Besides the above increases, there is, as you will 
have noticed, a marked increase in the number of 
TOWER subscribers. As may be expected all this increase 
has not come from the immediate neighborhood 



of meeting places; the Truth is asserting itself here 

R3122: page 379 

and there, gathering to it those whose hearts are so 
disposed. In Ireland, too, much literature has been 
scattered, chiefly in Dublin and Belfast. In the latter 
place a considerable amount of Colporteur work has 
been done. Our hearts are glad because of all the 
favor of God, and because the knowledge of him is 
increasing. For all the goodness that has been shown 
we are deeply thankful. 

The Pilgrim visit of Bro. Hope Hay was very 
much enjoyed by all the friends. I am sure I speak 
for all when I say we should much appreciate a sight 
of yourself amongst us. We remember your promise 
to come on the first opportunity. 

If I may add a personal word, I would say how 
much I appreciate the privilege of working with, and 
in any way serving, the Lord's people. 

The opportunities for service in this country are 
very many: the "harvest" is indeed "great," and 
the labourers are few. We hope for great things. In 
the meantime "we thank God, and take courage." 

I am, dear brother, 

Yours in the Lord, J. HEMERY. 

Tract Fund receipts and expenditures of the 
British Branch of the Society from Nov. 1, 1901, to 
Nov. 1, 1902:- 

Expenditures. L s d 

Deficit from last year 537 4 11 

Paper, printing, postage, etc., on matter 

circulated free 222 14 6 

"Pilgrim" expenses 50 15 

Total 810 14 5 

Receipts from Great Britain 268 15 9 

Deficit 541 18 8 

Letters received 3,448 

" sent out 4,329 

Total DAWNS sold 17,668 

" Booklets sold 2,516 

Tracts and Towers circulated free 670,200 

Representing tract pages 23,131,440 



R3122: page 379 



REJOICING IN TRIBULATION. 

--ACTS 16:22-34-JANUARY4.- 

"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved." 

THE International Lessons change with the New 

Year from the Old Testament to the New, taking 

up the theme where we left it six months 

ago. That series of lessons noted (1) Christ as the 

central figure of Christianity; (2) the Holy Spirit as 

the motive power of Christianity; (3) the gradual development 

of the Church from its birth at Pentecost; 

(4) missionary work by Paul and Barnabas; (5) 

Paul's second missionary tour, with Silas and others 

as his companions, and by them the first entrance of the 

Gospel into Europe. We now take up the subject at 

this point. The first city in Macedonia— the first city, 

therefore, in Europe— to hear the Gospel message, was 

Philippi. One of the Apostle Paul's epistles, addressed 

to the church there established, is known to us as the 

"Epistle to the Philippians." 

At Philippi the Apostle and his companions, in 
seeking for those who reverenced the Lord, and hence 
most likely to have hearing ears for the Gospel, found 
a little group who met by the riverside for worship. 
Lydia, one of the number, became prominent for her 
thorough acceptance of the Gospel message, and her 
zeal in entertaining the Apostle and his company, and 
in forwarding, as best she could, the interests of the 
cause. The meetings were held outside the city, doubtless, 
on a similar pretext to that which, until recent 
years, excluded the worship of Protestants in the city 
of Rome, compelling them to go outside the city if 
they would hold any gatherings for worship. Philippi 
had its approved religious system, and would grant 
liberty for meetings to no other. 

It was while the apostles were day by day passing 
from Lydia's home to the place of worship outside the 
city gate that they were met repeatedly by a young 
woman known in that city as a Pythoness, or Sybil (a 
sooth-sayer or truth-teller or fortune-teller; a foreteller 
of future events, or prophetess). She was evidently 
well known to all the people, and the exercise of her 
profession brought large income to a joint-stock company 
which owned her as its slave. As the evangelists 
passed daily she called out after them, "These men 
are the servants of the most high God, which show unto 
us the way of salvation." These words, though true 
enough, coming from such a source, and possibly in a 
jesting voice, might be understood by those who heard 
them to be sarcasm, ridicule, and, therefore, a hindrance 
to the Lord's work; or even if uttered in serious 
tones their coming from such an unsanctified quarter 
would probably preclude their having any favorable influence 
with those of such cast of mind and heart as might 



otherwise have a hearing ear for the Gospel of Christ. 
This continued many days, the Apostle gradually becoming 
more and more grieved by it— probably because 
it was hindering his mission, and perhaps, also, because 
he was grieved to see a fellow-creature thus made a 
tool of by the fallen angels, the wicked spirits which 
controlled her. Similarly our Lord refused to recognize 
the testimony of the evil spirit who acknowledged 
him, saying, "I know thee who thou art, the Holy 
One of God," and had compassion upon the one who 
had the evil spirit, and delivered him.— Mark 1:24; 
Luke 4:34. 

Present-day higher critics and lower critics are disposed 
to dispute that there are evil spirits, and that 
human beings ever are or ever were possessed by demons. 
Such incline to suppose that either deception or 
insanity was mistaken by the Lord and the apostles in 
these cases of obsession. However, to those who have 
learned to respect the Word of God there is no room for 
questioning the accounts. Our Lord commanded evil 
spirits to come out of possessed ones, and they obeyed 
him; and in this case the Apostle Paul invoked the 
same divine power for the healing of this young woman 
—for her deliverance from the evil spirit being which 

R3122: page 380 

had obtained possession of her and made her its slave, 
speaking through her, and otherwise using her mouth, 
ears, etc., as channels of communication. These fallen 
angels adapt themselves to the varying conditions of 
humanity in all parts of the world, and in connection 
with all the various systems of religion, all of which we 
may properly accredit, more or less directly, to the 
great Adversary of the truth, who worketh by and 
through those who will submit themselves.* 

As this young woman was a money-winner for the 
people who owned her, we can imagine what consternation 
was aroused amongst them when they found that 
not only was their source of gain for the future gone, 
but also that the large amount of money invested in 
this slave was lost (for such spirit-possessed ones had a 
high market value): they became desperately angry. 
Nothing will so greatly move men as love or selfishness; 
and under present conditions selfishness moves the vast 
majority, and with intense power. They had no hope 
of getting the evil spirit back into the woman; they 
must have revenge upon those who had financially 
ruined them. There is much of this spirit abroad in 
the world today: so long as the truth and the Lord's 
servants quietly go their way the world will generally 
be too busy with its affairs to molest them; but so soon 
as they perceive that truth and righteousness are inimical 
to their earthly interests and prospects their opposition 
becomes intense. Nor should we consider it to be 
the chief business of the Lord's people to stir up the animosity 



of the world and to bring persecution upon 
themselves. As a rule it is best that we leave the 
world to watch its own affairs, while we preach the 
Gospel, not using it as a sledge-hammer, to break men's 
hearts, but as the message of peace and love and blessing 
and joy to those whose hearts under divine providence 
have been already broken; and who have ears 
to hear the message of the grace of God. Very generally 
the apostles pursued as smooth a course as principle 
would permit, and in this instance very evidently 
Paul acted under special guidance of the Lord. The 
Apostle's general instruction is, "So far as lieth in you, 
live peaceably with all men"— do not go out of your 
way to stir up trouble, but if the Lord in his providence 
allows it to arise, be courageous and full of faith in him 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism? Proofs That 
It Is Demonism. 

R3123 : page 380 

who has permitted it, that he will overrule it for good. 

The owners of the Pythoness evidently had influence, 
and succeeded quickly in arousing a mob determined 
to have revenge against Paul and Silas. Of 
course they did not attempt this by telling the truth. 
They did not say, We were using a poor slave girl, possessed 
of an evil spirit, for our financial profit, and 
these men have restored her mind, her will— released 
her from mental enslavement to saneness of mind. 
No; like all who are engaged in a bad cause, they ignored 
the truth of the matter, and raised spurious 
charges— that the prisoners were teaching a religion 
contrary to the laws of Rome, and likely thus to raise 
sedition. We see that this was contrary to the truth, 
for the Lord's servants went, according to law, outside 
the city gates for their worship. However, under the 
circumstances the false charge, without proofs, was 
sufficient to bring down upon the Lord's representatives 
the severest penalties their judges could inflict: their 
clothing was torn from them, and the command was 
given that they should be beaten with rods and imprisoned. 
The customary sentence of the time was, "Go, 
victors! Tear off their garments! Scourge them!" 
This was one of the three times Paul was thus beaten. 
(2 Cor. 1 1:25.) He referred to it in his letter to the 
Thessalonians, declaring that he was "shamefully" 
treated at Philippi.— I Thess. 2:2. 

The prison was constructed with outer cells, which 
were more or less accessible to the light and air, and 
with an inner or central dungeon for the most vicious 
criminals. It was into the latter that Paul and Silas 
were thrust, and their feet made fast in the stocks, 
which often were so constructed as to separate the limbs 



widely and to make any movement very painful. It 
was under these unfavorable circumstances, with their 
backs bleeding and raw from the scourging, that reflecting 
upon the wonders of the divine plan, and their own 
association with that plan, these faithful brethren were 
so filled with the spirit of rejoicing that they gave vent 
to their feelings in hymn-prayers of thankfulness for 
their privilege of suffering in connection with the Lord's 
service, of enduring tribulation for righteousness' sake. 

How remarkable it must seem to the worldly, who 
have never tasted of the joys of the Lord, that these 
men could thus rejoice in tribulation— rejoice that they 
were counted worthy to suffer afflictions for the cause 
of Christ! How little the world knows of the peace of 
God which passeth all understanding, that rules in the 
hearts of the Lord's people who have grown in his grace 
and heart-likeness! How little can they appreciate 
the fact expressed by our Lord when he said, "Peace 
I leave with you; my peace I give unto you; not as 
the world giveth give I unto you. Let not your heart 
be troubled, neither let it be afraid." And again, 
through the Apostle, "We glory in tribulation, also; 
knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience 
experience; and experience hope; and hope 
maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed 
abroad in our hearts." (John 14:27; Rom. 5:3-5.) 
And as these faithful servants of the Lord could rejoice 
in whatever experiences God permitted to come to them 
in the discharge of duty, so may we remember that 
ours is the same God, that he changes not; that he is 
equally able and equally willing today to grant the sunshine 
of his favor to those who trust him and seek to 
walk in his ways. It is the reverse condition that the 
followers of Christ need to dread, need to fear, as expressed 
by the poet, 

"Oh, let no earthborn cloud arise 

To hide thee from thy servant's eyes!" 

In a general sense, the entire Gospel age is represented 
as being a night, in which sin and distress prevail, 
and, as the Prophet has declared, "Weeping may 
endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning"— 
when the Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing 
in his beams, to scatter all the miasm of sin and death! 
But even in this night-time the Lord's people do not 
need to sorrow as others, who have no hope. On the 
contrary, to his people, "He giveth songs in the night." 
(Job 35:10.) While they are watching, hoping, praying, 
for the glorious morning of deliverance, their trust 
in the Lord is as an anchor to their souls within the 
vail. How could such children of the great King go 
mourning all their days? Surely especially now, as 

R3123 : page 381 

the Millennial morning is dawning, we can say, "He 
hath put a new song into our mouths, even the loving 



kindness of our God!" He has given his people the 
blessed privilege of singing the new song of Moses and 
the Lamb, that others cannot sing— at least not yet. 
These who sing and make melody in their hearts unto 
the Lord will surely also show forth the praises of him 
who hath called them out of darkness into his marvelous 
light— theirs will be the psalm of life, manifesting 
in looks and words and tones and sentiments the love 
of God received into good and honest hearts. 

Since as Christians we have learned that it is our 
privilege to be always rejoicing— to rejoice evermore 
and in everything give thanks— we need not, like the 
world, wait for special manifestations of divine favor 
to call forth our praise, our homage of heart and our 
grateful obedience to the Lord. Rather, learning that 
divine providence is in all of our affairs, ready to shape 
them for our good, we may rejoice "whatever lot we 
see, since 'tis God's hand that leadeth us." Some one 
has well said:— 

"If we are not ready to praise God where we are, 
and with our conditions and circumstances as they are, 
we should not be likely to praise him if we were differently 
circumstanced and our conditions just that which 
now seems to us most desirable. Daniel could sleep 
better in the den of lions than Darius in the royal palace; 
he who could not find rest in a lion's den, when 
that was the place for him, could not gain rest by a mere 
removal to a palace. It is the man's self which must be 
changed, not his circumstances or his possessions, in order 
to his having a heart overflowing with joy and praise." 

When, in 1695, Madame Guyon was imprisoned 
in the Castle of Vincennes, she sang praises to the Lord, 
composing one of her own hymns, as follows: 

"A little bird I am, 

Shut from the fields and air; 
And in my songs I sit and sing 

To him who placed me there: 
Well pleased a prisoner thus to be, 

Because, my God, it pleaseth thee. 

"My cage confines me round, 

Abroad I cannot fly; 
But though my wing is closely bound, 

My heart's at liberty; 
My prison walls can not control 

The flight, the freedom, of the soul." 

The shaking of the prison, the loosing of the chains, 
the opening of the doors, the waking of the jailer, his 
dismay and intended suicide, fearing the ignominy 
which would attach to him from the escape of the prisoners, 
Paul's call to him to do himself no harm, assuring 
him that the prisoners were all safe, constitute together 
a thrilling episode, more remarkable to the jailer 
than to anyone else. Doubtless he had heard something 



respecting these men, so different from the ordinary 

criminals with which he had to do. Doubtless, he 

had been impressed with their unresisting attitude; 

their Christlike demeanor even under severe provocation; 

their moderate submission even to their severe 

treatment at his hands. In any event he seems to 

have felt a heart-hunger for fellowship with his Creator 

such as these discredited men under his care enjoyed. 

Quite probably he had already been reading the Gospel 

of Christ in the features and conduct of his prisoners, 

whose living epistles were always open to be known 

and read by those about them. Had there not been 

some such preliminary instruction of his heart, we can 

scarcely suppose that he would so quickly have resolved 

to walk in the footsteps of the prisoners— that their 

God should be his God, and their salvation which was 

able to make them joyful in tribulation, should, if possible, 

be his salvation. And this was his inquiry: 

"What must I do to be saved?"— saved from sin, 

saved from its penalty,— death, saved from its degrading 

influence, saved from its unrest of heart and mind, 

saved to the same peace and joy and comfort and consolation 

which his prisoners exemplified. 

We are not surprised at the reply given by the 
Lord's servants; we are not surprised that they did 
not say, Go to the confessional, get the priest to sprinkle 
holy water upon you, pay him to say masses for 
your sins, and join the Catholic Church. Neither are 
we surprised that the message was not that he must 
feel his guilt a long while, and pray to the Lord a good 
while, and seek forgiveness at a mourner's bench night 
after night, and join a Methodist or Presbyterian or 
other human system. How evident it is that these 
servants of the true Gospel and builders of the true 
Church were not Catholics, nor Presbyterians, nor 
Methodists; and that they neither founded these sects 
nor taught along their lines; and that they would no 
more affiliate with or encourage their methods today 
than they would then have done. 

The answer to the jailer is one which commends 
itself to the Christian mind as being the proper one- 
no more, no less: he should believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ as his Redeemer, as the one who had died on his 
behalf, through whose stripes he might be healed, 
saved and through whose sacrifice he might rejoice in 
at-one-ment with God; and having thus believed with 
all his heart, whether it required a moment or an hour 
to explain and to understand these simple first principles 
of the Gospel, his next step was to consecrate himself, 
to be baptized into death with his Redeemer, and 
to symbolize this consecration into death by a baptism 
in water. And he was encouraged to hope, not only 
for his personal salvation, but that his family might 
be sharers with him. We may reasonably suppose 
that this conversation about his salvation progressed 
while he was ministering to the evangelists— washing 



R3124: page 381 

their wounds, seeking to make them comfortable and 
providing them food. We may also reasonably suppose 
that with many more words than are here presented 
the Apostle set before the jailer and his assembled 
family the simple story of the love of God manifested 
in the gift of his Son; and of the love of Christ manifested 
in his sacrifice on our behalf; and the evidence 
of the acceptableness of that sacrifice, as testified to by 
our Lord's resurrection and by his sending of the holy 
spirit upon the infant Church; and the subsequent 
message now going forth to whomsoever had an ear to 
hear, that there is salvation in him and in no other. 

There is a lesson here for us in regard to the promulgation 
of God's message. We are not to use words 
of man's wisdom; not to attempt to philosophize and 
to show our learning; nor are we to say, Now, do not 
be in too much haste; there is plenty of time, and 
after we are comfortably fixed we will have all day tomorrow 
to talk this matter over. We are to remember 
the declaration of the wise man, "A word in season, 
how good it is!" We are to remember, when talking 

R3124: page 382 

with those who have an ear to hear and are inquiring 

the way to the Lord, that there are great crises in the 

lives of men, momentous occasions, in which one word 

may be more valuable, more potent, than would be a 

hundred words or a thousand words at another time, 

under different circumstances; and we are to be instant 

in the Lord's service, whether seasonable or unseasonable 

to ourselves,— gladly ready to lay down our lives 

for the brethren. The disposition of Paul and Silas to 

preach Christ to the jailer regardless of their own convenience 

and comfort and need of rest was in perfect 

accord with the joy of the Lord which filled their hearts 

and led them to sing. Dissatisfied Christians, disposed 

to grumble, would be inclined neither to sing praises 

under such circumstances, nor to preach the Gospel to 

a poor inquiring fellow on so out-of-season an occasion. 

We are to distinguish, however, between out-of-season 

to ourselves and out-of-season to others; and to be willing 

to serve others at any time, however out-of-season 

to ourselves, if it be in season and opportune for them. 

We are not to intrude even the Gospel itself at inopportune 

times, however convenient the occasion may be 

to ourselves. 

Let us learn from this brief statement of the Gospel 
discourse by the Apostle the wisdom of simplicity 
and directness. The Apostle might have preached a 
great deal about the Jewish Law, and about the Jewish 
failure to keep the Law. He might have discussed the 
various philosophies of the false religions; and all of 



these might be proper at the right time, but now was 
not the time suited for these, and hence he confined 
his remarks particularly to the general statement that 
Christ was the Messiah, that he had redeemed the 
world, that he must be laid hold on by faith, and that 
to all who thus took hold on him he became the power 
of God and the wisdom of God. 

The next morning the rulers, learning something 
of the circumstances of the night, ordered the release 
of Paul and Silas; but the Apostle sought to forward 
the interests of the cause he served by returning word 
that he was a Roman citizen, and that Roman law 
had been violated in three particulars in his case: 
(1) That they had "beaten" him; (2) that this had 
been done "publicly;" (3) that it was specially 
reprehensible in that he had not been legally 
"condemned." 

These charges against the rulers might have gone hard 
with them; hence, it is not to be wondered at that they 
came to the prison, as the Apostle requested, and brought 
their prisoners forth publicly, thus giving evidence to 
the people that they conceded that an injustice had 
been done them on the previous night. It was agreed 
that the Lord's representatives should leave the place, 
and evidently this was as wise a thing as could have 
been done, at the time, for the publicity given to the 
Apostles and their teaching would now have opportunity 
to work, and the new disciples might have a 
better chance for presenting the truth quietly, in the absence 
of their leaders, against whom strong enmity had 
been aroused on account of the healing of the woman. 
From here the servants of the Lord went to Thessalonica, 
and undaunted by their experiences (indeed, rejoicing 
in them) they boldly spoke the word of grace to 
such as would hear them there. 

"Many men of many minds," writes the poet; 
hence it is not surprising that some with too little reverence 
and too much self-consciousness are disposed to 
criticize the Apostle's course in claiming Roman citizenship 
here and on another occasion. We should 
approach such criticism from the standpoint of reverence, 
recognizing the apostles as specially chosen 
and specially inspired of the Lord and specially guided 
of him and fit to be our exemplars in all matters (Matt. 18:18) 
unless (as in Gal. 2:1 1) the criticism of their 
conduct or words is found in the Scriptures themselves. 
Unquestionably it was proper for the Apostle to appeal 
to his Roman citizenship as a means to secure justice, 
not injustice. 

Similarly we may properly appeal to every item of 
the human laws under which we may be living that 
would protect us in our just rights; but we may not go 
beyond this and denounce the laws or violate them. 
Our Lord's admonition was in line with such submission 
to the ordinances or laws of men, in respect to our 
earthly affairs; and he explains,— If any man sue thee 



at the law and take away thy coat resist not, but even 

let him take thy cloak also. If, however, any man attempts 

to rob us of our coat without due process of law 

we are not bound to yield except it seem to be the better 

policy. In all civilized lands we would have the 

right to call on the law to protect us from violence. 

Such a course would not mean an acknowledgment 
that we are citizens of this world and renouncers of our 
heavenly citizenship— even as the Apostle's course did 
not mean this. It would mean merely that as strangers 
and pilgrims, we are required to pay taxes for the 
support of law and order, and that worldly people recognize 
our rights to certain protection in the laws which 
they framed. 

Similarly the Apostle at times referred to himself 
as a Jew— not as denying his Christianity, but as one 
now might say,— I am a German, or an American, thus 
to appeal not to a religious prejudice, but to a national 
sympathy, which, if men's hearts were right, would 
not need to be appealed to, because it would be quite 
sufficient to say,— I am a fellow man. The Apostle 
on one occasion, perceiving that his enemies were 
chiefly Pharisees, cried out, "I am a Pharisee, the son 
of a Pharisee! For the hope of the resurrection I am 
called in question!" To imagine a similar case now, 
suppose that Christians were practically of two parties, 
one professing faith in the resurrection of the dead, and 
the other denying a resurrection and future life; suppose 
the latter were called "Evolutionists," and the 
former "the Faithful," and that some of us were misunderstood 
and caught by a mob, and that we perceived 
that a goodly number of our assailants were of "the 
Faithfuls," and that we were to cry out, "I am one of 
the Faithful' and the son of a 'Faithful!' It is because 
I believe in the resurrection of the dead that I 
am now being molested!" Surely there would be 
nothing amiss in such a position. And this was exactly 
Paul's case;— the name Pharisee stood for faith in 
God and in a future life by a resurrection and for obedience 
to the Law and, in general, full loyalty to God. 
The word Pharisee signifies— wholly separated to God; 
and only that the word has since come to be proverbial 
for hypocrite any of the Lord's people could still say, 
I am a Pharisee— I am one of those wholly separated 
to God. 



R3124: page 383 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS IN 1903. 

THE following information is very important in 
connection with arrangements for "Pilgrim" 
services. There is no charge for these services, 
nor for the traveling expenses; nor are collections 



ever to be taken up. We expect that all friends of 
the truth will be glad to entertain the "Pilgrims" 
during their brief stays, with "such things as ye 
have;" but where circumstances do not permit this, 
the "Pilgrims" are prepared to pay their way. If you 
desire to be remembered by us when we lay out the 
routes for these "Pilgrims," please answer the following 
questions— on a postal card or on separate paper 
from your letter. You need not repeat the questions, 
but merely number the answers, thus: No. 1— Yes 
(or No). No. 2— Twice a week— Sunday and Wednesday 
(or whatever may be the truth). No. 3— 
Sunday at 3 p.m. at Bible House, 610 Arch Street; 
Wednesday 8 p.m., same place (or whatever may be 
the facts of your case). And thus with each question. 

Such as neglect answering these questions, or so 
many of them as they can answer, must not be surprised 
if no meetings are arranged for them, or at most 
for one day. The information aids us greatly in 
arranging the "Pilgrim" routes. 

ANSWER AS MANY AS POSSIBLE OF THESE QUERIES: 

(1) Are regular meetings now held in your vicinity? 

(2) How frequently? 

(3) Give addresses of meeting places and hours. 

(4) What is the present average attendance? 

(5) At what date are leaders or elders chosen? 

(6) Give full name and address of regularly elected 
elders,— that arrangements for Pilgrim visits 

may be committed to them. 

(7) Is request for a Pilgrim visit the publicly expressed 
wish of those who usually attend meetings? 

(8) To whom should the Pilgrim be referred for 
entertainment? 

(9) Will suitable places be secured for parlor meetings? 

(10) Can suitable room for a public meeting be secured? 

(1 1) If no regularly chosen elders, give at least one 
address in full, besides your own. 

(12) Give your own name and address in full (state if 
colored) and any other information likely to be 
useful. 

(13) If not on the railroad give name of proper station 
and your distance from it, and the direction. 

State also if a conveyance would meet the Pilgrim 
at station and return him to it. 



R3126 : page 383 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION ANSWERED. 
THE EXTENT OF JUDAS' KNOWLEDGE. 



Question.— The Psalms, quoted from in the New 
Testament, seem to show clearly that destruction is 
Judas' end,— but can we decide that the scribes and 
Pharisees of our Lord's time came under the two Scriptures 
that specially bear on the case, I Tim. 2:3-6, with 
the will of God that all should come to an "Epignosin" 
of the truth, and Heb. 6:4-6 that the ones it is impossible 
to renew, are those who have once been enlightened, 
tasted the heavenly gift— become partakers of 
holy spirit— tasted the good word of God, and powers 
of the coming age? Did they reach those conditions? 
I think not. 

Answer.— All will agree that no matter how positive 
a word may be used respecting the bringing of 
mankind to knowledge before judgment, general knowledge 
is not meant. To assume that general knowledge 
of the sciences, or even of the science of religion is 
necessary to a trial for eternal life, would be to assume 
that God had not given to father Adam a full, proper 
or just trial for eternal life;— and from such a proposition 
we would all dissent, for we know that he was 
justly tried and justly condemned. His knowledge will 
help us to understand what degree or kind of knowledge 
his children must have, before they can come under 
the responsibility of the second trial secured by the 
ransom for all. Father Adam's knowledge consisted 
in a discernment of the right and the wrong of the 
question before him— and no more knowledge than this 
was necessary. It was immaterial whether he thought 
of God as Trinity or Unity; whether he believed in 
heaven and hell, etc., or not; whether he knew about 
the sun, moon and stars, and the laws governing their 
motions, or not. He knew what was necessary for him 
to know; namely, (1) that God had a right to command 
his obedience, and (2) that God had commanded 
him not to eat of that fruit, and had attached thereto 
some penalty. It did not matter whether he knew 
exactly all that the penalty implied or not. He knew 
that to eat would be transgression— sin. 

So, we take it, is the responsibility of all mankind, 
as soon as they come mentally in contact with "the 
light of the world." We cannot conceive how Judas 
could be ignorant of the wrong which he committed, 
after his three years of experience with the Master, and 
in the use of the power of the holy spirit communicated 
to him. It seems to us unnecessary that he should 
know either about the planetary movements, or about 
all the particulars of the divine plan: he knew of the 
holy and pure character of our Redeemer; and of his 
self-sacrificing service of Jehovah and the people; and 
it seems to us he must have known beyond question 
that his conduct was treason to God and to righteousness; 
and to every principle of goodness reprobate. 
We reason that if Adam's knowledge and transgression 
were justly punished with death, Judas' knowledge and 



sin could bring nothing short of the Second Death. 
However, we leave the matter; any who see it differently 
are entitled to hold their opinions. 

Respecting the scribes and Pharisees: Their conduct 
seems indeed flagrant; we would find it impossible 
to imagine that they felt within themselves that they 
were doing the right thing in crucifying the spotless 
Lamb of God. Nevertheless, our Lord did not say of 
them that it had been better for them not to have been 
born; he merely said, "How can ye escape the condemnation 
of Gehenna?"— the Second Death. This 
leaves us abundant room to suppose that they may yet 
have opportunity to escape that condemnation; but it 
also suggests to us the probability that some of them 
will not escape the Second Death— that some of them 
had so perverted and seared their consciences with pride 
and wilfulness and love of evil that even the blessings 
of the Millennial Age would fail to dissolve the callousness 
of their hearts. 



BIBLES, TESTAMENTS, STUDENTS' HELPS, Etc. 
SUPPLIES AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES. 



Our Society does not supply Bibles free, but it justifies the 
Bible feature of its name by supplying Bibles, Testaments and 
Bible Study Helps at wholesale rates. Additionally we give our 
readers the benefit of our experience and judgment respecting 
which Bibles are the best value at the wholesale rate. When 
ordering large-size Bibles always name your express office and company, 
as well as post office. Letters containing money or stamps 
accompanying order should always be registered. 



BAGSTER TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

CONTAINING ALL THE IMPROVEMENTS-LARGE TYPE (LONG PRIMER). 
-SIZE, 5-5/8 X 8-5/8 INCHES. 

No. 8701 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold $1.15 

No. 8709 Egyptian Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold, 

Leather Lined 1.65 

No. 8721 Norse Morocco, Silk Sewed, ditto 2.75 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired .25 

THE CHEAPEST TEACHERS' BIBLE IN THE WORLD. 

MINION TYPE EDITION. 

No. 8301 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold 75 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired, .25 



HOLM AN TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

PICTORIAL EDITION. 

COMBINES ALL THE "HELPS" FEATURES, 

ALSO EIGHTY SPLENDID FULL-PAGE PHOTO-VIEWS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

BOURGEOIS TYPE-5-1/4 x 7-3/4 INCHES. 

No. 4810 French Seal, Red under Gold $1.35 

No. 8816 ditto, ditto, Linen Lined 1.85 

No. 8838 Alaska Seal, Calfskin Lined to Edge, Silk Sewed, 

Red under Gold Edges, Divinity Circuit 2.45 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired .25 



COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

No. N.A. French Seal, Divinity Circuit $1.10 

No. N.B. do do Linen Lined 1.25 

No. N.C. do do Leather Lined 1.55 

All Red under Gold Edges. 

Postage, 25c each extra; Thumb Index, if desired .25 



VARIORUM TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

We can supply any of these at publishers' list prices less 
25 per cent, discount. 



OXFORD INDIA-PAPER BIBLES. 

The merits of these wonderful productions of the bookmaker's 
skilful art are so well known as to render detailed 
comment unnecessary. By special arrangement we can save 
our friends one-third of the list price on these Bibles, and have 
selected the styles which in our opinion, are most desirable. 
All but No. 01 157x contain References, and are Silk Sewed. 
No. 03554 is Self-Pronouncing. All are bound with Divinity 
Circuit, are Leather Lined, have Red under Gold Edges and 
Round Corners. The type increases in size as follows: Pearl, 
Ruby, Emerald, Minion, Bourgeois and Long Primer. Nos. 
03464x and 0358 lx contain Concordance and Maps, and Nos. 
0863x and 0865-l/2x contain full Teachers' Helps. Thumb Index 
on any of these, 25c extra. 

No. 03009x Pearl Type, Persian Levant, postpaid $2.25 

No. 01157x Ruby Type, French Morocco, postpaid 1.45 

No. 03114x do Persian Levant, Postpaid 2.50 

No. 03229x do do postpaid 2.65 



No. 03265x Emerald Type, Levant Morocco, postpaid 3.25 

No. 03464x Minion Type, Persian Levant, postpaid 3.80 

No. 03554x Bourgeois Type, Alaska Seal, postpaid 4.20 

No. 03581x Long Primer Type, Persian Levant, postpaid 4.67 

No. 0863x do do Alaska Seal, postpaid 5.21 

No. 0865-1/2 do do Levant, postpaid 6.55 



THE LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLE. 

Hitherto this Bible has been sold by "Subscription Agents" 
only. Its special feature, differentiating it from other "Teachers' 
Bibles," is that it shows the readings of the Common and 
Revised Versions side by side in the same line. 

(Those requesting it will be supplied a publishers' price 
list, showing the special feature.) 

No. 350 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold, 
Edges, list price $6, our price $2.10 

No. 355 French Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Red Leather 
Lined, list price $8, our price 3.15 

No. 360 Levant Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Red Kid Lined, 

list price $10, our price 4.20 

Thumb Index, if desired, 25c extra; Postage 25 

Other Desirable Bibles, New Testaments, Etc. 



The Students' Hand Bible. 

No. 04403 Minion type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Selected Helps, including Concordance $ .75 

Post extra 20 

Oxford Self-pronouncing Teachers' Bible. 

No. 0823 Bourgeois type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit 

Round corners, Red under Gold Edge 1.25 

Postage 25 

This is a wonderful book for the price, and its 
self-pronouncing feature is on a new plan 
preferred by some. 

Lap Bibles for the Aged.— No References. 

These contain Family Registers. 

No. 01600 Small Pica Type, Cloth, Red Edges $1.00 

Post extra 25 

No. 01603 Small Pica Type, French Seal, Limp 1.35 

Post extra 25 

No. 01605 Small Pica Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit 1.95 

Post extra, 25 

Ditto New Testaments for Aged. 



No. 212 Small Pica Type, Roan Square Corners 35 

Post extra 12 

No. 283 Same as No. 212 with Psalms added 45 

Post extra, 15 

Pocket Bible with References. 

No. 03008 Pearl Type, Fr. Seal, Divinity Circuit 60 

Post extra, 07 

Pocket Bibles Without References. 

No. 01 103 Diamond Type, India Paper, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges $1.00 .03 

No. 178 Pearl Type, Cloth, Red Edges 18 .07 

No. 010 Pearl Type, French Seal, Red under Gold 55 .05 

No. 013 Pearl Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges 55 .05 

No. 038 Pearl Type, Padded, Red under Gold 55 .05 

No. 035 Pearl Type, Padded and Clasp, Red under 

Gold Edges 60 .05 

No. 1150 Ruby Type, French Seal, Red under Gold 45 .07 

No. 01 153 Ruby Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges 60 .07 

No. 01327 Minion Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit 

Red under Gold Edges 75 .12 

No. 01329 Minion Type, French Seal, Divinity Circuit, 

Leather lined 1.10 .12 

No. 215 Nonpareil Type, French Morocco, Divinity Circuit, 

Red under Gold Edges 80 .12 

No. 602 Thin Vest Pocket Bible, Persian Morocco, 

Limp, Round Corners, Red under Gold 

Edges 1.50 

No. 2002 Ditto— Divinity Circuit, Leather Lined, 

Silk Sewed, References 1.85 

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE. 

OTHER DESIRABLE BIBLES, TESTAMENTS, ETC. 

Child's Bibles, Profusely Illustrated. 

No. 252 Ruby Type, Fr. Seal, Limp $ .80 post extra, .10 

No. 145 Ruby Type, Fr. Divinity Circ 1.00 post extra, .10 

Pocket New Testaments. 

No. 801 Ruby Type, Limp Cloth 05 post extra, .02 

No. 030 Ruby Type, French Seal 17 post extra, .02 

No. 033 Ruby Type, Fr. Seal, Div. Circuit 25 post extra, .02 

No. 0130 Same as No. 030 with Psalms added 25 post extra, .03 

No. 0133 Same as No. 033 with Psalms added 35 post extra, .03 

No. 287 Brevier Type, Roan, Gilt Edge, 

Psalms 35 post extra, .05 

No. 010 Diamond Type (very small), Limp 



Morocco, Red under Gold Edges 35 post extra, .01 

No. 014 Diamond Type (very small), Fr'ch 
Morocco, Divinity Circuit, 
Leather Lined, etc 80 post extra, .01 

Self -pronouncing Family Bibles. 

At one-half list prices. Publishers' catalogue sent on 
application. 

"Bible Talks in Simple Language." 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and 
seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common in 
this class of books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday 
Bible lesson with their children, and this book furnishes 
interesting topics, to which may be added as much concordant 
"present truth" as the age of the children will justify. Parents 
are responsible for their children's training in theology as well 
as morals. This will assist you in the discharge of this duty, 
and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special 
price 75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

"Daily Food." 

Two texts and a verse for every day in the year. Have one 
on your breakfast table with the natural food. Appoint one of 
the family reader, and call for questions and comments. Feed 
the soul as well as the body. Small, neat, cloth bound, gilt 
edges. 15 cents, 2 for 25 cents, including postage. 



Concordances and Other Bible Study Helps. 



First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this 

journal for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following 

publications by other presses, which we supply at specially 

low prices because of the assistance they will lend to the study 

of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the order in 

which they seem to us to be desirable aids,— putting the concordances 

last, though they are not by any means least 

important. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 



by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, until now (A.D. 

1902), has been sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half 

leather binding. For several years a friend, an earnest Bible 

student, desirous of assisting the readers of our Society's publications, 

has supplied them through us at a greatly reduced 

price; now he has purchased the copyuright and plates from the 

Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a 

gift, under our assurance that the gift will be used for the furthering 

of the Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction 

of price as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have 

this help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. 
On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red 
under gold edges, silk sewed leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— 
includes postage and one year's subscription to Z.W.T. The 
morocco bound edition will not be ready for some time, but 
orders may be sent in now, for later delivery. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT. 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As 
footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from 
the Common Version. This is a very valuable little work, published 
in Europe, which we specially import for the benefit of 
our readers. Price 40c, including postage. 

THE NEW ROTHERHAM TRANSLATION OF THE NEW 
TESTAMENT. 

Mr. Rotherham's previous translation was good, but so far 
as we are able to judge, from a hasty examination, this one is 
better. Our price, in cloth binding, postage included, is $1.50. 

THE SYRIAC-PESHITO NEW TESTAMENT -MURDOCH'S. 

This, too, is a valuable work, and an aid in critical study. 
It is translated from the Syriac instead of from the Greek. It is 
claimed by some that it was the language in which our Lord 
and the apostles spoke and wrote, and that the Greek was 
translated from this. Our price, in half leather binding, postage 
included, $1.50. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a 
valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special 
price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

REVISED VERSION TESTAMENTS. 

In cloth binding, pocket size, postage included 20 



REVISED VERSION BIBLES. 

No. 040 Pearl Type, Cloth binding 45, postage extra, .10 

No. 060 Minion Type, do 75, postage extra, .20 

AMERICAN COMMITTEE'S REVISED (OXFORD) BIBLE. 

No. 03570 Bourgeois, Cloth, References $1.00, postage, .25 

No. 03752 Ditto, in Morocco, Div. Circuit 1.90, postage, .25 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE. 

No. 260 Long Primer, Cloth, References 1.35, postage, .30 

No. 275 Long Primer, Fr. Seal, References 2.50, postage, .30 

No. 160 Bourgeois, Cloth, References 90, postage, .20 

No. 172 Bourgeois, Fr. Seal, References 1.75, postage, .20 

PROF. YOUNG'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD AND NEW 
TESTAMENT. 

Many regard this as a valuable aid; but we do not specially 
recommend it as such, as some of its peculiarities are liable to 
mislead those who have no conception of the Hebrew idiom. 
In cloth binding, including postage, $4. This is the regular retail 
price, and the publishers do not permit us to make any reduction. 
We are at liberty, however, to prepay the postage 
free and to give as a premium two volumes of the DAWN series 
in cloth binding. 

THE ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in 
cloth binding, $5, including postage. We are not permitted by 
the publishers to cut this price; but may and do give postage 
free and give besides a premium of any three volumes of the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series in cloth binding with each 
Concordance. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

In English Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work, and useful in critical study, 
but scarcely so good for the average student, we think, as Prof. 
Young's work. Price, in cloth binding, $6; half leather, $8; 
full leather, $10. We will pay mail or express charges on these, 
and in addition give as a premium any three volumes of the 
DAWN series in cloth binding, with each Concordance. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have 
either one of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth 
binding, $1, postage included. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY. 



This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's 
work. It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, 
$1.30, including postage. 

--WHEN ORDERING ALWAYS NAME YOUR EXPRESS OFFICE 
AND COMPANY AS WELL AS POST OFFICE. - 

ADDRESS ORDERS WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY, BIBLE HOUSE, ALLEGHENY, PA. 

For Prices in Great Britain, Address us at 
131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 



YOUR "GOOD HOPES" 1903. 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 



during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 

to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 

the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 

judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 

me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 

the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 

upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 

than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 

well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 

of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Millennial Dawn in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 
-ON GOOD HOPES ACCOUNT. - 



The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the Watch Tower to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 



accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give 
us such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from 
their donations. Give full addresses, and write very plainly 
please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



For several years we have been supplying our readers 
with handsome text and motto cards for the walls of their 
homes. Their influence is excellent; for they continually 
and cheerfully catch the eye and remind the heart of our 
great favors present and to come, based upon the exceeding 
great and precious promises of our Father's Word. We 
commend these as helps in the "narrow way,"— helps in 
character-building . 

We aim to have a good supply of these very choice cards constantly 
on hand, and for particular description of some (not all) 
of the styles would refer you to our illustrated list, which will 
be sent on request. We still recommend the dollar packages 
as the most satisfactory way, all things considered, of acquiring 
these texts. They are sent carriage paid for $1.16, by prepaid 
express whenever feasible. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



These are published quarterly, copies being sent to all subscribers. 
Other copies, for distribution among friends, from 
house to house, for enclosure in letters, and in general for use 
in such ways as seem judicious, are supplied freely, the expense 
entailed by the great demand for them being borne by the 
Tract Fund of voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as 
you feel able to use them, even if not so well able to contribute 
toward the expense; some who are not able, and do contribute, 
do not have opportunities personally to use all that their 
contributions pay for, so that the matter is equalized, 
and all may have a part in this service of disseminating 
the truth. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE. 



We are convinced that the Watch Tower lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content that 
the name of any should be missing. We believe that all such 
will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow way" by 
its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding them 
afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh and the 



devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring the Watch Tower 
on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make personal 
application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in present truth, 
and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may necessitate. 
Any getting it on credit may at any future time request 
that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. We 
desire that as nearly as possible the Watch Tower lists shall 
represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
17,000; but it should be at least 25,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS. 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take this 
opportunity to remark that we will be glad to hear promptly 
from such as desire the visits of the Watch Tower continued. 
This applies to all who get it on the Lord's Poor list as well 
as to those who pay. When names are dropped and afterward 
renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. 


