VOU XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., APRIL 1, 1917 


No. 7 


"CONSIDER HIM" 

" Consider him who endured such contradiction of sinners, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. " — Hebrews 12:3. 

[On Wednesday evening, October 11th, 19X6, at the Brooklyn Tabernacle, after the Church Activities Committee had read the 
various reports of the work done during the paat quarter, Brother Russell gave a short address to the New York City Congregation, which 
proved to be his last words to the church in the midst of which he lived and labored. Those words were taken down at the time, and are 
here transcribed for the benefit of the friends, The topic and text were those of the Manna for the week, and were the same as those 
used on the same evening by classes of the I. B. S. A. the world over,] 
There is a natural tendency amongst people to tire of a Whom? We all know that he is referring to our Lord Jesus, 


thing when the novelty wears off. Even the hearing of the 
truth, strange as it may seem, causes weariness to some after 
a time,. It is the same way with the soldier. It is easy for 
him to enlist and march forward when the drums are beating 
and the bands are playing, and enthusiasm runs high; but 
when the damp, cold weather comes, when ice forms in the 
trenches and there is no martial music, he is liable to grow 
weary j and army life does not seem to be nearly so attractive 
as it appeared at the first. This is true in our spiritual 
warfare — in fighting the good fight of faith. There are times 
when all around seem joyous, when the Christian soldiers 
are marching, and all are stimulated and encouraged; whereas 
there are times when the clouds hang low and are dark, chilliness
 surrounds ua, ardor is abated, and we are liable to get 
discouraged. It is partly for this reason that the Lord has 
directed us to "consider him," that thereby we might be 
stimulated and encouraged to press on and to inspire others. 
He knew just what we would need. 

"LEST YE BE WEARIED AND FAINT IN YOUR HINDS" 

The Apostle Paul exhorts us not to forget the assembling 
of ourselves together, and so much the more as we see the 
day approaching. Why so? Because "the day" will have its 
peculiar trials, its difficulties, its attractions in various directions
; and the story of the Cross will likely seem old — not 
as new as some things; and consequently we shall need to 
bear each other up. Because there is danger of becoming 
luke warm spiritually, it is generally recommended that the 
Lord's people meet together; for to do so is stimulating. In 
proportion as we seek to stir up others in the way by putting 
them in remembrance, we are thereby reviving our own minds. 
We can, therefore, see a wisdom in all of God's arrangements 
with respect to the truth. 

I believe that in every congregation there is danger of 
growing weary in well-doing. Well-doing coats something. It 
means sacrificing. If you are serving the Lord's cause, you 
are denying yourself in some way. Unless we have some 
special love for the Lord and for the truth, we might say, 
"This is a very tedious work, I am pressed in many other 
directions, and there are those who are inviting me to see 
them." So many things come to you, and to us all, that we 
might consequently be retarded and slacken our efforts. The 
world, the flesh and the adversary are pressing hard to draw 
us, not exactly from the prize, but from the narrow way that 
leads to the prize. They would slacken our zeal and beat 
our courage down ; they would make us faint and cause us to 
say, "Oh, I am so tired; I cannot do any more!" Doubtless 
we all have had such experiences. If we get faint in body, 
we can rest ourselves; but if we get faint in mind, it is more 
difficult to become refreshed. 

WHAT SHALL WE CON SIDES ABOUT HIM? 

What, then, shall we do, in case we get weary and faint 
in our minds ? The Apostle tells us : "Consider him ! " 

(82-100) [6064] 


the one great "him" in all the whole world. What shall we 
consider about him? His birth ? Yes, that is profitable; but it 
is not what the Apostle here suggests. His glory and honor? 
Not that exactly ; but rather, how much he endubed without 
getting faint and weaby, without giving up the work which 
he undertook to do. He undertook 5) do a certain work, and 
so have we! In some respects we have undertaken to do the 
same work that Jesus did. Let us consider him, lest we get 
weary and faint in following on in his footsteps 1 

Of course, the world is not exhorted in this text, but merely 
those who have come into the Lord's family, and have taken 
up their cross to follow him — those who have consecrated 
themselves to him, those who have made a covenant with the 
Lord by sacrifice, declaring that they will give all to him 
and his service — that they will follow him at any cost. These 
are the ones who are exhorted to consider him. 

But what about him shall they consider? What he endured
 without fainting, in carrying out the Father's will. 
What he endured in the way of contradiction of sinners against 
himself. This is the very kind of difficulty which we have in 
our endeavor to carry out the Father's will. If there were 
no devil, no sinners, and no trials, this would be a very pleasant
 world to go through. It is because we have to swim upstream
, against the current, when almost everything is going 
in the opposite direction, that we have such a difficult work. 
Watch the swimmer! He must battle up-stream against the 
down-flowing current; a moment's relaxation and the current 
carries him downward. With us there is a natural tendency 
in ourselves, as well as in the currents of thought and activity 
about us in the world, to pull us back in the opposite direction
 from which we are trying to go. 

OUR LORD'S LOYALTY AND OBEDIENCE 

Let us consider his example, his words; or else we may 
become faint. There are many reasons why we might become 
so. One of them is that we might consider that the opposition 
against us is too great. Jesus had the opposition of all 
those of national influence in his day. He was continually 
misrepresented, until finally the slanders culminated in his 
being called a profane person, one who had spoken blasphemies 
against God, who had said that he was like God, and was as 
great as God. This was a part of the charge against him. 
Although the accusation was not true, nevertheless he endured 
it, even though he had power to stop it. If he could cast out 
demons and open the eyes of the blind, then surely he could 
have done something to change things in his own case. Why, 
then, did he not do it? Because he was doing the Father's 
will; and it was the Father's will that he should bear witness
 to the truth and demonstrate his loyalty in connection 
with it. 

Is it not the same with us? But why does the Father 
care about our loyalty? Because he is seeking a certain class 
for a certain purpose. In Jesus' case, he was seeking one 
to be the Head of the church. In our case, he is selecting 


Aprii, 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(100-101) 


those who will be members of the body. He has a great plan 
that contemplates the overthrow of sin and the blessing of all 
the families of the earth; and he is now looking for a 
class who is in sympathy with all his plans and arrangements. 
He is seeking for those who would rather suffer death than violate
 his Word, or shrink from doing his will. 

This is our glorious position, and we are considering one 
who never made a mistake in carrying out the Father's will. 
Yet he suffered as though he had made a great many serious 
mistakes. He suffered as a disloyal person, although he had 
always been loyal. The Jews declared that he had no patriotism
 at all, yet he was loyal to his own nation in every respect. 
As Jesus said, 'They hated me without a cause." 

HIS TEMPTATIONS SUBTLE 

Turn these things over in your mind! Consider him! 
This kind of suffering is necessary; for the Father would not 
be wise in exalting to such a high position any one who was 
not thoroughly loyal. B>e could not give even his own son 
the divine nature without a thorough testing. Our Lord, as 
a new creature, was tempted in all points like as we are, yet 
without sin. He was not tempted as a fallen man or as a 
father; he was not tempted with liquor, etc. The temptations 
coming to the new creature are different from those which 
come to the sinner. 

Jesus was tempted to grow weary and faint in his mind. 
This was one of the ways through which special temptations 
from Satan were placed before him. Satan told our Lord 
that he would get rid of these difficulties if he would cooperate 
with him and would avoid those things which would necessarily 
and surely come to him if he should continue in the way 
marked out by Jehovah. Our Lord's answer was, "Get thee 
behind me, Satan!" Another temptation was to show the 
great power which he had received as a spirit-begotten Son, 
to use this power either to gratify his own natural appetite 
or to make a display before the people. So it is with those 
of us who may wish to do things in a showy way instead of 
in the humble way marked out for us. We may expect to have 
the same temptations that our Lord had. Therefore we should 
be on guard that we may prove loyal to fhe Father. 

CHRIST CALLED TO SACRIFICE-—'* THE BODY" ALSO TO 
SACRIFICE 

"If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him." The 
reason why the Father is so careful in making the selection of 
the church class, is that they are to reign. He could not take 
hypocrites or any disloyal ones or even careless ones to be 
rulers and teachers of the people in the coming kingdom. 
He would not select those .who had first learned humility before
 he could use them to teach humility to others. 
God desires such a company of priests and judges to 
be associated with his Son for a thousand years in ruling 
and blessing the world as will prove faithful under all circumstanced
 — those in whom he can place absolute confidence, 
who have been tested and found faithful. This is the reason 
that he tests and proves during this Gospel age every one 
whom he will receive for that future work. 

The call of the Gospel age is, therefore, one to sacrifice. 
God does not hide this fact from us. He does not call us 
to simply stand up and say that we wish to be followers of 
Jesus. No! Our Lord says, "If any man will be my disciple, 
let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me." 
There is no deception about the matter. If we have been deceived
, it is our own fault. The Old Testament says the same 
thing: "Gather my saints together unto me; those who have 
made a covenant with me by sacrifice." There is nothing hidden
. Whoever would follow Jesus must prove his faithfulness 
by his willingness to sacrifice. 

In the past, false doctrines confused us; but now "we 
see Jesus" — we see what he accomplished, and how he endured 
without growing weary or giving up. It makes our course 
plain when we consider him. We sometimes say that we have 
not been careful enough in this' or that matter, and have 
consequently made some mistakes. We can often find some 
fault in ourselves, thus demonstrating that we are partly to 
blame for our sufferings. But in our Lord's case it was different
. He received the slanders, the misrepresentation, and 
everything else that came against him, without having any 
fault in him at all. "He was holy, harmless, undefiled and 
separate from sinners," still he endured. We, though following
 in his footsteps, have not as much to endure as had the 
Master. 

THE OUTCOME OF OUR FAITHFUL ENDURANCE 

We are also to consider the outcome. While the Father 
let Jesus die on the cross as a malefactor, yet he did not let 


our Lord go permanently, but kept his promise to raise hittn 
from the dead. We have the promise that, as the Father 
raised Jesus from the dead, so also will he raise those up who 
are found worthy by being faithful unto death. In raising up 
Jesus the Father has given us a, testimony to his faithfulness. 
In the case of Jesus, no one had set him an example. It 
was all by faith with him ; none had gone before. With us it 
is different. Besides, we have not so much to lose as had our 
Lord. However, if we trust God, he is faithful to keep us 
and to do what he has promised — to raise us up with our 
Head. Consider what great things God has done for his 
Son. Consider also ,that he has promised us a share in our 
Lord's glory if we be found faithful. It is amazing — almost 
beyond conception! Unless God had made it plain, I fear that 
I would not be able to receive it. If he had said it but once, 

1 might have doubted it; but since he has stated it over and 
over again in so many ways as to remove all grounds for 
doubt, I must believe it. How wonderful it seems! 

Consider him! Consider that God has highly exalted him! 
Consider what a great privilege has been afforded us of walking
 in his footsteps, especially as our lives are so imperfect, so 
unsatisfactory even to ourselves, and as life is all that we have 
to give. What a thought that God will count our little sacrifice
 as a part of that which Jesus gave! We are to be heirs of 
God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, "to an inheritance incorruptible
 and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved 
in heaven for you who are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed at the last time." 
Then to think that we are in the last time now! We are right 
at the close of the age. The new dispensation is opening all 
around us, and the great majority of the people are so bewildered
 that they do not know what to make of the wonderful
 things of our day. "None of the wicked shall understand; 
but the wise shall understand." (Daniel 12:10) The Lord's 
true people are the only ones who have a correct understanding 
of these things. 

How carefully the people of God, therefore, should weigh 
their thoughts and deeds! "Seeing that these [present] 
things are to be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to 
be in all holy living and godliness, looking for and earnestly 
desiring the coming of the day of God! . . . According to 
his promise we look for a new heavens and a new earth, 
wherein dwelleth righteousness. Wherefore, beloved, seeing 
that ye look for these things, give diligence that ye may be 
found of him in peace, without spot and blameless" in his 
sight. ie Ye therefore, beloved, knowing these things beforehand
, beware lest, being carried away with the error of the 
wicked, ye fall from your own steadfastness. But grow in 
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ. To him be the glory both now and forever. Amen." — 

2 Peter 3:13-18. 

CLOSING EXHORTATION 

In view of what we see ahead of us as sharers with Jesus 
of his glory, honor and immortality, we should be leading 
holy lives. We should be living in the future rather than 
in the past. Do not think too much of the past. Let us not 
live in the past and dwell upon our mistakes and shortcomings
, and thus be cast down; but let us believe that "if we 
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our 
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." (1 John 
1:9) And we should have such an appreciation of these 
mercies and blessings of forgiveness as to show it forth in our 
conduct. 

Let us give heed more and more to the suggestion of 
our text, and consider him whom the Father has so greatly 
exalted — so highly exalted. Let us remember that he has 
called us with the same high and heavenly calling and has 
promised to help us all the way through! If we remember 
this, we shall cease to be weary and faint and shall become 
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might; we shall 
go on from grace to grace, from glory to glory; we shall he 
transformed by the renewing of our minds, more and more 
proving what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of 
God. Then, finally, we shall attain unto the glorious things 
which he has in reservation for those who love him more 
than parents, or children, or self, or any other person or 
thing. 

"Hold on thy way with hope unchilled, 

By -faith and not by sight ; 
And thou shalt own his Word fulfilled — 

At eve it shall be light." 


[6065] 


FOREIGN BRANCH REPORTS 


BRITISH BRANCH REPORT 

Deab Bhetbben: — 

It is once again our privilege to send to you the Annual 
Report of the British harvest work. Included in the War 
zone, as Britain is, we are very thankful to our heavenly 
Father that we are able to send so gratifying a report. Opportunities
 for witness have been greatly affected by the war, and 
the operation of the Military Service Act has taken from us 
many of our valued workers. Other features, such as the 
cost of living, the darkened streets, making travel by night a 
risky matter, and for some time past the lessened supply of 
tracts, have all interfered to some extent with active propaganda
. Conditions might have been much worse, and we are 
therefore very thankful for the work's sake and for the 
brethren's sake that in the Lord's providence we have had so 
favorable a time under adverse conditions. The general condition
 of the country is not altered in outward appearance, 
and despite the difficulties the good work continues to go forward
. 

The Colporteur Department has suffered considerably 
through the altered conditions, but there has been much 
activity during the year. War work has brought prosperity
 to some and employment to many. The rate of unemployed
 in 1916 was the lowest on record, and as fairly 
good wages have been paid, there has been plenty of money 
about. We have now on the list a total of 45 colporteurs, 
nearly all of whom find their work self-sustaining, while not 
a few report an increased percentage during the year. We 
would urge upon all who have the necessary talent and time 
at their disposal the importance of this branch of service. 
The opportunity is still great, but signs are not wanting 
that soon "the night cometh, wherein no man can work." 

The output of Studies for the year is no leas than 71,776, 
most of which has been handled by the colporteurs. 

In the volunteer work the dear brethren have labored to 
make up for the depletion in their numbers. The number of 
B. S. M. delivered as volunteer matter is 5,926,000 copies, while 
the total distribution of free literature amounts to 7,198,145 
copies. We are very pleased to be able to report this, and we 
are sure the brethren have been greatly blessed in their labors. 
We were for a short time limited through lack of funds, and 
then of paper. The B. S. M. cost almost twice as much as in 
pre-war days, even though we use a cheaper paper. 

The class extension work has revived and is on the increase
. The exhibition of the Photo-Drama of Creation, although
 closed down for several months, has commenced again, 
with considerable success. 

Three general conventions have been held and have proved a 
means of messing to the dear friends in these difficult times. 
The pilgrim service is much appreciated by the classes, more 
especially at the present time, when so many have had their 
elders removed by the Conscription Act. At no time have the 
brethren needed comfort, encouragement and counsel so much as 
now. 

Since the introduction of compulsory service in this 
Country— in March, 1&16 — there have been 153 of the brethren 
imprisoned as Conscientious Objectors to Militarism, and all 
of these continue under Government control — separated from 
their homes. This has meant considerable suffering in the 
cases of some of the married brethren, whose families of 
five and six children have been left without any visible means 
of support. Those brethren more favorably situated have joyfully
 assisted to the best of their ability and, as a result, we 
do not think there has been any real distress so far. 

The dear friends have kept the office alive with their letters
, and we have to report the goodly number of 23,383 received
 and 25,484 sent out. 

The death of our beloved Pastor i& the outstanding feature 
of the British Harvest Work, as it U with you, and all. The 
news camae with staggering suddenness; the expected happened 
unexpectedly. But with the assurance in the hearts of the 
brethren that the work is the Lord's, there has been no faltering
 nor hesitancy, and the brethren are prepared to carry on 
the work of the Lord as it has been manifested through the life 
and writings or our dear brother and Pastor. 

We are indeed grateful to the Society for the assistance 
and comfort sent us in various ways since the death of our 
beloved Brother Russell. These have served as a great stimulus
 to the brethren. We are looking forward to increased 
activity for a time through the pastoral work, and are endeavoring
 to set ourselves in order for the increase which we 
believe the Lord will send. 

W r e enclose a summary of the circulation of the Studies. 
Briefly the figures are: 


Studies in the Scbiftures 71,776 

Books, Mannas, Scenarios 20.257 

Booklets ..." 16,400 

Tracts of all kinds 7,198,146 

Letters sent out 

Letters received 


Becrease 

18,924 

19,540 

8,108 

3,586,625 

25,484 
23,383 


48,867 
The summary of the year'B Finance is as follows : 

CASH SUMMARY 

Nov. 1, 1915— Oct. 31, 1916. 

£ ft. d. 

Nov. 1, Cash on hand 952 : 10 : 1 % 

Receipts 13,269: 9 : 2 

£14,221: 19: W> 


£ s. d. 

Expenditures 13,019 : 17 : oy 2 

Balance on hand 1,202: 12: IV2 


£14,221: 19: 'iY 2 
Appreciating all your loving cooperation in giving us supplies
 of material with which to help carry on our work, and 
your loving sympathy, we are, 
Yours in His grace and service, 

W. Crawford, 
H. J. Shearn, 
J. Hemeby, 
British Brcunch Managers. 
REPORT OF THE AUSTRALIAN BRANCH 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

It is with a full and tender heart that this letter is hegun
. Had it not been for the pressure of work it would probably
 have been sent last mail and addressed as usual to our 
dearly beloved Pastpr, our Brother Russell. For over a 
quarter of a century I have loved him, not only for his work's 
sake, but also for his beautiful character, have rejoiced in 
the truths he has sent out as "meat in due season/' and in 
his counsel, admiring the sympathetic, kind, loving • nature 
so grandly blended with fortitude and strong determination to 
do and dare anything in order to accomplish what he believed
 to be the divine will or the unfolding of his Word. 

While there is a sense of loneliness as one realizes that 
this strong stay is removed in person, yet one cannot but rejoice
 that he has finished his course, fought a good fight 
and gained the great reward, "Well done, good and faithful
 servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." "Praise ye 
the Lord!" It was praise as soon as his lips could frame 
the song to his Creator, I do believe ; and it haa been praise 
and sweet incense from the golden altar all his life. We can 
but reecho the same now that we know that the abundant entrance
 into the kingdom has been administered. "Praise ye the 
Lord!" His life has been an inspiration to me, and his death 
seems to impress one the more with desire to prove also 
faithful and loyal to the Lord, following him even as he followed
 Christ. It is good to think that his intensest sufferings 
did not extend over a long period. No doubt Jehovah saw that 
he had borne sufficient of the cross throughout his course. No 
doubt many of us would like also to take our tickets, enter 
the train and go home; yet "Thy will be done," while we wait 
patiently upon him. 

The work of another year has been such that w^e may rejoice
 in that "our labor has not been in vain in the Lord." 
While our records show a diminution in the output of Volumes 
of Studies, as also of free literature, the reasons are apparent
. On the other hand, there has ,been a good increase of 
interested readers, and, what is still better, we are sure that 
there it is deeper sense of responsibility in regard to the, holding
 of the truth, and the necessity of sending out the light 
of the glorious Gospel of the divine plan, which alone can 
offer the comfort and consolation which the desolated homes 
and wounded hearts require in this day of trouble. The events 
of our day are to us developments of the great Architect's 
plan; and the various features of the changing dispensation become
 clearer as we progress and as our faith grows stronger. 
The removal of our beloved Pastor is only another evidence of 
the closing of the harvest work in the near future. 

As you are aware, it was the shortage of paper which curtailed
 the work of sending out the free literature. The 
friends everywhere have been just as zealous as ever; and if 
materia'] last*, we may depend upon there being a good work 
in this direction; for never was there a time when the Truth 
was mpre acceptable to the people. The fact that Christian 
ministers of all churches have been energetically aiding the 


(102-103) 


[6066] 


April 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(103-104) 


military in the matter of recruiting and preaching conscription
 in their pulpits has made a great many people disgusted 
with their professions; and many have left the churches on 
this account and just need the satisfying portion of truth. 

The pilgrim work here is difficult to operate in a regular 
way on account of the great distances. Nevertheless all the 
States of the Commonwealth have been visited with the exception
 of West Australia; and we are hoping that our Brother 
Brewster will be along there shortly. Besides this, there has 
been the follow-up work in connection with the Photo-Drama 
of Cbeation. 

The Drama has been shown at fifteen different places — 
164 exhibitions with attendances of about 65,050. Great interest
 has been evidenced. Good attendances have been at the 
follow-up meetings; and 928 names have been received as 
having been helped by the Drama and desirous of having some 
literature. A great' number of volumes have been supplied 
to these, when our workers have called upon them; and there 
are many now rejoicing in the fulness of the truth through 
this means. 

Brother Michehnore is operating, and Brother Brewster 
giving the Finale talks and follow-ups. While it is expensive
 through long distances, and few friends around who 
are able to accommodate the brethren, yet they have done remarkably
 well. 

The colporteur work continues to go fairly well. The war 
conditions, while favorable from the standpoint that people 
are more easily interested in these matters, yet have on the 
whole probably interfered somewhat with the work. One or 
two of our colporteurs have through sickness or other cause 
not been able to continue. There is still a happy band of 
faithful workers — about 14 or 16 — and then others that can 
do a little now and again. 

Brother Nelson has taken the Finale, follow-up work and 
a little extension work in New Zealand. The friends there 
are zealously entering upon a work with the Eureka Drama, 
and good reports are being heard of their efforts. 

The Brisbane, Perth and Tasmanian brethren have also 
been zealous with the Eureka Drama. We had hoped to have 
reports of results of their efforts to include with this, but 
have received particulars from only one in Tasmania, He 
has had 44 shows, with attendances of 1,560, for which he 
traveled 500 miles. Probably the largest Eureka Show was 
at Broken Hill, where the attendance was about 1,500 at one 
meeting. 

It is a great privilege to serve the Lord's cause and his 
dear flock. We realize that without- ;hjs grace to helj> and 
the strength and comjfort from the lore - of the ddar friends, 
together with their loving assistance vn every way possible, our 
efforts would be of no avail. Wftiat is done is the Lord's doing
. His Spirit is working through his people in zeal and 
sacrifice; and so we swing into another year relyingoa the 
promised grace to help in every time of need; for **When I 
look at *elf I tremble, when I look to thee Vm strong." 

With Christian love to all, and praying for you the wisdom
 from above that such arrangements may. be made for the 
carrying on of the work of the Lord as shall best serve his 
cause, 

Yours in the Service of Christ, R. E. B. Nicholson. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK— OCT. 31, 1915-NOV. 1, 1016. 

Studies its the Scriptures, Bound 

Vols 21,040 

Studies in this Scriptures, Paper 

Edition 2,136 


23,176 
Booklets 3,350 


811 
693 


Photo-Drama of Creation Soen* 

ARIOS, Cloth 

Photo-Dra.m a of Creation 
Scenario Booklets 

free literature 
B. £. M., Everybody's Paper, and 

and P. P *. 843,620 

The Watch Tower "4,118 

Hell Towers •. 1,341 

Debates 170 

Free Copies Photo-Drama lectures. 25,030 

Letters received 4,371 

Letters sent out , 6,132 


26,526 


1,504 


874,278 


expenditures 

Owing to Brooklyn Office, 

1915 £1,959:14: 3 

Pilgrim Work 80:12: 8 

Photo-Drama Work 239: 6: — 

Printing, Posting, etc., 

People'b Pulpxt 374: — :10 

Stereos, travel, etc., in 
connection with Publication
 of sermons 128: 3 : 6 


Freight, postage, etc. . . . 

48: 

9: 5 


Gas, rent (house and office
), and Personal Expenses
 

103: 

1: — 


Draft to Brooklyn on a/c 




Print Paper 

100: 

. 


Exchange on Same 

1: 

5: — 

£3,034:12:8 




receipts 



Donations received £ 

906: 

7:10 


" to Photo-Drama 




fund 

115: 

8:10 


Subscriptions to Peoples 


Pulpit 

126: 

14: 4 


Subscriptions to Newspapers
 with Sermons 

35: 

17:— 


Now Owing to Brooklyn 




Office 

1,852 

!: 4:8 

£3,034:12:8 


Beside the above amounts contributed to the Tract Fund 
and the Photo- Drama Fund there have been other expenditures
, by friends in various parts in paying the local expenses 
of Drama operations. This we know to have amounted to 
£255. Also a considerable amount has been spent by classes 
operating the Eureka Drama; for instance, Brisbane, Perth, 
Broken Hill, Hobart, Wynyard (Tasmania), and New Zealand. 
We had hoped to have particulars of the number of these 
meetings and their attendance ; these have not come to hand as 
yet. EEPOET FROM FEENCH BRANCH 

Beloved Bbethben: 

Looking back over the past year we perceive the innumerable
 blessings which the Lord has shed upon us in permitting 
the translation of Vol. 5, Studies in the Scriptures, the 
Journal pour Toua, containing our dear Brother Russell's sermons
, four new Tracts, the Great Pyramid pamphlet and the 
Photo-Dbama pamphlet, of which 2,000 copies have been 
printed on two different occasions during the year — in all, 
4,000 copies. Here, are assets given us by the Lord as talents 
to invest and to make the most of, in order that the house of 
God may be abundantly tuppUed with spiritual food. Let us 
show our gratitude towards God by serving him acceptably 
with reverence and godly fear (Hebrews 12:28) ; and let us 
value highly all the privileges given us, and remain faithful 
during his harvest. 

In spite of our weaknesses and our poverty the Lord has 
nevertheless been willing to shower his blessings upon his dear 
work. In all departments there has been a great increase of 
business. 

Despite many struggles and difficulties we have continually 
placed the work before the Lord ; and he has heard our prayerB. 
Since the work is his, it cannot fail. On the contrary, while 
our balance sheet closed last year with a deficit of 2208.53 
Fr., this year it closed with a surplus of 729,65 Fr. We are 
living in a perturbed period of the world's history; and the 
adversary tries hard to strike us down with his poisoned 
arrows or with bis noisome pestilence. (Psalm 91:5-7) Therefore
 we watch and pray, that we may have the disposition of 
our Lord and may banish from our hearts all that is not 
love. 

Our report from Nov. 1 1915, to Oct. 31, 1916, follows: 

Letters and cards received 3,740 

Letters and cards sent out 1,884 

Packages and parcels sent out 746 

Tracts, pamphlets sent out 58,610 

Papers distributed . . . . * 115*000 

Puolic lectures and presentations of the 

Peoto-Dbama 235 

Attendance at lectures arid Photo-Dbama 
(about) 51,277 

RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITtrfilQe 

Assets — from "Good Hoped,*' and other 
sources 22,498.74 Fr. 

Liabilities — money spent for general expenses
 21,769,09 " 


Balance on hand. 


729.65 


[&067-] 


(104-110) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


The Lord haa done great things for ua and we owe Him 
our deep gratitude. As we see the diminution of "Good 
Hopes," partly due to the present hard times, we think that 
some of our blessings have not been understood by all. ^ Is it 
not indeed a marvelous privilege to have the opportunity of 
continuing the Lord's harvest work, no matter the conditions? 
The Lord, seeing our faith, has supplied our needs. Thanks 
to important sales, we have been able to balance our accounts 
in a satisfactory manner. These sales, by judicious management
, have supplied the deficit in the "Good Hopes" for the 
year. 

With much Christian love and with our best wishes and 
greetings for you all from us all, I am, 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, A. Fbeytao. 
KBPOBT FROM FINLAND BBAKCH 
Dear Brethren: — 

My most affectionate regard to you. Here is my report 
from Dec. 15, 1915, to October 15, 1916: 
literature 

Studies in the Scriptures 400 

First Volume (special) 1,609 

2,009 

Booklets 1,772 

Bibles 23 

Subscriptions to Finnish Watch Toweb 539 

" Swedish " " 33 

572 

Watch Towers given out free 6,211 

Kilometers traveled by Pilgrims 19,938 

Meetings held 249 

Convention 1 

Letters and cards received 596 

Total number pieces of mail sent out 5,751 


expenditures 

Headquarters 6,067 : 51 Fin. Mks. 

Convention and meeting expenses 2,151:33 " " 
Watch Tower (Finnish and 

Swedish 1,933:20 " 

Postage and freight 460 : 38 " " 

Other expenses at Headquarters... 147:65 " " 

Help to Colporteurs 128:05 " 

Pastor Russell's sermon in the 

press 32:35 " " 

Cash on hand 878:37 " 

Total 11,798:84 " 

receipts 

Voluntary contributions 6,991:55 Fin. Mks. 

From Headquarters in Brooklyn .. . 1,961:98 <( (t 

Books sold 1,789:14 « 

Other donations 99:55 ** " 

Subscriptions to Watch Toweb... 956.62 " " 

11,798:84 " 

Four Colporteurs have been in the Held part of the time, 
but we have been out of books for some time. Now, however, 
we are beginning to receive some, and more are offering their 
services for the Colporteur work. 

Another Pilgrim and myself have been out the last few 
months holding meetings. The number of kilometers traveled 
by the other pilgrim is included in my report. 

I hardly know what else to write in regard to last year's 
work. However, I am thankful to God that I have been 
privileged to have some part in the harvest field, and that the 
work has gotten a fresh start, after having ceased altogether 
in August, 1915. 

Yours in Him, and by His grace, Marti Liesi. 


JESUS RAISES LAZARUS FROM THE DEAD 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "I Go That I May Awake Him," published in issue of April 1, 1908, which please see.] 


JESUS THE GOOD SHEPHERD 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "The Shepherd, the Door, the Flocks/' published in issue of March 15, 1908, which 

please see.] 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


WHX SUPPOET AND STRENGTHS* THE HANDS 

Deab Friends: — 

We have already, with the class at Loveland, expressed 
our heart-felt sympathy and love to the dear brethren at the 
Bible House for their loss, as well as ours, of "that faithful 
servant." But we desire to assure you again of our determination
 to bear up, support and strengthen the hands of those 
left in care of the work, by prayer for their guidance, and by 
any other means within our power, that they may be faithful
 in pointing the Lord's dear sheep to the green pastures 
and still waters. And haven't we six of these pastures, and 
are they not kept green by the water of the Word, the Spirit 
of truth that runs through them ? 

In Luke 12:43, out dear Lord said, "Blessed is that servant
 who, when he (Christ) cotmeth, shall find watching . . . 
He will gird himself and make them to sit down to meat 
and will come forth and serve them." Our dear Lord came in 
1874, girded to serve the whole church; but he appointed one 
visible servant as a steward through whom he gave his church 
"meat in due season." — Verse 42. 

There is no question but our dear Brother Russell was 
that steward; and now he is gone. He finished the work 
given him to do this side the veil. And now that the steward 
is gone, what shall we do? Must we starve* The Lord says 
he will spread a table in the presence of our enemies. And 
have we not just such a table, groaning under its load of 
"meat in due season ?" 

Let us look at some of the dishes. What are they? — the 
six Volumes of Scbhtote Studies, Towers and Tracts. What 
is in them? Let us lift tne covers and see. First, creation, 
then condemnation, law, ranBom, resurrection, justification, 
sanctification, glorification, restitution, second death. Then 
we have faith, hope, love, and all the fruits and graces of the 
Spirit. And we asked ourselves, "Have we perfected all these 
fruits?" and we answered, "No." Then we went to the table 
and began feasting upon the food to strengthen these fruits 
and graces ; and oh ! how sweet and strengthening those viands 


were to our souls! And we remembered the words of 2 
Peter 1:4-8, 10, 11, that through a knowledge of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus, grace and peace are multiplied unto us, and 
thereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises
, that by these we might be partakers of the divine nature
. But there is something more; for we must, besides this, 
give all diligence (all our time and strength), adding to our 
faith (how? by feasting on these precious truths now on our 
table) virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, god-likeness, 
brotherly kindness, love. If these-thinga be in us, and abound 
they make us that we will neither be barren nor unfruitful in 
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

So our determination is to more diligently feast at the 
table, that we may be filled, may abound to overflowing; for 
the Apostle says, "If ye do these things ye shall never fall; 
for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting kingdom." This is our determination to 
attain this kingdom honor, and is our prayer for all spiritual 
Israel. 

Your brother and sister by His grace, 

Mb. and Mrs. G. N. Chamberlain. — Colo. 
BESOLUTION TO STAND CLOSES TOOBTHBE 
Dear Brethren: — 

It has been our cuBtom in past years at our Annual Business
 Meetings to elect our dear Brother Russell as Pastor of 
the church here, but now that he is not with us in the flesh, 
but has entered into his reward, we can no longer do so. 
We have been glad to look to him for the precious "meat 
in due season" and for pastoral counsel through The Watch 
Toweb, Scripture Studies, etc. We believe him to have 
been God's faithful steward in supplying us with food from 
the store-house of God's Word. 

When we think of the confusion in which we were before 
reading the Studies in the Scriptures, and of the effect 
of these upon our hearts and lives, we testify that through the 
noble sacrifice of our late Pastor on our behalf, we have been 
led to a deeper reverence and love for God and an ever-lncreas* 


[6068] 


Aran, 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


OH-98) 


ing faith in and love for the Bible, aa God's inspired Word; 
to a stronger desire to be more God-like in thought and word 
and deed; to a fuller consecration of our lives to do the will 
of God and to be used in His service; to a greater* love 
for the brethren in Christ and for the world of mankind; and 
to an intelligent appreciation of God's plan as revealed in his 
Word. 

We desire to express our confidence in the wisdom of our 
late Pastor in selecting an Editorial Committee to carry on 
the good work, and rejoice in the great privilege which is 
yours in serving the household of faith. We convey to you 
our sincere Christian love and confidence, trusting that the 
Lord may continue to use you as faithful stewards in the 
interests of his people. We have full confidence in the Lord, 
and know that he who has led us thus far will lead us to 
the end; and with faces Zionward, we resolve to stand closer 
together in love, unity, humility and faith, under the Captain 
of our salvation. 

Yours in the glorious hope of the High Calling of God 
in Christ Jesus, Melbourne Ecclesia. — Australia. 

WBITTBN PARTLY BEFORE AND PARTLY AFTER BROTHER 
RUSSELL'S DEATH 

Dear Bbothee Russell: — 

Christian love and greeting in our Lord and Redeemer! 
My desire in writing is to thank the Lord for your ministrations
 in spiritual things. How gloriously beautiful the truth 
is, in letter and spirit, as you portray it both by word and 
example! We thank God for you, and feel our own shortcomings
, weaknesses, imperfections, and oh, such inability to 
perform the desires of the new mind! 

Every test and trial is a special one along the line of patient
 endurance and love, and we fear and abhor the thought 
of allowing anything like a Judas spirit to lodge in our minds. 
We feel it so difficult to endure patiently, uncomplaining, 
what God sees fit to permit. The blessedness of our Advocate
 is very precious. "He knows, and loves, and cares. How 
true it is that the flesh wishes to rise from its condition of 
reckoned deadness! 


My heart is too full — I can write no more, having heard 
of the glorification of our beloved Pastor! Oh, we bless 
the Lord for his marvelous life, and earnestly crave of the 
Lord a greater measure of his spirit of Christ-likeness! My 
prayer to God is to "prefer to be where the Lord prefers me 
to be!" May our gracious God and Father and the Lord 
Jesus Christ our Advocate bless and keep God's children in 
the faith to the end! I am 

Your sister by His grace, Margaret Borden. — Scotland. 

"A MAN AFTER GOD'S OWH HEART" 

Bear Brethren: — 

We greet you, dear brethren in the Anointed, assuring 
you that we are not one whit behind the various classes and 


brethren over the known world with regard to the departure 
of so noble a man after God's own heart. Brother Russeirs 
character and influence knew no bounds — "the man of God," 
the under-shepherd of God's sheep, and our loving Pastor. 
Truly our hearts, like others, were disposed to shed tear 
drops, and though sighs of sorrow throb our hearts, yet we 
are confident that he has done his part and now has received 
his glad "Well done" from the Master's own lips. 

How he and Brother Paul must be shining lights of our 
God! Believing that those to whom the work is now entrusted 
will continue under the guidance of the holy Spirit to the 
completion of the harvest, we will endeavor to continue our 
earnest prayers for you, and all the ecclesias of God in Christ, 
until the fruition of our hopes is reached. 

Gatun Ecclesia. — Canal Zone. 

* 'LITTLE FLOCK" WILL NOT BR MISLED 

Dear Brethren: — 

We realize with you that there is work still to be done in 
the "harvest" field, and we rejoice in the preparation which 
"that faithful servant" left for the continuance of The Watch 
Tower for our spiritual nourishment. (Isaiah 21:6) 

Seeing with what carefulness Brother Russell handled 
the Lord's work, we cannot do otherwise than remain loval 
supporters of this work, until the waters are fully divided 
and we have done all the Lord has for us to do. 

We rest assured that the "little flock" will not be misled, 
but will receive the meat in due season; for it is written 
(Isaiah 62:12), "A city not forsaken"; again (Matt. 28:20), 
"Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the age." 
Therefore it behooves us to heed the Master's admonition 
(Rev. 2:10), "Be thou faithful unto death"— faithful to our 
covenant vows, and to do all we can both spiritually and 
temporally for the furtherance of the cause, in righteousness 
and love. 

So be assured, dear Brethren, you have our prayers, our 
sympathy, and our love as never before, and we shall esteem it 
a privilege to cooperate with you as we may be able. Pray 
for us. With mucn Christian love, 

Your brethren in the one hope of our calling in Christ 
Jesus. Everett Ecclesia. — Wash. 

WILL ASSIST THOSE LEADIHG IN THE VAN OJ TRUTH 

Dear Beethren: — 

The class here has passed a resolution to be forwarded 
to you to this effect. Assuring the Society of our sincere 
determination of loyalty to the truth to the best of our 
ability, and that we will assist in every way possible those 
responsible for and leading in the van of truth, m the harvest 
work and the smiting of the waters of Jordan, we cease not 
to pray for the oolaborers and that the divine blessing may 
be with you. 

In the name of our Lord and Master, 

The Class at Toogoolawah. — Australia. 


A WORD OF EXPLANATION 


Some time before his death Brother Russell arranged to 
have a set of fifty phonograph records made of the choicest 
old fireside tunes, many from the Millennial Dawn Hymnal, 
and on the reverse side a short talk by himself explaining 
the doctrinal points of the hymn. It was his thought that 
a large number of these should be prepared and sold to the 
five and ten-cent storeB, expecting that they would have a 
wide sale and awaken in the minds of the righteously 
disposed a desire for spiritual things. Brother Russell was 
always alive to use every channel possible to send out the 
light and truth and each of these talks is a gem itself. 

Friends who knew of his plan urged him to have the Bible 
Talks recorded in his own voice, This he did; but owing to. 
his rapidly declining strength, it was later found that his 
voice was not strong enough to make a good record. 

Brother Russell then thought to have them re-recorded by 
the gentleman who made the Creation Drama records so 
great a success. Our Pastor's death, however, upset these plans. 


The brethren interested in the Angelophone Company, believing
 that Brother Russell's friends would be very glad to 
have even so weak a record of his voice, continued to carry 
out his instructions so far as possible. Some of the friends 
who purchased the records, not understanding why Brother 
Russell's voice was so weak and low, and thinking the manufacturer
 at fault, complained. Others who purchased the 
records write that they are so well pleased that they would 
not be without them for a thousand dollars, if they could not 
secure another set. We believe that many more will take this 
same view when they understand all the circumstances. 

In the March 1st Tower we mentioned the fact that t^he 
Angelophone Co. is now going out of business. However, as 
they still have about five hundred incomplete sets of these 
records, and about two thousand machines, they are prepared
 to fill orders as long as the stock lasts. The machines 
have given general satisfaction, and play records of any make. 


ANGELOPHONE HYMN BOOKS 


The Angelophone Co. had prepared an attractive booklet 
containing the above mentioned fifty hymns with music, and 
an appropriate talk by Brother Russell on the reverse side of 
each page. These have been turned over to ua. Some of the 


friends have found them specially appropriate for public services
, occasionally presenting a copy to one who might show 
special interest. Two styles: Limp cover, 5c each; stiff cover, 
10c each, postpaid. 

[6069] 

