From Our Readers
Loneliness  I felt compelled to write you after reading the series “Alone but Not Lonely.” (June 8, 2004) When I first saw this series, it did not strike me as interesting. But as I started reading, I realized that I tend to shut people out emotionally. The suggestions given were just what I needed.
A. V., United States
I suffer from seizures and depression, and I spend most of my time asleep from medications. So, oftentimes, I feel alone and lonely. These articles helped me to understand that even when we feel lonely, we are not alone!
J. C., United States
I am 14 years old, and I went through a period when I wanted to fit in with my classmates. I thought they were my friends. However, when they saw that as a Christian, I was different, I learned that they would desert me if I did not change and become like them. I now realize that true friends—old and young—can be found in the Christian congregation.
N. C., Spain
This series enabled me to see why I reacted so negatively when my husband traveled on business and I was left alone. Your counsel to view loneliness as a common experience and to talk with a mature friend has helped me very much.
J. H., Czech Republic
I am moving away soon to an area that is in need of evangelizers. My mother is happy that I am doing so, but at times she feels lonely. Just when I was wondering what I could do, these articles came out. I now plan on communicating with my mother regularly, sharing the joys I experience in the ministry.
N. K., Japan
London Tower  The article “The Tower of London—Historic Monument to a Turbulent Past” came at just the right time. (June 8, 2004) My teacher and some schoolmates had just returned from a trip to London. Thanks to this article, I was able to imagine what a trip to London would be like—at no personal expense!
P. L., Germany
Anxiety  Recently, as a result of anxieties, I became very tired. Thinking my condition was due to a lack of faith made things worse. I was very grateful when I saw the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Does Anxiety Indicate a Lack of Faith?” (June 8, 2004) Jehovah always gives me encouragement when I am worried.
Y. I., Japan
Demographics  In the article “Demographics, the Bible, and the Future,” you say that Israel left Egypt after 215 years. (May 8, 2004) But Exodus 12:40, 41 says it was 430 years.
R. C., United States
“Awake!” responds: Exodus 12:40 says: “The dwelling of the sons of Israel, who had dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.” Note that “the dwelling of the sons of Israel” is not limited to the time the Jews spent in Egypt; instead, it evidently covers the entire period that began with Abraham’s entry into the land of Canaan. The apostle Paul showed that this 430-year period began when the Abrahamic covenant was validated. (Galatians 3:16, 17) That occurred when Abraham entered Canaan in 1943 B.C.E. Bible chronology indicates that it was 215 years before the Jews moved to Egypt. That leaves 215 years for the Jews to have actually “dwelt in Egypt.”—See the article “Chronology,” in Volume 1 of “Insight on the Scriptures,” published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

