India’s Holy Ganga​—Why Worshiped by Millions?
By Awake! correspondent in India
The Ganges River, or Ganga as it is known in India, has been revered by Hindus throughout history as the holiest river in the world. For centuries millions of worshipers have flocked to its banks. Why do people come? What are they seeking? A brief look at the river in this article will help in finding the answer.
AT THE holy city of Hardwar, near the Himalayan foothills, a shining white Mercedes-Benz swerves through the narrow streets. Carefully, it overtakes bicycle rickshas, horsedrawn tongas, scooters, and pedestrians. Finally, near the edge of the city, the vehicle halts at a spot overlooking the Ganga.
Although the river is heavily polluted downstream, here at Hardwar, the blue-green waters, arriving fresh from a downward journey through the mountains, provide a pleasant feast for the eyes. But it is not for mere sight-seeing that the car has come this far.
The car door opens and out comes an obviously well-educated, modern Indian family. As the mother straightens her scarlet sari, her gold bangles and necklaces catch sunrays and glimmer brightly. The father locks his car and gathers the children, all clad in fashionable jeans and sports clothing. From mere appearances, there is prosperity and an apparent freedom from the anxieties plaguing the poor. Yet, like those from far more modest backgrounds, they have come to worship the goddess Ganga, hoping to benefit from her powers.
Near the sacred bathing ghat of Hari Ki Pauri, they remove their shoes and then descend the steps to the river. In a moment, they are lost among the multitude of colorful saris and other regional garb. Here, on any given day, a cross section of India’s people, rich and poor, come to Ganga’s banks. They are drawn by a basic spiritual need, one that has parallels worldwide.
Sacred Rituals and Fearless Devotion
At the bathing area, priests are eagerly waiting to assist the pilgrims in performing the rituals of Ganga puja (worship). They offer flowers and chant prayers. Then the priest applies a mark, or tilak, of red or yellow paste to the foreheads of the worshipers. Next comes a remarkable display of fearless devotion.
The cold, rushing waters of a November day do not deter the pilgrims. Bravely, young and old enter the chilling river. Savoring this perhaps once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, they allow Ganga’s waters to numb their bodies. Even young children, in the arms of cautious parents, are dunked in the water. Shivering but satisfied, the bathers step out to warm themselves before Surya, the sun-god. Later, they will visit some of Hardwar’s numerous temples or perhaps head upstream 16 miles [26 km] to Rishikesh. There, dozens of ashrams line Ganga’s banks, and foreigners flock for meditation and Yoga studies.
By nightfall, the pilgrims have returned to the bathing area for a time of special worship. Family groups and couples come with sturdy little boats made from green leaves. These are filled with colorful marigolds, fragrant rose petals, and a small clay cup with a wick. One young couple slip off their footwear, pray together, light the wick, and gently deposit their boat in the rushing waters. Like many newly married people, they may have asked Ganga’s blessing of a healthy young son. After making petitions, others likewise launch their small vessels. Soon a flotilla of bobbing lights fill the water and are quickly carried downstream by the strong current.
Suddenly, the evening peace is broken by the furious clanging of temple bells. The din continues for some minutes while the priests wave flaming lamps at the river’s edge and chant praises to Ganga. Thus concludes another day of worship and devotion.
“Drinking at Your Mother’s Breast”
Unquestionably, the Ganga is unique among rivers but not for its physical attributes. Nearly 30 rivers in the world are longer, and in India itself, the Brahmaputra and Indus rivers are far larger. Yet, from its humble glacial origin to its sweeping exit into the Bay of Bengal, Ganga is worshiped along its entire 1,678-mile [2,700 km] length. A third of the country’s 800 million people live in the Ganga river basin and are materially dependent on the river for food, water, and irrigation. Far more than any other river, Ganga symbolizes India.
So to Hindu believers, Ganga is Ganga Ma, or Mother Ganges. The river is viewed as a faithful mother who feeds and cleanses her children, both spiritually and physically. Hence, Indian poet Tulsidas described Ganga as bhukti mukti dayini, namely, the giver of both salvation and material enjoyment. Drinking from her, is “like drinking at your mother’s breast,” said one devotee. Such feelings reflect the intimate relationship between the river and its worshipers. So strong has this bond been that pilgrims of years past unhesitatingly gave their ‘life sacrifice’ by deliberately drowning themselves in its waters.
This idealistic picture takes on a new character and color today. Twisting its way past prospering cities, the Ganga absorbs a steady invasion of sewage and chemicals. One civil engineer, bemoaning the situation, commented: “The poor simply defecate into the river, the rich dispose of industrial wastes and the religious throw their dead bodies into it.” It is estimated that at least ten thousand dead bodies are thrown into the river each day. Yet, daily at the city of Varanasi (Banaras), elated bathers take ritual dips in the now murky, brown water, oblivious to the floating debris from nearby cremation sites. Confidently, they perform achaman, the swallowing of a bit of Ganga water as part of sun worship.
“I will continue taking the holy dip till I die,” said one scientist who resides next to the Ganga. “But everytime I do achaman . . . , there is a tremendous conflict within me.” Commenting on this statement, one Indian magazine noted: “As a scientist, Professor Mishra knows that the water he is swallowing is contaminated. But Mahant Veerbhadra Mishra cannot but sip the holy water of the Ganga and perhaps, there is no better example of the feelings which Hindus have towards the Ganga.”
Why are Hindu worshipers so devoted to the Ganga? Such devotion may be a puzzlement to those unacquainted with the myth of its legendary origin and the powers credited to its waters. In these lie the secrets of the mystical hold of the Ganga on its people.
Descent From the Heavens​—Why?
The legend of the Ganga is as elaborately woven as any of the stories of Hindu gods and goddesses. Exact details vary, but, briefly, the story goes like this:
King Sagara had 60,000 sons, who were killed by the sage Kapila. Their souls were condemned to roam the earth forever unless the goddess Ganga would come down from heaven to cleanse them and release them from the curse. On account of penance done by another king, Bhagirathi, Ganga came to earth and was caught in the god Shiva’s hair​—the Himalayan snow peaks. From there, she rushed to the sea, and her waters purified the souls of King Sagara’s 60,000 sons and restored them to paradise.
Therein lies the answer to why millions have visited and worshiped the Ganga for centuries. Ganga, according to her worshipers, has the power of release, purification, cleansing, and cure. An ancient Hindu writing, The Brahmandapurana, states: “Those who bathe devoutly once in the pure currents of the Ganga, their tribes are protected by Her from hundreds of thousands of dangers. Evils accumulated through generations are destroyed. Just by bathing in the Ganga one gets immediately purified.” Further, by drinking Ganga’s water, it is said, immortality is attained. Dying at the Ganga, being cremated on its banks, and having one’s ashes thrown into the river is thought to lead to eternal bliss. The soul​—believed by many to be immortal—​is said to be released from the cycle of rebirths, so that it can finally rest, merging with the very essence of god.
Curing of All Nations Near
The desire for spiritual cleansing and release from suffering seems basic to humans everywhere. In other areas of the world, such salvation, or mukti, is sought in other ways. Some may confess their sins to an intercessor, such as a priest, to receive forgiveness and then perform the required penance. Others feel that through prayers, reading of sacred scriptures, sacrifices, giving of gifts and alms, or self-denial a man can be purged of his errors and receive blessings after death. But with such conflicting ideas, is there any sure way to find a release from sin and death?
Interestingly, an ancient book of sacred writings, the Bible, also speaks of mankind’s spiritual cleansing and healing in connection with a river. The prophet and writer John saw a vision of “a river of water of life” issuing forth from the throne of God. Instead of bathers, along its banks were bountiful fruit trees “for the curing of the nations.”​—Revelation 22:1, 2.
Symbolically, the Bible here speaks about the Creator’s marvelous provision to free mankind from sin and death forever and to provide life everlasting. Under this provision, multitudes who have bathed in Ganga’s waters​—along with millions who have never seen the Ganga—​will have opportunity for cleansing from sin and release from death in the very near future.a
[Footnotes]
See the booklet Victory Over Death​—Is It Possible for You? available from the publishers of this magazine.
[Picture on page 15]
Amid numerous temples and shrines, people of all types come to bathe in the Ganga
[Picture on page 15]
At the edge of the river, a priest assists a woman with the rituals of Ganga puja, or worship
[Picture on page 16]
A pantheon of Hindu gods and goddesses at one of Hardwar’s many temples
[Picture on page 17]
A young woman prepares to launch her leaf boat on the Ganga

