The Source of True Values
A MORAL code is present in all human societies. Whether they wish to admit it or not, all peoples feel a need for a guiding force above and beyond themselves. They instinctively look to a higher power to worship or serve. It may be the sun, the moon, a star, a mountain, a river, an animal, a man, or an organization. Their moral code may be set forth in one of the many sacred writings of different cultures. The need is found in people everywhere. It is instinctive in man.
“Religion,” according to prominent psychiatrist C. G. Jung, “is an instinctive attitude peculiar to man, and its manifestations can be followed all through human history.” The well-known scientist Fred Hoyle wrote of “the moral code present in all human societies” and added: “It would be easy to build a considerable argument to show that the moral sense in man persists despite all the temptations [and persecutions] which constantly work against it.”
The best known and most widely circulated of all the sacred writings, the Bible, recognizes this inherent moral sense in man. It says at Romans 2:14, 15: “For whenever people of the nations that do not have law do by nature the things of the law, these people, although not having law, are a law to themselves. They are the very ones who demonstrate the matter of the law to be written in their hearts, while their conscience is bearing witness with them and, between their own thoughts, they are being accused or even excused.”
Hoyle considers evolution “an open charter for any form of opportunistic behaviour,” and he continues: “Frankly, I am haunted by a conviction that the nihilistic philosophy which so-called educated opinion chose to adopt following the publication of The Origin of Species committed mankind to a course of automatic self-destruction. A Doomsday machine was then set ticking. . . . The number of people who nowadays sense that something is fundamentally amiss with society is not small, but sadly they dissipate their energies in protesting against one inconsequential matter after another.”
Intelligence Behind Life’s Origin
Then, with mathematical precision, Hoyle proceeds to show that the probabilities for life to have originated on earth by chance are nil. Orthodox scientists, he says, have been turned away from the idea of a creative force by “the religious excesses of the past.” But Hoyle believes that life was created by some intelligent force out in universal space. He believes that what was impossible on earth was possible in outer space​—but he postulates that even out there some kind of intelligence was at work. Even the simplest form of life, a bacterium, is so amazingly complex that intelligence had to be involved in its creation, but he can’t bring himself to call that intelligence God.
Others who “sense that something is fundamentally amiss with society” are not so reluctant to do so. One of such is psychiatrist Jung, previously quoted: “The individual who is not anchored in God can offer no resistance on his own resources to the physical and moral blandishments of the world. For this he needs the evidence of inner, transcendent experience which alone can protect him from the otherwise inevitable submersion in the mass.”
Presiding Justice Francis T. Murphy of the Appellate Division says that modern man “does not know the ultimate meaning of his life and doubts that life has any meaning. Whatever his moral pretensions may be, he has in fact driven God out of his life, out of his office, out of his home. He therefore lacks a moral center.” From the sports world, Howard Cosell voiced the same opinion when discussing the problem of drug abuse by athletes. He said: “There is no definable moral center in America anymore . . . and that is a problem for the entire culture.”
“It is impossible,” says syndicated columnist Georgie Anne Geyer, “to have a moral community or nation without faith in God, because everything rapidly comes down to ‘me,’ and ‘me’ alone is meaningless. . . . When ‘me’ becomes the measure of all things​—at the expense of God, of church, of family and of the accepted norms of civil and civic human behavior—​we are in trouble.”
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn said that if asked to identify in a few words the principal trait of the 20th century, he would say: “Men have forgotten God.” He continued: “The entire twentieth century is being sucked into the vortex of atheism and self-destruction. . . . All attempts to find a way out of the plight of today’s world are fruitless unless we redirect our consciousness, in repentance, to the Creator of all: without this, no exit will be illumined, and we shall seek it in vain.”
For six thousand years, man has tried it his way, deciding what is right and what is wrong. Now the modern trend is to do your own thing​—there is no right and wrong. History has recorded the horrendous consequences of both ways, proving that it is not in man to direct his steps. “There is a way which seems right to a man, but its end is the way to death.” (Proverbs 14:12, Revised Standard Version; Jeremiah 10:23) Jehovah God made man, knows him inside and out, and has provided the map to happiness: “Your word is a lamp to my foot, and a light to my roadway.” (Psalm 119:105) His Word, the Bible, identifies the true values for man’s blessing. The accompanying box lists some of the dos and don’ts.
[Box on page 7]
Values to Live By
▸ Love Jehovah God with all your heart, mind, soul, and strength.
▸ Love your neighbor as yourself.
▸ Do to others as you want others to do to you.
▸ Follow Jesus as your Exemplar.
▸ Forgive others as you want to be forgiven.
▸ Honor your father and your mother.
▸ In honor preferring others.
▸ Be faithful in all your dealings.
▸ Pursue peace with all.
▸ Seek mildness, kindness, self-control.
▸ Return evil for evil to no man.
▸ Be conquering the evil with the good.
▸ Do not worship false gods.
▸ Do not bow down to images.
▸ Do not commit murder.
▸ Do not steal.
▸ Do not bear false witness.
▸ Do not take God’s name in vain.
▸ Do not covet your neighbor’s belongings.
▸ Do not let the sun go down on your wrath.

