page 1 



SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXIX JANUARY 1 No. 1 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 3 

Christendom in Survey 3 

"All Things Continue as They Were" 4 

Yet Seven Years More 4 

"A Confederacy !"-Isa. 8:12 5 

The Time of Trouble 5 

The Present Financial Spasm 6 

Travailing in Birth of New Era 6 

Outlook for the Work 7 

Two Debates Arranged For 8 

Preparing the Way of the Lord 8 

The Antitypical Elijah 9 

Finding the Lord's Jewels 11 

Seeking Fellowship with Jesus 12 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SACRED MISSION 



THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system 
of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now being presented in 
all parts of the civilized world by the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 
TRACT SOCIETY, chartered A.D. 1881, "For the Promotion of Christian 
Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students 
may meet in the study of the divine Word, but also as a channel of 
communication through which they may be reached with announcements of 
the Society's Conventions and of the coming of its traveling representatives 
styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's 
published "Studies," most entertainingly arranged, and very helpful 
to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, 
viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which translated into English 
is, Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International 
S.S. Lessons is specially for the older Bible Students and Teachers. By 
some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defence of the only true foundation 
of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 
through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 
a ransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (I Pet. 1:19; 
I Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 
and precious stones (I Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 
of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 
of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 
that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 



God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men 
as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of his Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-I Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; Jno. 1:9; I Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
hisjoint-heir.-I John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, 
at the hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the 
wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 



"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



THE WOMAN'S NATIONAL DAILY 



The number of the friends subscribing for this cheap 
daily through us was not nearly as large as we had expected. 
Hence Brother Russell's sermons are not appearing in it regularly, 
as proposed. Sorry, for it meant a wide circulation of 
the Truth weekly. A kind card to the Editor of the National 
Daily from each one who has subscribed might help. But 
the best help will be large lists of new subscriptions. The 
Daily and THE TOWER both $1.60 for the year, or 60c now if 
you already are on the TOWER list. Get new subscribers for 
The Daily one year and the TOWER four months, both for $ 1 . 

R4114 : page 2 

CANADIAN FRIENDS DESIRING SERMONS WEEKLY 



Arrangements have been made for Brother Russell's sermons 
weekly in The Toronto World. We can give a clubbing 
rate of $1.50 per year (or, with TOWER, $2.50), except in the cities 
of Hamilton and Toronto, where the price will be $2.75, 
with TOWER, $3.75. Make up your lists speedily and send to us. 

page 2 



"STUDIES," INDIA PAPER EDITION 



We now have India STUDIES, Vols. 4, 5 and 6. Back 
orders will have attention at once. Price, 85c each. The 
first three volumes will be announced later— when in stock. 

THE NEW BIBLES 



The new Bibles are all gone except No. W300, the best 
grade, full seal. Price, $3.00, plus 10c postage— $3.10. 



R4109 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

THE opening of a New Year is a most favorable 

time for special circumspection— for reviewing 

the year past, for the looking forward to the 

things coming upon the earth, and for a general survey 

of present conditions in the world, in the Church, 

and particularly in our own hearts. This circumspection 

should be taken with a view to our growth in 

knowledge and in grace— not from idle curiosity nor 

from boastful self-sufficiency. 

CHRISTENDOM IN SURVEY 

While Church and State are in many respects totally 
separate, nevertheless throughout what we term Christendom 
they are so closely related and intertwined as to 
appear one, and this oneness we believe the Scriptures to 
teach will increase until for all practical purposes they 
will be one. We surmise that this will be accomplished 
within the next three years. The Committee on Church 
Federation appointed some time ago is to meet in December, 
1908. Conditions during the present year will 
undoubtedly cause the idea of Church Federation to 
take firmer hold than ever upon the public mind, especially 
upon the clerics, and our expectation, therefore, 
is that two years later it will be an accomplished fact. 
Quite probably by that time some arrangement will 
have been effected between the Episcopal system and 
other Protestant denominations, whereby the clergy of 
the latter will all be recognized by the former— probably 
by the Episcopal clergy in some manner imparting 
the apostolic succession. Thereafter any not recognized 
by the system will be in sore straits, condemned 
as unorthodox, and without right or authority or privilege 
to preach or teach. This condition of things, as 



pointed out in these columns twenty-eight years ago, 
we look for as the fulfilment of Rev. 13:15-17. 

In the Lord's providence the increase of light and 
knowledge preparatory for the great Millennial day has 
brought to Christendom great riches. Not only have 
the millions of Christendom been more constantly employed 
than ever, but by reason of education their employment 
has yielded larger fruitage, and in combination 
with machinery the results have surely been 
five-fold. No wonder, then, that the world's wealth 
has been enormously increased. As might be expected, 
however, all have not profited equally by this great 
gain. While all have profited in great measure, the 
master minds— especially those endowed with large 
acquisitiveness— have profited chiefly by the favorable 
conditions. As a result we see that one-seventh of the 
people own six-sevenths of the wealth. If on the one 
hand this condition of things seems hard and inequitable, 
let us remember on the other hand that it is the 
legitimate fruit of the law of selfishness, under which 
the world has operated now for six thousand years. 
That the field in many respects has been a fair and 
open one is evidenced by the fact that some of the 
wealthiest people of today started life in the humblest 
circumstances. If some of these in gaining their 
wealth have used unscrupulous means, let us remember 
that they did nothing more than many of their neighbors 
who had less success in life— nothing more 
than what the majority of mankind would have done 
had they possessed opportunity and the intellectual 
talent to improve it. This being true, it behooves us 
to look with generosity upon the rich, and to note to 
their credit that many of them have been very benevolent 
both in public and in private. Let us remember, 
also, that many of the most successful have not gained 
their wealth by grinding the poor nor by treating them 
as slaves, but on the contrary have paid the best 
wages, treated their employees most honorably, and 
really have been benefactors to the world in that their 
business acumen enabled them to launch large projects, 
which gave profitable employment and large 
wages to many of their fellows, who would have been 
incapable of such management. 

LET A MAN THINK SOBERLY 

Many are able to take the reasonable, just, philosophical 
view of the subject above presented so long as 
they are doing reasonably well themselves; but when 
the pinch comes and they begin to be in want they reason 
differently. They forget a part of the truth on the 
subject— they think merely of the fact that in nature 

R4109 : page 4 

and providence we are surrounded by wonderful bounties 



and vast opportunities, and in the scramble for 

wealth which these produced others got the lion's 

share. From this standpoint they reason that the 

wealth of the world and the increment belong equally 

to the wise and the unwise, to the learned and the ignorant, 

to the ambitious and the careless, and with this 

thought in view they are inclined to demand their 

share and to hold that anyone who has more than his 

per capita portion must have stolen it from his fellows. 

But since they joined in the scramble, hoping to be 

amongst the more successful, even acknowledging thus 

the principles of selfish competition, it is with bad 

grace that they now especially find fault with those who 

have been more successful than they, instead of finding 

fault with the system which permitted, fostered and 

developed present conditions. Indeed, however strenuous 

may be the results of present conditions of the 

world, we can fully justify divine providence in permitting 

matters to take the course which has led up to 

the present condition of things— up to the time of trouble 

which will mark the consummation of this age and 

the inauguration of the Millennium. 

Without selfish ambition to spur men on, without 
the law of necessity to speed the movements of the 
slothful, the tendency of mankind would have been 
toward a barbaric indolence, contentment with a hut 
instead of a palace, satisfied with signs and grunts and 
hieroglyphics instead of an education. Undoubtedly, 
all the fallen conditions considered, the Lord did the 
best thing for the race to permit selfish ambition to 
crack the whip and drive the remainder of the world 
toward a higher civilization than that into which they 
had sunk, as described by the Apostle in 
Romans, chapters 1 and 2. 

"ALL THINGS CONTINUE AS THEY WERE" 

The Lord through the Apostle calls our attention 
to the fact that in the end of this age there would be a 
tendency on the part of the worldly wise to say that 
there would be no change of dispensation; that all 
things continue as they were from the beginning of 
creation and will so continue— that there will be no 
change. This is brought out as an answer that will be 
made to some who will claim the presence of the Lord 
and the change of dispensation— just as we are doing. 
But in accord with the Word of God, we are not heeding 
these worldly wise, but are hearkening to the voice 
of him that speaketh from heaven, which assures us of 
a great change, and that it is now at the door: (1) A 
change of rulers, the Prince of Light taking from the 
prince of darkness the sceptre of this world and binding, 

R4110 : page 4 

restraining, him for a thousand years, that during 



the same he shall not deceive the nations. (Rev. 20:3.) 

(2) The overthrow of all present institutions built up 

under the influence of the prince of darkness, and fostered 

by ignorance, superstition and selfishness, and 

the substitution of a reign of equality and love which 

shall lift all men from the depths of degradation, mental, 

physical and moral, and bring them all to a completeness 

of perfection if they will, and thus to a plane 

of equality, destroying the unwilling as mischievous 

and injurious in the Second Death. 

Emphasizing this change which he will bring 
about, the Lord through the Prophet declares that he 
will not forever plow the field and sow, but in its appropriate 
season he would do a reaping work. We perceive 
that the entire field was not sown with the good 
seed of the Gospel, but only a small, limited area, and 
that for now nearly nineteen centuries the Lord has 
watered and harrowed this sowing, and that the harvest 
time of the Gospel Age is come. True to our Lord's 
parable the Adversary was permitted to do a contaminating 
work— to over-sow the field with tare seed, and 
as a consequence the acceptable crop now to be gathered 
is a small one in comparison with what would be 
expected by those who have not been able to distinguish 
between wheat and tares, between consecrated 
believers and nominal Christians. To our understanding 
of the Bible, as set forth in the volumes of SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, this harvest work has been in progress 
since October, 1 874, and will be completed within forty 
years— by October, 1914. Within that time we fully 
expect that all the wheat will be gathered into the garner, 
glorified, and that the tares will be gathered 
into bundles, if indeed by that time their burning will 
not have commenced. We do not understand the burning 
of the tares will be with literal fire, nor that their 
destruction will mean the destruction of the individuals, 
but merely that they will cease to exist as imitation 
wheat and take their true stand with the world as members 
thereof, without part or lot in the inheritance of 
the "saints in light." 

YET SEVEN YEARS MORE 

From the foregoing it will be seen that to our understanding 
Christendom entered upon the final seven 
years of harvest time in October, 1907. Promptly on 
time the present panic gave Christendom a convulsive 
tremor, and it is our anticipation that the entire seven 
years thus started will witness a succession of panics 
and difficulties, each pressing a little more upon the 
interests of mankind, the rich as well as the poor, and 
each bringing conditions to a little harder plane than 
its predecessor, until, with the close of the seven years, 
during 1915, according to the Bible, we expect that 
anarchy will gain the upper hand of control throughout 
Christendom, overthrowing present institutions, civil 



and religious, financial and social, and in a general 
way plunging the poor world into the most awful trouble 
it has ever experienced— a trouble so dark, so terrible, 
that in referring to it the Master said, "Except 
those days be shortened there would no flesh survive." 
But then he added, that because of the Elect the days 
would be shortened. The Elect Church, at that time 
in glory with the Lord, and assuming the authority of 
the world, will at the proper moment intervene, and 
with divine power and wisdom bring order out of the 
confusion, and establish in the world righteous conditions, 
which the Scriptures assure us will then be welcomed 
by all mankind. Those now disposed to fight 
for present conditions will then, as a result of the 
chastening experience, be glad to look for and accept 
the new order of things— the reign of righteousness and 
love under the Millennial rule of the King of kings and 
Lord of lords, with whom in his throne will be associated 

R4110 : page 5 

the Bride, the Lamb's Wife— the Elect Little Flock 
of this Gospel Age. 

We are not prophesying; we are merely giving our 
surmises, the Scriptural basis for which is already in 
the hands of our readers in the six volumes of SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES. We do not even aver that there is no 
mistake in our interpretation of prophecy and our calculations 
of chronology. We have merely laid these 
before you, leaving it for each to exercise his own faith 
or doubt in respect to them; but showing our own faith 
by our works. Even our enemies must concede, and 
many of them do concede, that the facts as they have 
developed year by year since we began these presentations 
in 1876 have most wonderfully, most remarkably, 
corroborated our expectations and continue to do so. 
For instance, the Jews had not thought of returning to 
their own land when, in 1878, we pointed out that the 
time for favor to that people had chronologically begun, 
in fulfilment of Isaiah's prophecy, "Comfort ye, comfort 
ye my people, saith my God. Speak ye comfortably 
unto Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her appointed 
hour is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned; 
for she hath received of the Lord's hand double for all 
her sins." (Isa. 40:1,2.) Zionism was not dreamed 
of at that time, and began to take practical form seventeen 
years afterward. 

"A CONFEDERACY! "-ISAIAH 8:12 

We pointed out from the Scriptures a federation of 
Protestants which would receive its life or vitality 
through association with the Episcopal Church, and 
that this combination of Protestants would be one side 
of the great scroll of the heavens while Roman Catholicism 
would be the other side of the scroll, and that 



these would not unite, but "roll together as a scroll" 

during this harvest time, and because of the shaking 

incident to the time of trouble and anarchy with which 

the age would end. But not until seventeen years later 

was the idea of federation brought forward. Formerly 

it was urged everywhere that the cause of righteousness 

was advanced by the competition between various denominations 

of Christendom. Now, however, the federation 

is surely near, and it will have an important 

part to play in connection with the trouble coming upon 

the faithful Little Flock, and later on it will receive 

by divine permission as complete an overthrow as came 

upon the Jewish institution, its prototype, in A.D. 70. 

In 1878 Christendom in general possessed faith in the 

precious blood of Christ, a ransom price: we pointed 

out from the Scriptures that a testing would come upon 

all and chiefly along this line, that a thousand would 

fall to one who would stand (Psalm 91:7); that the 

cross of Christ was set for a stone of stumbling and a 

rock of offence to both the houses of Israel— to Natural 

Israel in its harvest time, and to Spiritual Israel, Christendom, 

in this present harvest time of this age. 

As we look about today, we see, alas, how truly the 
Scriptures on this subject have been fulfilled. Not a 
college or seminary that we know of in the world 
teaches the doctrine of redemption, the very foundation 
of the Gospel. Some of them teach Evolution, 
Higher Criticism and morality; others which do not 
openly so teach give similar instruction in a private 
way— in that the professors are known to hold these 
views. Amongst the ministers of all denominations 
the same thing is true: probably not one minister in 
ten can be found who would declare unequivocally 
that it is his faith that the death of Christ was a ransom 
price for Adam and his race— that without his 
death as our Redeemer there would have been no atonement 
for sin, and no forgiveness of sin, and no future 
life for any— the plain teaching of Scripture. Moreover, 
these same errors have stumbled and overthrown 
the faith of the majority of professing Christians, remarkably 
few of whom would be found who know what 
justification by faith means, and who believe that 
Christ died for our sins and rose again for our justification, 
that by his stripes we are healed, and that the 
chastisements necessary for the securing of our peace 
with God were laid upon him who died, the Just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us back into harmony with 
God. As for the coming generation, it is growing up 
in unbelief as respects the foundation principles of the 
real Gospel of Christ. It is being instructed in "another 
Gospel," which is not another, because there is 
truly no good tidings except that which God himself 
has provided, the forgiveness of sins through the merit 
of the precious blood of Christ. Not only in the colleges, 
but also in the High Schools, and now more 
latterly in the Grammar Schools— yea, even in the 



Sunday Schools— the theories of Higher Criticism in 
respect to the Bible, and of Evolution as respects our 
race, are being taught. The one undermines faith in 
the Bible, the other puts before the mind of the youth 
another theory, the reverse of the Scriptural one, which 
—supported by teachers and professors and ministers 
and others— causes the Scriptural theory of a perfect 
Adam and his fall by original sin, his redemption by a 
Savior, and his ultimate restitution in the "times of 
restitution of all things which God hath spoken"— it 
makes all of these seem absurd, unreasonable. 

THE TIME OF TROUBLE 

Similarly the Scriptural presentation of the time of 
trouble has been found to be correct. Step by step 
the conditions have been approximating the great climax 
which the Scriptures declare. Education and general 
enlightenment and invention— blessings which 
belong to the morning of the new dispensation about 
to dawn— have awakened the world to its present rapid 
pace, and have turned the minds of the masses towards 
selfishness and the worship of Mammon in a remarkable 
degree. This Mammon worship is shared in not 
only by the wealthy but also by the poor. One man 
chases after a fortune of one thousand dollars, another 
after one of a million, another after hundreds of millions, 
but nearly all are in pursuit of wealth. If it be 
claimed that this is more true of the people of the 
United States of America than of Europe, we reply 
that this may be so, because in every sense of the word 
the people of America are awakened at least ten years 
in advance of Europe; but indications are that the 
whole world is getting awake very rapidly, and its 
awakening will be a ruder one than ours, with no less 
strenuous results. 

R4111 : page 6 

We are not faulting the people for their awakening 
in the morning time; we are not faulting them that in 
their hunger for a share of the wonderful blessings 
which God has granted in the present time they have 
been moving with selfish energy to the protection of 
their rights and the acquirement of greater privileges 
by means of labor unions and federations. We would 
be most inclined to find fault with the unjust and unreasonable 
demands and methods sometimes employed. 
And yet even here we sympathize in great measure 
when we remember that these, hungry for their pro 
rata of present blessings, have not the guidance of the 
Lord, his Word and his Spirit, to show them the wise 
and proper path. Hence some of their moves not only 
result disastrously to themselves, but sometimes inflict 
needless hardship upon some of the best-intentioned 
capitalists and employers. On the other hand, 



we must not be surprised that capitalists of keen mind, 
reckoning life as a battle and a game, have exercised 
their quick intelligence to strengthen their own position, 
to maintain advantage in their own hands, and to 
increase the same by combinations and trusts, eliminating 
competition and advantaging themselves in general. 
What more could we expect from natural men 
operating under natural laws, growing more and more 
disrespectful of the divine Word, and more and more 
into sympathy with the Evolution theory— that it is the 
law of nature to have a survival of the fittest, and that 
the unfit need not be sympathized with too much, but 
rather be allowed to drop out of the race for wealth 
and station and even for the right to live? Thus we 
find ourselves at the threshold of what we believe to be 
the last seven years of this Gospel dispensation. 

THE PRESENT FINANCIAL SPASM 

All financiers must ultimately agree that the present 
financial spasm was directly caused by selfishness 
on the part of the bankers, etc., and nearly all the 
wealthy are either directly or indirectly bankers or 
bank directors. Shrewd bankers realize that their 
business prospers in proportion as the volume of money 
currency is small in comparison to the amount of business. 
Hence the money of a country is sought to be 
restrained in volume, and at the time the present panic 
broke out amounted in this country to about $24.50 per 
capita. It has since been increased by the issue of 
more National Bank notes, etc., to about $33.00 for 
each person of population, which is larger than that of 
any other country. However, the business enterprise, 
etc., here is so much greater than elsewhere that in our 
judgment even yet we have only one-third the amount 
of money that the country really needs. The bankers 
of the world practically control the governments in this 
matter, and they advocate as small a volume as possible 
—as small as will be safe not to risk a panic. Why? 
Because they make their money on interest and discounts, 
and it is to their advantage to have the public 
short of money and needing to borrow. The scarcer 
money can be made without injuring prosperity and 
promoting a panic the greater will be the demands 
made upon them by borrowers, and the greater their 
profits. 

The enormous amount of their profits and surplus 
above the capital stock is advertised by the banks 
with pride, as showing their prosperity and soundness. 
If money were three times as plentiful interest rates 
would be about one-third what they are today, and the 
bankers would not be so much more prosperous than the 
remainder of the people. As an illustration of how the 
scarcity of money operates to the advantage of the 
banks, we note the case of a Pittsburgher who recently 
got into financial trouble and applied to an institution 



of this city whose capital and surplus amount to 
many millions of dollars. After examining his property 
they let him have $250,000 on credit, and took from 
him a mortgage for $350,000— thus clearing, because of 
the necessities of the case, $100,000. Had money been 
more plentiful that borrower would have found many 
ready to come to his assistance on much cheaper terms. 
We are mentioning this matter in detail to call attention 
to the fact that selfishness is at the bottom of nearly 
all financial troubles, and it is selfishness that 
will be to blame for the final collapse which the Scriptures 
predict and which we expect in 1915. 

We have already noted (Vol. IV., chap. VIII.) that 
the demonetization of silver was a matter instigated 
by the bankers. We have pointed out that it was inimical 
to the interests of the public. It lessened the 
money of the world by at least one-half. If silver were 
remonetized the business of the world would have none 
too much money for profitable handling, but that larger 
amount of money would make the banking business 
less profitable. Bankers tell the public that less money 
is necessary per capita than heretofore, because by our 
superior banking facilities one dollar chases around 
and, during a year, pays a thousand dollars worth of 
debts. We agree that the world has brilliant financiers, 
that our banking system in many respects is 
splendid, and that the making of one dollar do the 
work of a thousand is very wise for the bankers and 
very profitable to them. However, if the one dollar 
did one-third as much work as at present, the danger 
of panics would be proportionately decreased and the 
prosperity of the banks also decreased. Financial 
matters resemble a top, whose point is money and 
whose upper portion is composed of bonds, stocks, 
mortgages, securities representing value. So long as 
the top is kept spinning at a rapid rate it can stand 
erect upon the point, but when something occurs to 
overturn it it is difficult to get it to spin again. The 
heavy top of national debts, land values, etc., now prevailing 
throughout the world is too great in proportion 
to the world's money. But we have no thought that 
conditions will be materially changed. The bankers 
have the confidence of the public, great and small, and 
will continue to maintain their present power, and 
these and other deleterious influences will have much 
to do with bringing forward the great trouble in its due 
time, through "lack of confidence." 

TRAVAILING IN BIRTH OF NEW ERA 

We are not meaning to say that the banks of the 
country are not sound, reliable. Quite to the contrary: 
they are very rich— if their wealth be measured by the 
securities they hold. It is our expectation that the 
present stress will ere long be much relieved, but we 
do not expect to see as great prosperity as the past few 



years have witnessed; rather that there will be a down 
grade, with repeated hitchings or spasms of trouble, in 
harmony with the Apostle's illustration that this trouble 
is coming upon the world "as travail upon a woman 
with child." The final spasm, which we look for in 
1915, will give birth to the new dispensation of peace 
and blessing, the Millennial reign of Messiah, in which 
we hope to share, for the blessing and uplifting of the 
world. 

What shall we do? Quite a good many are inquiring 
as to the wisest course in view of our expectations. 
If by this query is meant, How can it be escaped? Our 
reply is that it will be impossible to escape the coming 
trouble except by death, for according to the Scriptures 
it is to be world wide, every man's hand against his 
neighbor, no peace to him that goeth out or to him that 
cometh in. We understand the Scriptures to teach that 
all of the "overcomers," the "very Elect," will be gone 
before 1915 and its terrible collapse, though they may 
pass through a considerable measure of persecution 
before that, and of course would share with others in 

R4111 : page 7 

the sorrows and perplexities of the further spasms of 
the trouble. Our advice in general would be, "Trust 
in the Lord and do good," exercise faith and the spirit 
of a sound mind. Remember the Lord's promise to 
care for all who are his, and to make all things work 
together for their good. Rely upon this and show your 
faith by your calm, quiet demeanor in the midst of 
trouble. As for those possessed of money, we offer the 
suggestion that a small home is one of the safest investments 
imaginable. 

Should the banks some years later on become entirely 
insolvent, as we expect, money in them and in insurance 
companies, etc., would be practically lost; but 
a home well adapted to one's needs would still have a 
value. Some have queried whether or not a little farm 
would be profitable in the time of trouble. We reply 
that wherever the Lord's keeping power is there is 
safety; that so far as human judgment could go there 
would be as little safety on a farm as anywhere, for in 
the time we anticipate tramps and thieves will infest 
the country districts and beset the wayfaring man as 
much if not more than the city dweller. If attempting 
to locate a family of small children our inclination 
would be to prefer a town of moderate size, not a manufacturing 
city nor a mining village, but, if possible, a 
college town, inhabited by an intelligent middle class, 
where order would be more respected and prolonged. 
But the wisest and best legacy possible to leave to 
our friends would be a good example as respects honesty, 
morality and reverence for divine things. To be 
known to have money secreted at that time would be to 
invite thieves and torture and possibly death. If in the 



small town suggested a lot could be had sufficiently 
large for a back -kitchen garden, it would be desirable. 
That will be a time, however, for demonstrating the 
truthfulness of the Lord's words: "Lay not up for yourselves 
treasures upon the earth, where moth and rust 
do corrupt, and where thieves break through and 
steal, but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven." 

OUTLOOK FOR THE WORK 

We anticipate two more good years in connection 
with the harvest work. Already we notice that some 
who have heretofore been opponents of the Truth are 
surprised by the lightning-like rapidity with which the 
present financial trouble has come upon the country 
and has spread from ocean to ocean, and may yet perhaps 
influence Europe. They seem to read in this a 
corroboration of our expectations, and to be correspondingly 

R4112 : page 7 

more willing to investigate the more spiritual 

features in our presentations. Let us be prompt 

to avail ourselves of every opportunity for putting the 

Truth into the hands of the public. Some of the colporteurs 

write us that already they have found quite a 

slackening of their work. From others we have the 

reverse report, that when they mention that the SCRIPTURE 

STUDIES they are selling explain the panic and 

show from the Scriptures the outlook for both capital 

and labor they find many thereby interested to purchase, 

and we trust to read and become more thoroughly 

informed respecting all the features of the divine 

plan. During the next two years, even if the prosperity 

be not so great as at present, we expect to see the work 

go grandly forward, and perhaps as much or more evidence 

of gathered wheat as in the past. Those who 

cannot give all of their time to the colporteur work are 

again reminded of the Volunteer work, and that in this 

department all can serve. We are already arranging 

for a large output of tracts during 1908. We will contract 

for at least two millions at first, and from present 

prospects the financial sinews will not be lacking for the 

doubling of that number. 

It remains largely in the hands of our readers to 
determine what shall be the output for the year 1908. 
Remember, that they are free and freight paid to your 
place. When writing about them give the quantity you 
would like to have, and also mention the reputed population 
of the district you hope to serve, and the number 
that will be cooperating with you in the Volunteer 
service. We think it not unreasonable to suppose that 
our Lord's estimate of treasures laid up in heaven 
would include such volunteer services, or any kind of 
service we would render to him and his cause. 



"FIERY TRIALS THAT SHALL TRY YOU" 

We come now to the most important feature of this 
view of the future— of the last seven years of the harvest. 
While, as suggested, we anticipate that the harvest 
work will go on, that the Truth will be spread 
very widely, it is our expectation also that another part 
of the harvesting work will be in progress, namely, the 
threshing and winnowing of the wheat already gathered 
from the field. Before it will be ready for the garner 
these tribulation processes of threshing and winnowing 
will be expected. If our anticipation be correct, 
it implies that there will be peculiar trials and 
testings of faith and of patience and of humility and 
of devotion to the Lord and to the brethren, upon those 
who are already in the light of Present Truth. To what 
extent have we still the chaff and straw of worldly sentiment 
attaching to us as New Creatures, as grains of 
wheat? To what extent are these earthly interests and 
ambitions holding us fast? We must be set free, and 
the experiences to be expected will be of a kind necessary 
for a complete separation from the things of 
worldliness and sin. So far as our hearts are concerned 
they must reach absolute perfection of intent and 
endeavor, however imperfectly they may be able to control 
our mortal bodies: otherwise we are not fit for the 
Kingdom, not fit to be gathered to the garner. To be 
forewarned is to be forearmed. The Apostle declares, 
"Of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse 
things to draw followers after them." The last week 
of our Lord's ministry was the most eventful one of all, 
and the one which witnessed his greatest triumph with 
the people when they hailed him as King as he sat upon 
the ass. And yet the same week meant the severest 
trial upon all of his disciples and our Lord's ignominious 
death. So we shall not be surprised if something 
of a similar character should come to pass during these 
seven years— prosperity of the work amidst intensest 
opposition. 

The Apostle, speaking of our day, mentions "perils 
amongst false brethren," and already we learn that 
some of these are boasting how much they shall be 
able to hinder the harvest work during the coming 
year. But we hear also the Word of the Lord assuring 
us that greater is he who is on our part than all they 
that be against us. We hear his voice again saying, 
"Let not your hearts be troubled," and again, "In 
quietness and confidence shall be your strength." 
So all of the Lord's true people should feel— "None of 
these things move us"— none of these things shall hinder 
us from our own faithfulness to the Lord and to 
the harvest work. Let us be content to wait until the 
great Chief Reaper at the close shall distribute his rewards 
and blessings. Let us continually seek his approval, 
and by and by we may hear his voice saying, 
"Well done, good and faithful servant: Thou hast been 



faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over 
many things. Enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." 
It is proper here that we remind the Lord's people 
of the Master's words to the effect that there are just 
two great captains in the present conflict— that he himself 
is the Head and Leader of the one party, and the 
Adversary the head and leader of the other. He assured 
us that we cannot serve God and Mammon, selfishness. 
He implied that we might be in danger of mistaking 

R4112:page8 

which of these two masters we are serving when 
he said, "His servants ye are to whom ye render service." 
The implication is that some might be serving 
the Adversary and mistakenly think themselves the 
servants of the Lord. We urge all to think carefully 
along these lines, to note what have been the leadings 
of divine providence throughout the harvest time, to 
note the spirit that belongs to the work— the spirit of 
self-sacrifice, the spirit of loyalty to the Word, the 
spirit of love for the brethren to the extent of laying 
down life in their service. We are also to notice the 
spirit or disposition of the Adversary, that it is not to 
build up but to pull down, that it is out of accord with 
the harvest work of the great Reaper, that it is self-seeking 
and ambitious, and disposed to raillery and to 
"shoot out arrows, even bitter words," against those 
who are seeking to serve the Lord and his cause, from 
whom they receive no arrows again in return. 
-Psa. 64:3. 

Let us have in mind at the opening of this year the 
words of our Master to the apostles in his Gethsemane 
hour, "Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation." 
Let us remember that it was zealous Peter who most 
courageously said, "Lord, though all men forsake thee 
yet will not I!" it was he who slept while he might have 
been giving some words of encouragement and joined 
with the Master in prayer, and it was he who later on 
temporarily fell from his steadfastness and joined himself 
to the enemies of the Lord by denying him. We are 
glad that he ultimately recovered himself by the Lord's 
assistance, but how much better it would have been, 
how much happier for him, if he had watched and 
prayed. And so with us— let us follow in the footsteps 
of our Lord, watching and praying, walking circumspectly; 
let us lay down our lives for one another in 
the service of the Truth, not rendering evil for evil nor 
railing for railing, but contrariwise let us bless those 
who seek to injure us and pray for them, realizing that 
not of themselves do they these things but of the Adversary's 
misleading, even as we have the assurance 
that those who crucified the Lord were under Satan's 
delusion, as the Apostles say, "I wot that in ignorance 
ye did it, as did also your rulers." "For if they had 
known they would not have crucified the Lord of glory." 



So those who now oppose the Truth do so because their 
eyes are holden and their ears are holden because of 
the Adversary, and because they have allowed themselves 
to become entangled by his delusive snares and 
ambitions. We hope and pray for their disentanglement, 
their recovery, while we shun their ways. 



R4115 : page 8 

TWO DEBATES ARRANGED FOR 

THE Editor of ZION'S WATCH TOWER is not anxious 
for debate— except where it would seem to be 
necessary for the defense of the Truth, or providentially 
indicated as likely to bring forth good fruits. 
However, as Dr. Eaton's challenge came unsolicited, 
so also, now, we have two more— both of which we have 
accepted in the name of the Lord and depending on his 
sustaining grace— as follows:— 

DEBATE WITH REV. WM. DILLON, D.D. 

VERY PROMINENT AMONGST THE "UNITED BRETHREN," 

AT ELKHART, INDIANA, JANUARY 17 AND 18 

FOUR TOPICS, TWO HOURS EACH, AFTERNOONS AND EVENINGS 

(1) "The Scriptures teach that there will be no probation 
nor opportunity for salvation after the body dies, 

nor subsequent to the second coming of Christ." Dr. 
Dillon will affirm, Pastor Russell will deny. 

(2) "The Scriptures clearly teach that only the 

'saints' of this Gospel Age will share in the First Resurrection, 
but that vast multitudes will be saved in and 
by the subsequent resurrection." Pastor Russell will 
affirm, Dr. Dillon will deny. 

(3) "The Scriptures clearly teach that the second 
coming of Christ will precede the Millennium, and that 
the object of both the second coming and the Millennium 
is the blessing of all the families of the earth." 

Pastor Russell will affirm, Dr. Dillon will deny. 

(4) "The Scriptures clearly teach that the divine 
penalty for sin— actual transgressions of God's holy 
law— eventually to be inflicted upon the incorrigible, 
will consist of inconceivably painful sufferings, eternal 
in duration." Dr. Dillon will affirm, Pastor Russell will 
deny. 

DEBATE WrTH ELDER L. S. WHITE 

SELECTED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE "CHRISTIAN 

DENOMINATION" (RADICAL BRANCH) 

CINCINNATI, O., FEBRUARY 23-28. 

SIX TOPICS, TWO HOURS EACH. PARTICULARS IN OUR NEXT 

ISSUE. 



R4112:page8 

PREPARING THE WAY OF THE LORD 

--JOHN l:19-34.-JANUARY 12- 

Golden Text:— "Behold the Lamb of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world." 

OUR Lord declared of his forerunner, "Verily, I 
say unto you, there hath not arisen a greater 
prophet than John the Baptist." The signification 
of the word prophet is "proclaimer"— not necessarily 
a proclaimer of future things, however. For 
instance, the Scriptures refer to the prophets and seers, 
the latter-named referring particularly to the seeing of 
visions and the foreseeing of coming events. Strictly 
speaking, a prophet is one who teaches or proclaims, 
though in many instances the two qualities are combined 
in one individual. This was so in the case of 
John the Baptist. He was not only a prophet declaring 
the important message to the people that they should 
repent, etc., but he foretold coming events— as, for instance, 
in this lesson he foretold that our Lord was the 
Lamb of God which should take away the sin of the 
world. He declared also that the Lord would baptize 
people with the holy Spirit and with fire. There was 
no greater prophet than John, because none of them 
was entrusted with a more important service of the 
Lord. Others had foretold the coming of Messiah, his 
birth of a virgin, his being led as a lamb to the slaughter, 
his crucifixion, his resurrection, etc., but to John 
was given the very honorable service of being the first 
direct announcer or herald of the Son of God, the man 
Christ Jesus. 

While thinking of this honorable position occupied 
by John, let us remember the Master's word on the 
subject— "Nevertheless I say unto you, he that is least 
in the Kingdom of heaven is greater than he." (Matt. 11:11.) 
What a thought there is here respecting the 
honor that God has conferred upon the apostles and 
upon all who since their time have believed on the Lord 
through their word and come into vital relationship 

R4113 : page 9 

with him through faith and consecration. In proportion 

as we realize this honor of being ambassadors for 

God, let us be faithful in the use of the opportunities 

and privileges afforded us. It was for John's honor to 

be the herald of the Lord in the flesh; it is our distinction 

to be permitted to proclaim the parousia of the 

Son of man and his glorious reign, about to be inaugurated 

for the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

Let us be faithful even unto imprisonment, even unto 



death, even unto beheading, should such be the providence 
of God. 

John's proclamation was, "The Kingdom of heaven 
is at hand, repent"— reform, get ready for it. He foretold 
that our Lord would treat the people of Israel as a 
reaper, that he would winnow the wheat and cast the chaff 
into the fire. The same thought he expressed again, saying, 
"He will baptize [some of you] with the holy 
Spirit and [others of you] with fire." These prophecies 
were accurately fulfilled. Our Lord did a reaping 
work in that nation, as he said to his disciples, "I send 
you forth to reap that whereon you bestowed no labor." 
For three years and a half the Lord reaped and gathered 
the first-fruits of that nation as his disciples, and 
upon these at Pentecost he poured out the holy Spirit. 
Subsequently the apostles gathered others before the 
time for the burning of the chaff, the "baptism of fire" 
which occurred in the closing of their national history, 
which culminated in A.D. 70 with the utter destruction 
of the city, the temple, and their entire polity. Similarly 
we who are living in the harvest time of this age, 
and who are declaring the presence, parousia, of the 
Son of man, are aware that a reaping work is now being 
accomplished in Christendom, nominal Spiritual 
Israel, and that all the wheat will be gathered into the 
garner, beyond the vail, and that speedily there will 
come upon the world, especially upon the tare class, a 
time of trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation— the divine preparation for the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom in power and great glory for the 
blessing of all the families of the earth. 

"WE BE ABRAHAM'S CHILDREN" 

John's announcement that sin would bar any from 
a share in the Kingdom, and hence that all should repent 
and seek divine reconciliation and turn over a new 
leaf, came as a shock to some who had been passing as 
God's holy people— the Pharisees and the worldly-wise 
Sadducees, higher critics, unbelievers. While some of 
these hearkened and confessed their sins and reformed, 
others disputed, claiming that John's teachings were 
extreme and unreasonable. Their argument was that 
God had promised the Kingdom to the seed of Abraham. 
There is no other nation of Abraham's seed 
and none other as holy or as worthy as we, and the 
promise of the Kingdom belongs to all Jews irrespective 
of their sanctity. So those who really embraced 
John's testimony were chiefly of the poor, confessedly 
sinful. We have the Lord's word for it that if the nation 
at large had heeded, had accepted John's message, 
they would have believed in Jesus. Hence we may 
well suppose that of the 500 brethren who became our 
Lord's disciples before his crucifixion, and who were 
privileged to see him after his resurrection, many of 
them were of those who had heard and heeded John's 



message. We may suppose also that considerable 

numbers of those who believed on the day of Pentecost 

and afterward were of those who heard John and were 

baptized by him for remission of sins and reformation 

of life. Thus do divine arrangements and agencies cooperate 

for the blessing of the honest-hearted, whatever 

may be their station in life, high or low, rich or poor. 

OUR LORD'S FORERUNNER 

In the East in olden times, and still, great personages 
in their travels are preceded by heralds or forerunners 
who clear the way. Dr. Trumball describes 
the streets of an oriental city, "well filled with half-naked 
cripples, blind beggars, vain women, and men 
in bright-colored garments, donkeys trotting through 
the crowded ways. Suddenly out of all this confusion 
a sharp, clear voice was heard, 'O ah! O ah!'— meaning, 
Take care— from a young Egyptian, gaily dressed, 
coming on the run, swinging a light staff in his hand 
and repeating his cries to the throng in the street to 
make way for those who are to follow. Close behind 
him came an open carriage drawn by a span of showy 
horses, containing an official of the government. During 
my stay in Cairo one of the commonest sights was 
the carriage of a pasha, preceded through the crowded 
streets by one or more forerunners, calling aloud for 
the clearing of the way." 

John the Baptist was to be the forerunner of our 
Lord in the flesh— to clear the way, to make the announcement 
—that he might be properly received, etc. 
But John did not fulfil all of the prophecy relating to 
this clearing of the way and preparing for Messiah's 
Kingdom, which reads:— 

"Prepare ye in the wilderness the way of the Lord, 

Make straight in the desert a highway for our God. 

Every valley shall be exalted, 

And every mountain shall be made low, 

And the crooked places shall be made straight, 

And the rough places plain."— Isa. 40:3,4. 

THE ANTITYPICAL ELIJAH 

We remind our readers that in the second volume 
of DAWN-STUDIES, chapter VIIL, we have set forth the 
evidences that as John in the flesh introduced Jesus in 
the flesh and thus fulfilled the work of forerunner, so 
the Church in the flesh during this Gospel Age has been 
the antitypical Elijah, whose business it is to announce 
the second coming of Christ, the King of glory, and to 
call for the clearing of the way for his Millennial reign. 
As you all have this presentation we will not enter into 
a discussion of it here. 

Let us note the foregoing prophecy: We perceive 
that John's ministry accomplished comparatively little 
of this; it lasted less than two years and reached a 



very small proportion of one generation, of one nation. 
But this is the very message that the antitypical John, 
the antitypical Elijah, the Church of Christ in the flesh, 
has been witnessing to the world. Its message as 
voiced by the Apostle is that the world is in a wilderness 
condition and needs the presence of the great 
King to bring order out of its confusion. Its message 
is that those who hear should walk circumspectly, 
should make a straight pathway in the desert, a highway 
for the coming King. More than this, it shows 

R4113 :page 10 

that the entire reign of Jesus and the Church during 
the Millennium will be to prepare the world for the 
presence of Jehovah, that the earth may again become 
his green footstool instead of being a desert, rejected 
and condemned by him because of sin. 

Not only is the work of the Church in the flesh 
pointed out in this prophecy, but also the work of 
Christ and the Church in glory during the Millennial 
Age is foretold— "every valley shall be exalted," signifying 
that the humble shall be lifted up out of degradation, 
and those who have reached high positions of influence 
and affluence under the reign of sin shall be 
humbled under the reign of righteousness, and thus 
symbolically "every mountain shall be brought low." 
The great things which belong to the present time of 
sin and imperfection will all be straightened out, and 
the incongruous things will all be smoothed over; so 
that eventually the world of mankind, as a result of the 
work of the "Times of restitution of all things," shall 
again be in harmony with the divine will and the divine 
law of love, be ready for a return of the divine presence, 
as represented by the prophets in the words, "He 
shall make the place of his feet glorious." 

"WHO ART THOU, THEN?" 

This was the question asked of John the Baptist— 
"Art thou the Messiah?" No. "Art thou Elias?" No. 
"Art thou that prophet mentioned by Moses?" (Acts 3:21,23.) 
No. "Who art thou, then? Why do you 
come in this manner, speaking as with authority?" 
John's answer was, "I am the voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make 
his paths straight.... I indeed baptize you with water; 
but one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of 
whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose." (Luke 3:4,16.) 
Thus did John announce the greatness of Messiah 
and his own insignificance in comparison. Surely 
we who antitype him may feel very humble in respect 
to all of our privileges in connection with the announcement 
of the glorious Kingdom. Any other attitude 
would be unworthy of us as his representatives and 
ambassadors. The poet expresses this matter, 



saying: 

"Rather be nothing, nothing— 

To him let their voices be raised; 
He is the fountain of blessing, 

Yes, worthy is he to be praised." 
How similar is this announcement to the one made 
by John. There Jesus was present in the flesh, offering 
himself to fleshly Israel. Now he is present a 
spirit being and equally unrecognized. There he was 
eventually recognized by all the Israelites indeed; here 
we expect that his presence, parousia, will be recognized 
by all Spiritual Israelites indeed before the "harvest" 
closes. It is not advisable to cast this pearl of 
precious truth before the world nor before the unconsecrated. 
The facts of the Lord's presence, that the 
harvest work is now in progress, that the wheat will 

R4114:page 10 

soon all be garnered and that the fire of trouble upon 
the tares will soon be kindled are only for those who 
are "Israelites indeed," hungering and thirsting for 
righteousness. But these truths are indeed meat in 
due season for all the wise virgins. 

"BEHOLD THE LAMB OF GOD" 

While our Lord's strength and majesty are symbolically 
referred to when he is styled the "Lion of the 
tribe of Judah," thus picturing his mighty power as the 
Millennial King, the picture of a lamb is certainly very 
appropriate to him in connection with his earthly ministry 
and sacrifice for our sins. His submission to the 
Father's will in every particular and ultimately even 
unto death, even the death of the cross, was very lamb-like. 
Furthermore, he was God's Lamb in the sense 
that his offering for our sins was the divine arrangement, 
the Father's plan. The Scriptural declaration 
is that God gave his only begotten Son to be man's 
Redeemer, that he sent his Son into the world— the Son 
delighting to do the Father's will. All these thoughts 
beautifully blend together in this expression, "The 
Lamb of God." Moreover, it brings to our minds the 
thought of the necessity for a sacrifice for our sins. In 
no other way could a lamb take away or bear the sin 
of the world. How glad we are that by the Lord's 
grace we not only have eyes of understanding to see 
him as our great Teacher, Shepherd, but also eyes to 
see and minds to understand that he was indeed the 
Lamb of God, whose sacrifice on our behalf is to cancel 
our sins, their penalty, etc. Only those who can 
recognize Jesus as the Lamb of God, the Sin-Bearer, 
can have the justification by faith proffered to believers 
in this Gospel Age. Let us never lose sight of this 
feature of the Truth, Whoever loses his robe of righteousness 
through faith in the blood, loses all so far as 



the Scriptures reveal. 

TAKING AWAY THE SIN OF THE WORLD 

How wonderful are the statements of the divine 
Word!— how exact! John, as a Jew, would not be expected 
to understand all that his words declared, for 
the Jews were especially expecting Messiah to take 
away the sins of the Jews, and that then they, as God's 
Royal Priesthood, would correct the world in righteousness. 
But John's declaration goes farther 
than this, and includes all the Gentiles as well. The 
wisdom from on high which guided this prophetic utterance 
is beyond that which the majority of the Lord's 
people today can appreciate. The general thought 
today seems to be that the sin of the world is never to 
be taken away— that the world will sink down into 
eternal torment under the weight of sin— the Adamic 
condemnation, supplemented by personal transgressions. 
Christendom, Churchianity, today knows nothing 
about a Savior that, as the Lamb of God, shall 
take away the sin of the world. Alas! alas! poor, blind 
Christendom! It has read these words and other similar 
declarations of the Scriptures without getting from them 
the real blessing which they contain. We remember in 
this connection the Apostle's statement that "the man 
Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all," and we 
remember his further statement that Jesus' sacrifice 
was "a propitiation for our sins [the Church's sins], 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world." (I John 2:2.) Truly, as the Lord declared, 
As the heavens are higher than the earth so are my 
ways higher than your ways and my plans than your 
plans. How glad we are that we find God to be neither 

R4114 :page 11 

little, mean nor revengeful, but a great God whose wondrous 
plan so far transcends the thought of man. As we 
look with the eyes of our understanding we realize a 
measure of the fulfilment of the Apostle's prayer, 
which, no doubt, included us, "I bow my knees unto the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,. ..that ye may be 
able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth 
and length and depth and height; and to know the love 
of Christ that passeth knowledge."— Eph. 3:14,18,19. 

HIS WORK IS BEFORE HIM 

John the Baptist spoke of the Lamb as being present, 
but of the cancellation of the sin of the world as 
being a future work. And this work is still incomplete. 
Our Lord did die as the Lamb, his sacrifice was 
indeed fully meritorious and satisfactory to the Father, 
as evidenced by his resurrection from the dead and exaltation 
to glory and power. But in harmony with the 



divine plan, the taking away of the sins of the world is 
divided into two parts: (1) The taking away of the 
sins of those whose hearts long for reconciliation with 
God and forgiveness, and to be in harmony with that 
which is right and true and just and good. These, 
called believers, have their sins taken away reckonedly; 
or rather, as the Apostle and the Prophet express it, 
their sins are "covered" from God's sight by the robe of 
Christ's righteousness— to be entirely blotted out or 
taken away when, by the Lord's grace, they shall have 
finished their course and as faithful ones been counted 
worthy to enter into life eternal. In that new body 
then to be granted there will be no blemish, no sin to 
cover, all will have been blotted out. Then will begin 
the reign of Christ and his glorified Church, his Bride, 
the blessing of the world— the Millennial reign, the 
Kingdom of the heavens, the rule of righteousness. 
(2) But before that reign shall begin, the Lamb of God— 
who redeemed the world more than eighteen centuries 
ago— will present the merit of his sacrifice and the sacrifice 
also of the Church, his Body members [made 
worthy, acceptable through his merit], to the Father 
as the second offering of the great Day of Atonement 
sacrifice— for all the people.— Lev. 16. 

As the Lord's presentation of his sacrifice when he 
ascended up on high was accepted of the Father and 
the blessing came upon the Church, the household of 
faith, so surely will the second presentation in the end 
of this age when offered by the great High Priest be 
acceptable to the Father for the sins of the whole world 
—all the people. Divine forgiveness for all, the obliquity 
of Adamic guilt and weakness, will then be made 
applicable to every creature, and only for such portions 
of transgressions as have been in the nature of wilful 
wrong doing will receive "chastisements," "stripes." 
(Luke 12:47,48.) All the influences of that Millennial 
Kingdom will be exercised for the blessing, uplifting 
and assistance of all who will then be brought to a 
knowledge of the Lord and his gracious plans. Even 
stripes, chastisements, judgments are amongst the 
assistances for the world and their correction in righteousness. 
So, then, by the end of the Millennial Age, 
the blessing of God— through the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world— shall have accomplished 
such wonderful, gracious blessings for mankind 
that all shall have reached the full perfection of restitution 
to human nature except the incorrigible, who 
will be "utterly destroyed from amongst the people." 
-Acts 3:23. 

JOHN'S FAITHFUL WITNESS 

We see in John's message an utter absence of selfishness, 
that stumbling stone which has kept so many 
of the Lord's people from themselves progressing and 
from being used of the Lord as a blessing to others 



and witnesses to the truth. John's confession was that 
Jesus was far greater than himself, and should be preferred 
before him because he was before him. He was 
not only before him in the sense of having had 
a preexistence with the Father, but he was before him 
in the sense of always having had a higher station and 
being perfect, while John himself was compassed with 
imperfections of the flesh like other men. 

The declaration, "I knew him not," should not be 
understood to mean that he was not acquainted with 
Jesus, for the record shows that they were full cousins. 
Rather the thought is that he knew not that Jesus was 
the Messiah: he knew him as his cousin, he knew him 
as a wonderful boy and a wonderful man, he knew him 
well enough to at first protest that he was not one of 
the kind that should be baptized— he was not a sinner. 
But after Jesus had insisted that by his baptism he 
would be accomplishing the Father's will— "fulfilling 
all righteousness"— then John baptized him in water. 
There, he tells us, at that moment he received from God 
the evidence that Jesus was the Messiah. He had already 
been informed that he was to announce Messiah 
and the Kingdom, and that he would know the Son of 
God by beholding the descent upon him of the holy 
Spirit as a dove, but he had not expected that this demonstration 
should take place in connection with any 
whom he baptized. He himself, then, was astonished 
when he beheld the descent of the Spirit upon the Lord, 
and he announced then to the people that Jesus was 
the Messiah, the Son of God, the Lamb of God. John 
did not announce that Jesus was the Father, but that 
he was the Son of God. This was our Lord's own declaration, 
the declaration of the apostles, and our testimony 
must be in harmony with this. We are not 
to ignore the Father nor the Son nor the relationship 
between the two, nor the oneness which exists between 
them, which our Lord explained in his prayer, when he 
prayed for the Church that they all might be one even 
as he and the Father are one— not one in person, but 
one in unity of heart and purpose. 



R4115 :page 11 

FINDING THE LORD'S JEWELS 

-JOHN 1:35-51. -JANUARY 19.- 

Golden Text:— "We have found him of whom Moses in 
the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth." 

OUR last lesson showed us Jesus at the time of his 
consecration and its symbolization by baptism, 
when he received the holy Spirit, which to John 
the Baptist was the token that he was the Messiah. It 



was after this that Jesus was for forty days alone in 
the wilderness studying the divine plan, and particularly 
his own share therein, under the enlightening 
influences of the holy Spirit which he had just received. 
This, we see, brought also testing and temptation from 
the Adversary, suggestions of other and different ways 
from that which the Lord's Word indicated and which 
the holy Spirit now showed. Our Lord having passed 
through those temptations successfully, a victor, began 
his ministry of three and a half years of self-sacrifice 
even unto death. Naturally enough he went back to 
where John had been baptizing and preaching. How 
much fellowship he enjoyed with John is not stated, 
or how long he remained in that vicinity. Only the 
most perspicuous incidents are noted. 

It was while Jesus was away in the wilderness that 
the Pharisees and Scribes asked John whether or not 
he was the Messiah and received bold testimony that he 

R4115 :page 12 

was not, and was not even worthy to be the menial servant 

of the great Messiah, who was to accomplish the 

fulfilment of the prophecies. This was just before our 

Lord's return, and on the next day (v. 29) Jesus— having 

returned from the wilderness— mingled amongst 

the people listening to John's preaching, etc., and it 

was at that time that John said, "Behold the Lamb of 

God which taketh away the sin of the world," and acknowledged 

him publicly, and that he had the witness of 

the Spirit in seeing the dove resting upon him at his 

baptism. It was on the following day, as we read 

in our lesson, that John, standing with two of his disciples, 

pointed to Jesus in the distance walking and said, 

"Behold the Lamb of God." 

"THERE COMETH ONE AFTER ME" 

The beautiful simplicity and honesty of John the 
Baptist is remarkable because it is rare. The majority 
of even the noble-minded seem to have such a selfish, 
grasping disposition as to unfit them for a service 
of this kind committed to John. Apparently the majority 
would find it absolutely impossible to avoid the 
extolling of their own position and service and dignity 
in connection with whatever they would say in respect 
to another, but John seems to have been utterly oblivious 
of himself— he thought only of his responsibility 
as the Voice that should cry in the wilderness to them, 
announcing Messiah. Disowning all honor and distinction 
for himself, he directed the reverence of all 
hearts toward Jesus. Let us emphasize this, each in 
his own heart, as being the proper attitude for all of 
the Lord's honored servants. We are not to honor 
ourselves, but to honor him whom the Father has honored, 
our Lord and our Head. In proportion as we 



shall be faithful in this service and seek not our own 

but our Master's praise and honor, pointing him out as 

the one in whom is centered the divine plan— in this 

same proportion will we be exhibiting the spirit, disposition, 

which our Lord can approve and reward with 

a share in the heavenly Kingdom and glory. If we did 

not cultivate this spirit and have it in our hearts we 

would be unfit for the Kingdom— unfit to be entrusted 

with so great power, honor and glory and with immortality. 

"He that honoreth me I will honor," "He that 

is ashamed of me and of my words, of him will the Son 

of man be ashamed," "He that exalteth [praises] himself 

shall be abased; he that humbleth himself shall 

be exalted. "-John 5:23; Luke 9:26; 14:11. 

"ALL MEN WERE IN EXPECTATION" 

The Scriptures inform us that at this time the 
whole Jewish nation was in expectation of Messiah. 
The records show this in connection with the time of 
our Lord's birth, the solicitude of Herod, the killing of 
the babes of Bethlehem, the journey of the wise men, 
etc. Doctor Farrar remarks on this same line:— 

"We are informed by Tacitus, by Suetonius, and 
by Josephus, that there prevailed throughout the entire 
East at this time an intense conviction, derived 
from ancient prophecies, that ere long a powerful monarch 
would arise in Judea, and gain dominion over the 
world." 

It was in harmony with this general expectation of 
the people that John's preaching drew such large 
crowds when he announced that the Kingdom of Messiah 
was nigh, and that all those prepared for a share 
therein should confess their sins, repent of them and 
reform— inviting them to symbolize this by baptism, 
but applying it only to Jews, and not in reference to 
their original sin— which under the Law was atoned 
for year by year with the blood of bulls and goats— 
but referred to repentance for all personal transgressions, 
misdeeds against the Law. We have our Lord's 
testimony for it that in proportion as the people believed 
John's message and acted thereon, in that same 
proportion they were ready for his ministry and the 
further truth of the Gospel. Hence we are not surprised 
that those who became the Lord's disciples 
were in some manner intimately and sympathetically 
acquainted with John and his preaching. Is it not a 
rule in divine providence that one step of knowledge 
and devotion leads to another? It was in harmony 
with this that the disciples of John the Baptist had the 
Messiah first pointed out to them, and thus the door 
was opened for their becoming Jesus' disciples. 

SEEKING FELLOWSHIP WITH JESUS 

The two disciples to whom John the Baptist made 



the remark, "Behold the Lamb of God," at once concluded 

that if they had found the Messiah whom John 

was introducing it was time to seek his fellowship, and 

if possible identify themselves with his ministry. Nor 

does John the Baptist seem to have offered the slightest 

remonstrance against their leaving off cooperation 

with him. The name of one of these is given in the 

narrative, Andrew; the name of the other is omitted, 

but it is presumed that it was John, the writer of this 

Gospel, whose modesty in such matters is indicated by 

the withholding of his name on another occasion also 

—when he refers to himself as "that disciple whom Jesus 

loved." How beautiful this modesty, how much it 

endears the character of John to all of us. A less modest 

man in writing of the matter would probably have 

told of how he first thought of following Jesus and invited 

Andrew to accompany him. But we can not only 

have much more love for John because of this characteristic 

of humility, but it gives us correspondingly 

more confidence in all he has written— that ambition 

did not warp or color any of his descriptions of the 

matters recorded by him. 

The modesty of the two men is further exemplified 
by their course of conduct in following the Lord instead 
of approaching him boldly and saying, "Sir, we 
have the honorable distinction of being amongst the 
most prominent disciples of John the Baptist, and now 
introduce ourselves to you." On the contrary, they followed 
quietly, wondering where our Lord resided and 
how they might have an opportunity without obtruding 
themselves to become acquainted with him. Their reverence 
for him and their modest opinion of themselves 
restrained them from improprieties. However, after 
they had followed the Lord probably a considerable 
distance on his journey toward his abode, he turned to 
them saying, "What seek ye?" or, as we might translate 
it into the form of today, "Is there anything I can 

R4116 :page 13 

do for you?" Taken by surprise, they merely answered 

the Master, "Rabbi, we are wondering where you reside." 

Our Lord answered, "Come and see," and they 

went with him and spent the remainder of that day 

(for this was about four o'clock in the afternoon) in 

his company. Their queries and our Lord's answers 

during that afternoon and evening are open for our 

imagination, for no record is given us. Doubtless 

they explained to the Lord what they had heard respecting 

him from John the Baptist, and made inquiries regarding 

his future work and Kingdom. We may be 

sure that our Lord told them only part of the truth, in 

harmony with his subsequent statement to all of 

the disciples, "I have many things to tell you, but 

you cannot bear them now."— John 16:12. 



LESSONS FOR THE NEW CREATION 

There are several lessons here that may profit us: 

(1) The humility of the disciples in their approach; 

(2) Their proper ambition to have all that God had 
provided for them and to make use of their opportunity 
—to progress from being the disciples of John to 

the discipleship of Jesus; (3) Their seeking in this unobtrusive 

manner to have fellowship with the Lord and 

to become better acquainted; (4) Our Lord's generous 

reception of them and hospitable invitation to his 

home; (5) His wisdom in not telling them the whole 

truth— neither about the heavenly things nor about the 

earthly trials and difficulties. Meat in due season is 

the Scriptural order— milk for babes, strong meat for 

those who are more developed, as the Apostle 

recommends. 

How much need all the Lord's dear followers have 
for applying these various lessons each to his own 
heart and experience and practice! How many of us 
have had a zeal without wisdom, and have fed new beginners 
with strong meat, which has troubled and hindered 
them if it did not choke their interest. But we 
are all pupils, and let us all learn more and more to be 
wise as serpents and harmless as doves, as earnest in 
showing the pearls to those ready for the sight as in 
withholding them from those who are swinish and 
unprepared. 

"WHAT ARE YOU SEEKING?" 

There is peculiar force in this query, and no doubt 
our Lord used it with the intention of awakening this 
very thought in these two who first sought his companionship. 
It is a good question for each one of us to put 
to himself, and for us to suggest at a proper time to all 
others who are manifesting any interest in Present 
Truth. What are we seeking? What are we looking 
for? We know what the world is seeking— wealth, 
honor, fame, ease, etc.— and we know that many who 
turn toward the Lord still have the spirit of the world. 
They would like to be the Lord's disciples and still 
have and cultivate and enjoy the hopes and ambitions 
that are more or less worldly. It is appropriate that 
we should give heed to the Master's words as though 
they were addressed to each of us individually, What 
are you seeking? Let us answer our Master in our own 
hearts and in prayer; and before we make answer, let 
us consider well that it may be a truthful one, for we 
might indeed deceive ourselves, but could not deceive 
him with whom we have to do. It is right that we 
should seek the Kingdom and that we should know 
that there is a great honor and glory and dignity associated 
with it by divine arrangement, and that thus we 
should "seek for glory, honor and immortality." But 
in conjunction with this seeking of the Kingdom we 



should remember our Master's words on another occasion, 
that we should seek chiefly the Kingdom of God 
and his righteousness. 

We are to remember that the Kingdom is not to be 
reached by an unrighteous path, that injustice, iniquity, 
lawlessness, self-indulgence, selfishness in any 
form are paths which lead in other directions. We are 
to remember that the Master by word and by example 
indicated to us that to live godly in this present time 
would involve us in a measure of persecution, as it did 
him, and that the servant must not expect to be above 
his lord in the world's favor. Hence to say we are 
seeking the Kingdom means that we are taking the 
path leading thereto— the narrow way of self-denial. 
It means that we have enlisted under the banner of the 
Lord, with a full knowledge that our loyalty to him 
will mean to us opposition from the world, the flesh 
and the Adversary, as we seek to be good soldiers of 
the cross and to endure hardness in fighting against 
sin. It is those who seek the Lord with sincerity, with 
honesty, without guile and without selfishness, who 
find him, have fellowship with him and become his 
true disciples, and eventually will have joint-heirship 
with him in his Kingdom. 

"FIRST FINDETH HIS OWN BROTHER" 

One of the two who heard John and followed Jesus 
was Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter— "He findeth 
first his own brother Simon." The revised version may 
be understood to imply that both disciples sought 
their brothers, but that Andrew found his brother first. 
If, as is supposed, John was the other disciple, we 
know that he had a brother, James, and that the latter 
also was brought to the Lord. The particular thought 
we wish to emphasize here as worthy of special commendation, 
embodying a proper lesson for us, is the 
fact that these disciples in beginning the service of the 
Truth went first to their own brethren. This implies 
that they had brotherly love in their hearts, as we 
should properly expect all would have who would be 
found worthy to be disciples of Jesus. It implies that 
they had influence with their brethren along religious 
lines, which probably would not have been true if they 
had not been recognized by their relatives as men of 
character and principle. If, therefore, any of the 
Lord's people should feel impelled to first go to strangers 
with the good tidings it would be a less favorable 
sign as respects the esteem in which they are held. 
However, let them not feel discouraged if they have not 
this favorable evidence to begin with. Let us remember 
the Apostle's assurance that amongst those the 
Lord is choosing for his disciples there are not many 
great, noble, influential— that they are mainly the 
ignoble. 

The very fact that the Lord has granted us the 



privilege of his fellowship is an assurance that there 
was something in us that he did not despise, and was 

R4116 :page 14 

willing to take over, that he might mould and fashion 
it by his truth and grace, and finally present it beautiful 
and irreprovable before the Father through the glorious 
change of the First Resurrection. Again, however, 
let us emphasize the propriety of loving those who 
are our kin to the extent that we will do all in our power 
for their assistance. As this is a rule that should 
prevail amongst brethren it should also be a rule 
as between husband and wife, parents and children. 
If a wife should receive the Truth, her first joy should 
be, if possible, to bring the matter to the attention of 
her husband. If a husband receive the Truth it should 
be his first joy and privilege to bring the matter to the 
attention of his wife, and so between the parents to the 
children. We confess that we have been surprised at 
times to find that this course, which seems so natural 
and so proper, has not always suggested itself to those 
who have come into the light of Present Truth. 

We advise that where a different course has been 
followed it is time for a change. Let the husband plan 
for the welfare of the wife and assist her in arranging 
the home matters, so that she may have time for studying 
the Truth, attending meetings, etc. Let the wife 
coming into the Truth give diligent attention to arrange 
matters most favorably for her husband, that he 
also may enjoy the blessings, the privileges of study, 
etc. The old adage, that "Charity begins at home," is 
as true of religious charity as of other kinds. "Husbands, 
love your wives"— do all in your power to bless 
them, especially in their highest spiritual interests, 
and to bring to them this highest of all joys. "Wives, 
reverence your husbands"— appreciate them, and desire 
that they shall have all of the good things obtainable, 
and use your best influence for their assistance. 

"WE HAVE FOUND THE MESSIAH" 

With this message they greeted their brethren, 
and, as explained in the text, the Hebrew word Messiah 
corresponded to the Greek word Christ. They 
knew that for long centuries Messiah had been promised, 
and that their whole nation, through varying vicissitudes, 
had been looking, hoping, praying for his coming 
and for the blessings which he would bring to their 
nation as their king, delivering them from all evil and 
exalting them with the power of God to be the light of 
the world, and thus through them shedding blessings 
upon all nations. The afternoon spent by these two 
with Jesus had convinced them that the words of John 
the Baptist were correct, that Jesus was "the Lamb of 
God, which taketh away the sin of the world." 



It is not explained how Peter received the message, 
but judging him from his subsequent course of conduct, 
we must assume that he came with haste to see, 
to know, to judge for himself on the subject. The nature 
of the evidence given him by Jesus is not related, 
but he believed, became a disciple, received a new 
name— an added name. He was Simon Bar-Jona, or 
Simon, son of Jonah; now, henceforth, he would be 
more particularly known as a disciple by the name of 
Simon Peter, that is, Simon, a stone. Thus early did 
Jesus indicate his knowledge of the man, recognizing 
him as one of the living stones for the glorious Temple 
of the future, as this Apostle himself afterward explained. 
-I Pet. 2:4,5. 

R4117 :page 14 

"GO FORTH INTO GALILEE" 

On the day following Jesus would go forth into 
Galilee, and en route found Philip, whom he personally 
invited to become his follower, and then speedily Philip 
found Nathanael, known also in the Scriptures as 
Bartholomew. 

This finding of the disciples is described to have 
been at Bethabara, where Jesus was making his home, 
and which by the revisers is called Bethany— thus giving 
the suggestion that our Lord was acquainted with 
the family of Lazarus and Martha and Mary before he 
began his ministry, and that it was to this point that 
the disciples followed him from the fords of the Jordan, 
where John had been baptizing. Evidently our Lord 
tarried in the vicinity of John's mission for a time, 
there to find some of the most earnest ones whom 
John's preaching had gathered together. 

It will be noticed that the disciples here mentioned 
all came from Galilee, John and James, Andrew and 
Simon Peter, Philip and Nathanael. (Judas alone was 
a Judean.) What were these men doing so far away 
from their homes? We can only suppose that they 
were amongst the masses who heard of John and his 
preaching, and who were so deeply interested in the 
coming Messiah that they came what was considered 
in those days a considerable journey, leaving their business 
that they might hear what John had to say, and 
join with him as his disciples in helping to prepare the 
way for Messiah. How the Lord does use one ministration 
of the Truth to prepare our hearts for a later 
and fuller illustration of it! This corroborates the 
statement of our Lord's prayer to the effect that these 
disciples were true, God-fearing consecrated men before 
they came to Jesus. In the prayer Jesus says, 
"Thine they were and thou gavest them to me." (John 17:6.) 
A lesson to us in this is that if we are faithful 
and zealous to every portion of truth that comes to us, 
according as we receive and act upon this we will be 



prepared for another. Had these men not had the 
spirit of consecration they never would have left their 
affairs to join with John in his ministry, and then they 
might not have been so well prepared to be the honored 
apostles of Jesus. 

"WHENCE KNOWEST THOU ME?" 

The story of the call of Nathanael is a specially 
interesting one. Our imaginations have little difficulty 
in filling in the items omitted by the narrative. Philip 
himself had come within the charmed circle of our 
Lord's influence, and had realized that it was a blessed 
privilege to become his disciple and that he must be 
indeed the long-looked-for Messiah. Full of this confidence 
he looked for his friend Nathanael, whom he 
recognized as being of one mind and heart with himself 
in the desire to serve the Lord and to be ready for 
Messiah's Kingdom. Finding him his salutation was, 
"We have found him of whom Moses in the Law and 
the Prophets did write— Jesus of Nazareth, [adopted] 
son of Joseph." Nathanael was apparently a man of 
keen intellectual power. He felt that his friend Philip 
had accepted something too hastily, and that he was 
being deceived by a pretender, and his prompt objection 
was, "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?" 
As though he had said, "That is a mean city of itself; 
no great people of any reputation would ever come from 
thence; no prophecies, so far as we know, make any 
reference to that city. What you tell me of your Messiah 
rather tends to prejudice my mind against him." 

And so it is today with some of the Lord's true 
followers who are expecting the second coming of the 
Lord as the great King of glory. When we tell them 
that we have found the truth on this subject and that 
the Law and the prophets all corroborate the fact that 
we are now living in the harvest time, in the parousia 
of the Son of man, they are disposed to sneer at our 
zeal and enthusiasm and to bid us be very careful lest 
we be deceived. They ask, Whence comes the message 
of the parousia? and when they are told that it is not 
from the great, the wise, the mighty of this present 
time, not from the Doctors of Divinity, but from humble 
sources that the message reaches them, they ask, 

R4117 :page 15 

"What could you expect from such a source?" intimating 
that rather we should look to the Scribes and 
Pharisees and Doctors of the Law today. 

Let us answer such doubting brethren as Philip 
answered Nathanael, "Come and see!" Investigate, 
test the matter by the Word of God. Apparently Nathanael 
would not go with Philip. The latter may have 
gone his own way dejectedly, because one whom he esteemed 
to be a true servant of God was apparently unwilling 



to hearken and to investigate. But Nathanael 
had his own reasons for not at once complying with the 
invitation. He felt that the matter was one of great 
importance; that it affected not only his own interests 
but the interests of his friends and of the Lord's cause 
in general. He must be cautious. He had already 
heard of Jesus, and had been considering and praying 
about this very subject before Philip came to him; he 
had asked to be kept from delusions and snares— that 
his judgment might be guided of the Lord, that he 
might not be deceived by a pretender. He would follow 
a little later, and, free from all prejudice, would 
endeavor to judge of the merits or demerits of the case, 
relying upon the Lord's blessing, which he had sought. 

How glad we would be if all our dear friends who 
give evidence, so far as we are able to judge, of being 
true, loyal servants of the Lord, were to take the course 
that Nathanael took to seek the Lord and his protection 
and guidance, and then to investigate, proving all 
things by the Word of God! And while we may be sure 
that though some may not as promptly take this course 
as did Nathanael, all who are of the truly overcoming 
class will ultimately take it and ultimately be guided, 
that they may indeed come in contact with Present 
Truth and realize the parousia of our Lord and his 
work of harvesting the Church and gathering the ripe 
grains into the garner preparatory to their shining 
forth with him in the glory of the Kingdom for the blessing 
of all the families of the earth. -Matt. 13:43. 

BLESSED ARE YOUR EYES AND EARS 

As we notice in this lesson the reception that our 
Lord gave Nathanael, we are forced to contrast it with 
the very different reception he gave to some of the 
Scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of the Law when 
they approached him in a caviling spirit. To these he 
spoke in parables and dark sayings which he did not 
expect them to appreciate or to understand, but to such 
as Nathanael our Lord was most gracious, because 
knowing the hearts of all he could wisely discriminate. 
We may not exercise such a liberty because such a 
knowledge is not ours; it is for us to be patient and 
courteous to all, and to do our best to assist all to an 
understanding of the Truth, whether they shall hear 
or whether they shall forbear— convinced, however, 
that only the Israelites indeed will hear effectually, 
will receive the call and be profited thereby to the attainment 
of the prize. 

Before Nathanael had quite reached Jesus and 
those who were with him, the Master said, in his hearing, 
"Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no 
guile." A wonderful tribute this! No wonder Nathanael 
was fit to be of the Little Flock and one of the 
apostles! No wonder Philip wrestled with him, praying 
him to come and see. His honesty of heart made 



him worthy of the blessings of which the mass of his 
nation were not then worthy. As we read in John 1:11,12, 
Jesus "came unto his own and his own received 
him not; but to as many as received him to them gave 
he liberty [privilege] to become the sons of God." 
And he helped those who were in the right attitude of 
heart to receive him; he assisted their faith and encouraged 
their confidence, saying to one, as we remember, 
"Be not faithless, but believing."— John 20:27. 

But Nathanael, although he realized that he was 
an honest, true Israelite, seeking for whatever God had 
to give to his faithful, was not satisfied with this testimony 
—such an expression might be given by another 
in flattery. He would cross-question the Lord, and he 
said, "Whence knowest thou me?" You have made a 
statement; what is your authority for it? I do not 
know that we have ever met before. Jesus replied, 
"When thou wast under the fig-tree, before Philip called 
thee, I saw thee." Ah, well did Nathanael remember 
how he had crept under the low-spreading boughs of 
the fig-tree and how he had prayed to the heavenly 
Father for wisdom and for the proper evidences on the 
subject of concern. Here he had the very answer to 
his prayer. The one who could know about that 
prayer and could thus answer it and reveal himself 
must indeed be superhuman— all that he claimed, the 
Messiah. Nathanael's faith operated quickly, and he 
responded, "Rabbi [Master], thou art the Son of God: 
thou art the King of Israel." 

And is not our Lord's dealing practically the same 
today? Is it not true that those who now in faith and 
prayer seek for enlightenment respecting the times and 
the seasons and the features of the divine plan, and 
information respecting the harvest work— is it not true 
that these are specially helped of the Lord? that the 
Truth is made specially clear before their minds? 
whereas others coming to the subject through idle curiosity 
perhaps, or with a half faith fear a coming trouble 
and are desirous of knowing how to escape it, are 
left comparatively in darkness? Let us who have discerned 
these beautiful traits and qualities in the class 
of disciples whom the Lord chose at his first advent, 
see to it that we cultivate similar characteristics, and 
that we expend our special energies to bring the Truth 
to the attention of others who give evidence of meekness 
and faith and loyalty to God. 

"THOU SHALT SEE GREATER THINGS" 

As soon as Nathanael had confessed his faith our 
Lord assured him that what he had already come to 
appreciate was insignificant in proportion to the still 

R4118 :page 15 

greater things which as his disciple he would gradually 



come to know and to understand. And is not this true 
with us today? The joy, the confidence, the hopes 
which filled our hearts at the beginning, as we came to 
recognize the Lord and to have a clearer understanding 
of the divine plan— have these not continually been 
added to by the Lord, so that what we first saw and enjoyed 
seems but small in comparison with the riches of 
grace and loving kindness and tender mercies revealed 
to our eyes of understanding. As our mental vision 
widens we behold lengths and breadths and depths 
and heights of the love of God surpassing all of our 
expectations.— Eph. 3:18,19. 

And by faith we can see Jesus as the antitypical 
Jacob's ladder, as our Lord intimated to Nathanael. 
As Jacob in his vision saw a ladder reaching from 
earth to heaven and communications carried on thereby, 
so we, in the light of the divine plan now unfolding, 
see that our Lord Jesus and the Church associated 
with him constitute the ladder of communication between 
God and the world of mankind, which, during 
the Millennial Age, will serve as the channel of favor 
by which all the families of the earth shall be blessed 
—by which the glory and blessing of the Lord shall be 
brought down to earth, even as now the Elect, firstfruits 
of his human creatures, are being gathered from 
amongst men, that they may ascend to God as heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord by 
means of the glorious change which shall come to them 
in the First Resurrection, in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye. 


