“We Appreciate the Older Ones!”
“IS THERE not wisdom among the aged and understanding in length of days?” asked Job. (Job 12:12) Solomon similarly observed: “Gray-headedness is a crown of beauty when it is found in the way of righteousness.” (Proverbs 16:31) These words were spoken at a time when older ones were esteemed and respected. And the Bible repeatedly shows how younger ones in those days benefited from associating with the aged.
Ruth, for example, had years of opportunity to observe and ponder over the example set by her mother-in-law, Naomi. This association apparently resulted in Ruth’s gaining a desire to worship Jehovah. So when given a chance to separate from Naomi and return to her land of idol worshipers, Ruth loyally said: “Where you go I shall go, and where you spend the night I shall spend the night. Your people will be my people, and your God my God.” (Ruth 1:16, 17) Yes, as a result of her friendship with Naomi, Ruth became “an excellent woman.”​—Ruth 3:11.
Timothy was another one who benefited from association with an older person. He spent many years traveling with the apostle Paul. And even when prison separated them, Timothy received letters from Paul that were an encouragement “to stir up like a fire the gift of God” that was in Timothy. (2 Timothy 1:6-8) So thoroughly did Timothy learn from Paul that when writing the Philippians, Paul explained that he ‘had no one else of a disposition like his [Timothy’s] who would genuinely care for the things pertaining to them.’​—Philippians 2:20.
Nowadays, though, respect for the aged has almost disappeared in some lands. Is it this way among Christians, however? Not at all. True Christians today still appreciate that older ones have much to offer by virtue of their faith, devotion, and experience in life. For example, one sister writes: “Whenever I feel under pressure from this system, I find myself looking around at older ones within the congregation, taking courage from their steadfastness.” A young brother, 34 years of age, similarly says of the faithful aged ones: “They have helped me in all areas of life. For example, I needed to know how to achieve balance. Well, a 72-year-old brother told me, ‘Make sure you do the things Jehovah wants you to do first. It is a constant fight. But balance comes as you seek first the Kingdom.’”
In another case, a brother 87 years old became seriously ill. An elder, along with an inactive brother, paid him a visit. Weeping, the inactive brother said, “You have been a good friend. I will miss you.” To which the aged man replied, “I will miss you too.” Still weeping, the inactive brother said, “I will see you in the New Order​—if it will come.” Though weak, our older brother made himself sit up, and he responded firmly: “It will come.” While the inactive one failed to respond to this encouragement, the old man’s faith touched the heart of the elder observing this. “His faith greatly assisted me,” he recalls.
Older brothers and sisters often draw from their experience in Christian living and offer sound and practical advice. “Pick up your little children and cuddle them,” advises one aged one, “for they will soon be older. Look after them first. They are your precious disciples.” “When pressures from this system come in on you or when Satan is testing you,” recommends another, “never give up the truth. Keep practicing it, for it will result in happiness for you.” One older couple who have served faithfully in one area of New Zealand for some 43 years give this practical counsel: “If you can, it is better to stay in one place, rather than moving around. The truth has a greater impact on the community, and it keeps you living up to it, thus making you stronger.”
True, many of our aged brothers and sisters cannot engage in the house-to-house work as younger ones can. Some are bedridden. Others suffer painful ailments. Said one elderly sister, “I do not mind growing old. It’s what age brings with it that I do not like.” Yet she still manages to display Christian zeal!
Are you taking the time to get to know your older brothers and sisters? Are you seeking to imitate the qualities they manifest, qualities that have been refined like gold through time and experience? Certainly, our older Christian brothers and sisters are a valuable resource if we but take the time to observe and speak with them. Said one younger Christian: “The faithful aged have been to me examples in commitment to the truth, genuine love, faith that is alive, compassion, and zeal for God’s service. To me their beauty is like trees in full blossom, and they are like a warm fire on a cold night.” Truly, we have reason to appreciate our older ones!

