VOL. XV. NOVEMBER 1 & 15, 1894. NOS. 21 & 22. 

THE DIVINE LAW-UNIVERSAL AND ETERNAL. 

THE RELATIONSHIP TO THIS OF ISRAEL'S TEN 
COMMANDMENTS AND THEIR SABBATH-DAY. 



"THE LAW WAS GIVEN BY MOSES; BUT GRACE 
AND TRUTH CAME BY JESUS CHRIST." 
--JOHN 1:17.— 

TO suppose this text to mean that there was no 
divine law governing heaven and earth, 
previous to the giving of the Law at Mt. Sinai 
at the hand of Moses, would be as unreasonable 
as to suppose that neither grace nor truth were 
known throughout the universe until our Lord's 
first advent. 

On the contrary, we may say that, so surely 
as it is true that God himself had no beginning, 
so true it is that truth had no beginning and that 
law had no beginning; for God's righteous will 
has always been the law incumbent upon all his 
creatures. There was a beginning to falsehood, 
and Satan is credited with being "the father 
of lies;" but since God is the Father of truth, it 
had no beginning even as he was never untrue. 
So there was a beginning, to lawlessness or sin, 
and Satan is credited with being the first 
transgressor; but, since God's will or law is the 
standard of righteousness, it follows that it, like 
him, has been from eternity past and will extend 
to eternity future. 

Since the government of God is universal and 
eternal, it follows that there never was a time 
or a place without law, nor a being not subject 
to his law or under its control. 

But God's law was made known at Mt. Sinai, 
through Moses, in a different manner than it 
had previously been made known. 

In the creation of angels God had given them 
such intelligence as could distinguish right from 
wrong. Their minds were so properly balanced 
that right always appeared as right, and wrong 
never could be mistaken for right. This capability 
of discernment, on the part of the creature, 
is said to be God's "image," which, when possessed, 
obviates the necessity of any written law. 
Adam, the first of the human race, was also 
created in God's likeness, and had this law of 
God written in the construction of his being, 
or, as it is sometimes said, written upon his heart. 

The law given by Moses would have been 
entirely out of place in heaven, or in Eden before 
sin entered. With the law of God (briefly 
comprehended in one word, love— to God 
and all his creatures in fellowship with him) 
written in their very beings, how strange it 
would have seemed to the angels if God had 
set up in heaven the Mosaic law tables or 
copies of them. Of what service could such 



a statement of the law of God be to such beings, 
who already had a much higher conception 
of it? And such a presentation to Adam 
in Eden before his fall would have been similarly 
useless; and it was not done. 

But why was the Law given by Moses? Why 
about 2500 years after the fall of Adam into 
sin and death? Why at Mt. Sinai? Why to 
the nation of Israel, and not to all nations or 
any other nation? Why was it written upon 
stones? Why that departure from the previous 
method of expressing it? 

R1723: page 340 

The mere reading of these questions, and a 
reflection upon the facts upon which they rest, 
should relieve the mind of many inconsistencies 
and prepare it for the answer to them all. 

Father Adam, having violated the law of 
God— written in his being— had passed under 
its sentence— death. And this death-sentence 
had affected him mentally and morally, as well 
as physically: and thus began the effacement 
from his heart of that power of discerning or 
intuitively knowing right from wrong. The 
fallen conditions favored the cultivation of selfishness, 
and exalted selfishness to be the rule 
of life, instead of love, as in God's original 
creation. 

The more selfishness came in and gained control, 
the more the law of love was erased from 
Adam's heart. And the fall continued naturally 
from parent to child as years rolled on, until, 
in Moses' day, it is safe to say that, with the 
majority of the race, the original law was almost 
gone. A general picture of the race aside 
from Israel is given by the Apostle with an account 
of just what led to such a dreadful condition. 
-See Rom. 1:21-32. 

God chose or elected to give the law on tables 
of stone to the descendants of his "friend," 
Abraham, according to a promise made to him, 
that he would specially use and bless his posterity. 
But, as though to insure men that the 
Hebrews were not naturally superior to other 
men, God permitted them to go for centuries 
into slavery to the Egyptians, then the greatest 
nation of earth. 

From this we conclude that the Law given 
at Sinai was given because the original law, expressed 
in Adam's nature twenty-five centuries 
previous, had become almost extinct and unintelligible. 
It was given to a chosen people, at 
the hands of a specially chosen leader. 

It could not have been re-written upon their 



hearts, because that would have implied the restoration 

of that nation to Edenic perfection; 

and that was impossible because the penalty under 

which that perfection was lost was death, 

and it still rested upon Israel and upon all men, 

and would continue until a ransom could be 

found, for Adam,— and hence for all who lost 

life in him. 

The best way to express the law of love to 
those who do not possess the spirit of love, or 
mental likeness of God, is as God indicated it 
in the ten commandments written in stone,— 
Thou shalt, and Thou shalt not. 

This brings us to the question, Why did God 
give the law on tables of stone? Why did he 
not wait until the due time to send his Son to 
be our ransom-price, and then, after he had 
redeemed or purchased all from the sentence 
of death, begin the work of "restitution of all 
things" (Acts 3:21)— the re- writing of the original 
law in the human heart? 

The Apostle answers this important question. 
He tells us that when God told Abraham that 
he would bless all nations through his seed, he 
referred not to all of his offspring, but to Christ 

R1724: page 340 

Jesus, who, according to the flesh, would be 
born of Abraham's descendants; and that for 
Christ he would select a "bride" or companion, 
of many members, but all of one spirit with 
him,— to be joined with him in the sufferings 
incidental to sympathy and obedience and, when 
complete, to be perfected with him in glory and 
to share with him the work of blessing all the 
families of earth. (Gal. 3:16,29; 1 Pet. 1:11; 
Rom. 8:17,18.) He tells us that the due time 
for Christ to come and redeem the world must 
be before the selection of his "bride;" because 
she must be redeemed before she could be 
called or chosen. But as a long interval lay between 
the promise to Abraham and the "due 
time" for God to send his Son to redeem men, 
God purposed a work with Abraham's natural 
children, which would fill the interim between 
then and the coming of Christ Jesus, the real 
"seed of Abraham" according to the divine 
intention. 

This covenant which the Lord proposed 
with Israel, Abraham's natural children, would 
do them great good, even though they might 
thereby pass through some very severe experiences; 
it would not only keep them from sinking 
lower into degradation and losing the image 
of God as completely as some other nations; 



but in a few cases it might even make the original 
law more discernible. And not only so, 
but this Law given to Israel would be to 
some extent a standard before the world; and 

R1724: page 341 

thus Abraham's natural seed might lift up a 
standard to the people and to a slight extent 
bless all nations, by calling a halt in the downward 
course and by reviving in all to some degree 
the dying influence of the original law of 
conscience. 

Of this covenant the Apostle declares, The 
Law "was added [to the Abrahamic Covenant] 
because of transgressions [because sin was spreading 
and men were degrading very rapidly], till 
the [promised] Seed should come [until Christ 
came (not only Christ Jesus, the Head, but also 
the Church his body) to do the real work, the time 
for which had come] to whom the [Abrahamic 
Covenant] promise was made." "For the Law 
made nothing perfect:" and, moreover, "the 
Law which was [given] 430 years after [the Covenant 
made with Abraham] can not disannul [or 
in any manner change the terms and conditions 
of that covenant], that it should make the promise 
of none effect."--Gal. 3:19,17; Heb. 7:19. 

But this covenant which God made with Israel 
was something more than even they could realize. 
His dealings with them were typical of his dealings 
future from their day. Their Sin-offerings, 
for instance, typically took away their sins, and 
brought reconciliation to God for a year at a 
time to the nation; but, as the Apostle says, 
those sacrifices could not really cancel sin.— 
"The blood [death] of bulls and goats can 
never take away sin." It was man that had 
sinned, and man that had been sentenced to 
death, and the death of the animal could at 
most only typify the death of the man Christ 
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. (Heb. 10: 1-10; 
1 Tim. 2:5,6.) And not only their 
sacrifices, but God's every dealing with that 
nation, seems to have a typical lesson, the reality 
of which reaches down either to the Gospel 
age or beyond into the Millennial age. From 
what we have shown foregoing respecting the 
divine law, which establishes the lines of right 
and wrong upon every question, and which, 
like its Author, is from everlasting to everlasting 
the same unalterable law, we trust that our 
readers see clearly that the giving of the Law 
at Sinai had a special, peculiar significance of 
its own, incidental to the people to whom it 
was given. 



THE LAW GIVEN AT SINAI. 



There was more done at Mt. Sinai than is 
generally supposed. Not only was a Law written 
upon tables of stone given there, but a 
Covenant based upon that Law was there entered 
into between God on the one part, represented 
by that Law, and Israel on the other part,— 
Moses being the Mediator of the Law Covenant. 

The Covenant was the important thing! God, 
who had recognized their father Abraham and 
made a covenant with him, for the fulfilment of 
which they had waited for centuries, had finally 
recognized them as Abraham's children, had 
brought them out of Egyptian bondage with 
wonderful evidences of his favor, and had now 
brought them in their journeys by a special leading 
to Mt. Sinai, and made a covenant with them. 

It was with hearts leaping with the joy of 
great anticipation that Israel accepted the proposal 
to become God's covenant people. It 
does not seem to have occurred to them, however, 
that theirs was a different covenant from 
the one made with Abraham. 

Great confusion of thought has resulted from 
a failure to notice the point just made,— 
namely, that the transaction at Sinai was important, 
not because God began there to have a 
law over his creatures, for we have seen that 
God's empire never was without a law; but it 
was important because there God made a covenant 
with Israel according to the terms of which 
they were no longer to be treated as sinners, 
but to be accepted as God's servants, if faithful 
to the requirements of that covenant. And the 
Law written upon tables of stone represented 
that covenant, because every blessing under that 
covenant was made dependent upon absolute 
obedience to that Law.-Exod. 19:7,8; 34:28. 

Hence in speaking of their covenant it became 
customary to think and speak of the Law 
upon which everything depended. Thus throughout 
the New Testament, when speaking of that 
covenant, the Apostle often calls it "the Law," 
leaving the word "covenant" to be understood. 
Yet in every instance a glance at the language and 
the context shows unquestionably that the Law 
Covenant is meant and not merely the written 
law. For instance, the expression, "The Law 

R1724: page 342 

made nothing perfect," could not refer to the law 



alone; for laws never make anything perfect: 
they merely show the perfect requirements. 
The Law on tables of stone showed Israel God's 
requirements, but it remained for the covenant 
to try to make the people perfect by promising 
blessings for obedience and curses for disobedience 
of the law. And this the Law Covenant 
failed to do: it made nothing perfect. It did 
serve to restrain sin and to show men some of 
their shortcomings, but it could not lift any out 
of the mire of sin and out of the horrible pit 
of death. It could not give life: it merely left 
Israel under sentence of death, as they were before 
it was given, but additionally bounden by 
it as a national contract. However, it was only 
a typical covenant and its mediator was only a 
type of the one mediator between God and men; 
and the blood of that covenant merely typified 
the blood of the New Covenant. 

God's covenant with Abraham was not hampered 
with a law. It applied as soon as 
Abraham entered Canaan,— "In thy seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
The seed was promised and was sure, and so 
was the blessing. But not so the Law Covenant, 
made four centuries afterward with the fleshly 
seed of Abraham. The blessing which it promised 
was conditioned on obedience to a code of 
laws then given them. It said, "The man that 
doeth these things shall live by them."— Rom. 10:5; 
Lev. 18:5. 

Nor did it seem to occur to Israel that they 
might be unable to obey the Law, perfectly. 
They promptly accepted the terms of the covenant 
(Exod. 19:8; Deut. 27:11-26), little realizing 
that it was a covenant "unto death" 
(Rom. 7:10), and not unto life, because of their 
inability to perfectly obey its just requirements. 
Its promise of life was on terms easy enough for 
perfect men, but impossible for fallen men; but, 
having agreed to the terms, they were bound to 
them. Thus the Law Covenant "slew them," 
or took from them the very hope of life it had 
helped to enkindle. (Rom. 7:9-1 1.) Nevertheless, 
it served them well as a servant to bring 
them to Christ. When Christ came and magnified 
it and made it honorable,* it began to be 
manifest that none before him had ever fully 
appreciated or obeyed it; and, thus convinced of 
their own inability to secure eternal life by the 
terms of the Mt. Sinai Covenant, the proffered 
righteousness of Christ under a New Covenant 
of which Christ became the Mediator, and which 
New Covenant he sealed or made binding by 
his own blood [death], began to be seen by 
those of teachable mind as the only hope of life 



everlasting. So the Law Covenant made nothing 
perfect. (Heb. 7:19.) In the fullest sense, 
no one ever kept it but the perfect man, Christ 
Jesus (Rom. 3:23); for it is the full measure of 
a perfect man's ability. 

The mind is cleared of much difficulty when 
it is discovered that statements that Christ had 
blotted out the Law, "nailing it to his cross" 
(Col. 2:14), and that "Christ is the end of the 
Law for righteousness to every one that believeth" 
(Rom. 10:4), and similar passages, do not 
mean that the divine law of the universe, forbidding 
sin, ceased at the cross. That law has 
been over men and angels and all others of God's 
intelligent creatures since they came into existence, 
and it will never cease. All is plain when 
in every text the word covenant is supplied, as it 
was evidently understood by those addressed. 

That the Ten Commandments were the basis 
of the covenant made with Israel at Sinai is 
clearly attested by Scripture. "And he [Moses] 
was there with the Lord forty days and forty 
nights. And he wrote upon the tables the words 
of the covenant, the Ten Commandments." 
(Exod. 34:28.) "And he declared unto you 
his covenant which he commanded you to perform, 
even the Ten Commandments, and he 
wrote them upon two tables of stone."— Deut. 4: 13,14; 
9:9,11,15. 



*See our issue of Nov. 1, '92. 

R1725: page 342 

REDEEMED FROM THE CURSE OF THE LAW 
COVENANT. 



It has escaped the attention of many, that 
while Israelites had many advantages every way 
under their Law Covenant (Rom. 3:1,2), yet 
each one who failed to meet all the requirements 
of that Law Covenant came under a curse, or 
sentence, not upon others. Thus it is written, 
"Cursed is every one [every Israelite] that continueth 
not in all the words of the Law [Covenant] 

R1725: page 343 

to do them."-Gal. 3:10; Deut. 27:26. 

The Apostle shows that this curse was only 
upon those under that covenant, saying, "Whatsoever 
the Law [Covenant] saith, it saith to 



them that are under the Law [Covenant]." 
(Rom. 3:19.) Moses also declared the same. 
(See Deut. 5:2,3-) And, indeed, no other 
arrangement would have been just; for the blessings 
of that covenant and its promises of life 
were only to the one nation. (Rom. 9:4.) 
How, then, could its curse extend beyond the 
nation which enjoyed its favors and privileges? 

The blessings of that Law Covenant were 
earthly, and such also were its curses: with 
one exception, noted below, neither related 
to the everlasting future. The future had already 
been settled for them and for all the race 
of Adam, in the death-sentence. Nothing short 
of the ransom-price,— the corresponding price, 
which our Lord Jesus gave long afterward,-- 
could settle that original sentence and secure a 
complete release from the sentence of death. 
The sin-offerings of Israel's Day of Atonement 
were not of permanent value, but only for a 
year in advance, and were therefore repeated 
yearly. These blessings and curses of the Law 
Covenant were very particularly explained to 
Israel.-Deut. 28:1-14,15-33-45-58-64-67. 

This Covenant included every member of the 
nation of Israel, so that they shared in common 
the blessings or the curses. There was one provision, 
however, for an individual, namely, that 
the man who would fully obey all of the requirements 
of the Law should live,— be guaranteed 
lasting life. However Israel may have imagined 
it possible for all or for many of the nation to 
thus gain life everlasting, we can see that God 
never had such expectations concerning them. 
He knew from the beginning, what he has 
taught us by experience, as well as by the inspired 
words of the Apostles, that, "By the 
deeds of the Law shall no flesh [i.e., none of 
the fallen race, needing justification] be justified 
in God's sight."— Rom. 3:20. 

"The man Christ Jesus" (1 Tim. 2:5), who 
obeyed the Law absolutely, was the one in the 
divine purpose for whom the provision was made, 
that "He that doeth these things shall live." 
He consequently had a right to life everlasting, 
and therefore might have asked for, and might 
have had, more than twelve legions of angels to 
defend him from those who sought his life. But 
he laid down his life. But the one death, begun 
at Jordan and "finished" three and a half years 
after at Calvary, accomplished two things, -- 
one for Israel only, the other for the whole world. 

Since the Children of Israel, as well as the 
other nations, were Adam's posterity, they, as 
well as others, shared his sentence of death, and 
were redeemed by our Lord's offering of himself 



a sin-offering and corresponding price for Adam 
and those who lost life in Adam. (Rom. 5:12,18.) 
But since Israel alone, and no other nation 
or family or people of earth, had been 
brought under the terms of the Law Covenant 
made with them at Mt. Sinai, therefore, only 
Israelites required to be "redeemed from the 
curse of the Law [Covenant]. "—Gal. 3:13. 

That the "one man," Christ Jesus, could 
justly redeem our race is stated by the Apostle, 
and is clearly evident when we see that all men 
were sentenced in the one man Adam; but how 
could one man redeem the multitudinous nation 
of Israel from the curse of their Law Covenant? 

We answer that there is a point in connection 
with Israel's covenant that few have noticed. It 
is that God dealt with only one man in connection 
with the making of that Law Covenant; 
and that man was Moses, who stood in the position 
of a father to the whole nation, the nation 
being regarded and treated as children under 
age. (Num. 1 1:11-15.) The Lord talked with 
Moses in the mount. The Lord gave the tables 
of the Law to Moses. And Moses spake to the 
people and gave them the Law and bound them 
by the terms of the Law Covenant. 

"Moses alone shall come near the Lord."— 
Exod. 24:2. 

"As the Lord spake to Moses, so did the 
children of Israel."— Num. 5:4. 

"The people cried to Moses, and Moses 
prayed to the Lord."— Num. 1 1:2. 

"God sent Moses his servant."— Psa. 105:26. 

"They envied Moses also in the camp."— 
Psa. 106:16. 

God said "he would destroy them, had not 
Moses his chosen stood before him in the 
breach."-Psa. 106:23. 

R1725: page 344 

"Remember ye the Law of Moses my servant." 
-Mai. 4:4. 

"Moses hath in every city them that preach 
him. "--Acts 15:21. 

"Did not Moses give you the Law?"— 
Christ, Jno. 7:19. 

"What did Moses command you?"— 
Christ, Mark 10:3. 

"One accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye 
trust. "-Christ, Jno. 5:45. 

All Israel were "baptised unto [into] Moses, 
in the cloud and in the sea."— 1 Cor. 10:2. 

"He that despised Moses' Law died without 
mercy."-Heb. 10:28. 

"The Law was given by Moses, but grace and 



truth came by Jesus Christ."— John 1:17. 

So thoroughly was the one man Moses, the 
representative and typical father of the nation 
of Israel, that God could and did propose its 
destruction and the fulfilment of all his engagements 
with Moses' family instead. (Exod. 32:10,31,32.) 
It was thus, as God's representative 
on the one hand, and as Israel's representative 
on the other, that Moses could be and was 
the Mediator of the Law Covenant between 
God and that nation. 

When the man Christ Jesus, by full obedience 
to the Law Covenant, became entitled to life 
everlasting under its provisions, he had the right 
to "Moses' seat," the right to supersede Moses 
as the Lawgiver and representative of that 
nation. Of him Moses bore witness, saying: 
"A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up 
unto you like unto me. Him shall ye hear in 
all things." By fulfilling the requirements of 
the Law Covenant and by his obedience even 
unto death, Christ became the heir of its promise 
of life, and the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
based upon that better and everlasting sacrifice 
for sins, which therefore needed not to be repeated 
yearly, and was effective, not for Israel 
only, but for all the families of earth;— for 
"this man," "the man Christ Jesus, gave himself 
a ransom for all." Hence, this gospel of 
the New Covenant was for the Jew first and also 
for the Greek (or Gentile). Thus the one work 
finished at Calvary did a special work for Israel, 
and also a general work of redemption for the 
world, including Israel, which sealed the New 
Covenant and made it operative for all mankind. 

Thus seen, the expression, "Christ is the end 
[fulfillment] of the Law [Covenant] for righteousness 
[justification] to every one that believeth" 
(Rom. 10:4), can apply only to Jews who by 
faith have accepted Christ and the New Covenant. 
It cannot apply to others— neither to 
those who never were Jews and who consequently 
were never under that Covenant, nor 
to those who still trust in Moses' Covenant and 
who are still vainly seeking life by obedience to 
its provisions, law, etc. 

Israel as a nation is still bound by that covenant 
which they at first supposed would bring 
life, but which experience proved could bring 
them only death, because of the weakness of their 
flesh and their inability to fulfill its requirements 
expressed in its Law of Ten Commandments. 
There is only one door of escape from 
it; viz., Christ and the New Covenant which 
he mediated. God shut them up to this one 
and only hope (Gal. 3:23), and he promises 



that by and by, when the Gospel Church, the 
body of Christ, has been selected, he will open 
their blind eyes and cause them to see Christ in 
his true character— as their Redeemer from sin 
and their deliverer from death and their Covenant 
of death.-Rom. 11:25-27-29. 

Christ "came unto his own [people, the house 
of servants, under the bondage of the Law 
Covenant, offering the worthy ones favor and 
liberty under the New Covenant], and his own 
[people] received him not; but as many as received 
him, to them gave he liberty [privilege] 
to become the sons of God [under the New 
Covenant— with all the proper privileges or 
liberties of sons], even to them that believe on 
his name."— John 1:11,12. 

No wonder, then, that the Apostle so earnestly 
sought to guard the new Gentile converts 
from becoming Jews and seeking life under the 
Law Covenant; by which neither he nor his 
nation had been able to profit. No wonder he 
exhorted them to stand fast in the liberty of 
Christ and his gracious arrangements under the 
New Covenant. 

It was in view of this danger of their losing 
faith in Christ's finished work and trusting for 
salvation to their own efforts to keep the Law 

R1725: page 345 

Covenant by works, that Paul even prohibited 
the circumcision of Gentile converts, although 
he approved of it for Hebrews, to whom it 
was given as a symbol and rite long before the 
Law Covenant was made. Hence the remark 
that "the gospel to the circumcision" was specially 
supervised by Peter, while the gospel to 
the uncircumcised, the Gentiles, was specially 
Paul's mission. (Gal. 2:7,8,14-16.) It will 

R1726: page 345 

be quite a help in the study of the Scriptures to 
observe that the Apostles often refer to themselves 
as having been under the Law Covenant 
and subsequently freed from its bondage, and to 
Gentile converts as not having passed through 
such an experience.— See Gal. 2:17; 3:3,13,14; 
5:5,6,8-10; Eph. 2:11-19. 

FREE FROM THE LAW. 



The ransom was given FOR ALL mankind, but 
its benefits are applicable only to those who believe. 



Thus far the believers are only a few compared 

with the mass of mankind. These have 

escaped from all condemnation of all broken 

laws, while, of the remainder, the world in 

general still continues under the original condemnation, 

and Israelites who have not come 

to Christ and his New Covenant are still condemned 

by Moses' Law Covenant. "He that 

believeth is passed [reckonedly] from death unto 

life" (John 5:24), while "he that believeth 

not is condemned already." (John 3:18.) He 

was condemned six thousand years ago, and, if 

a Jew, he was additionally bounden by the 

Law Covenant, and has not escaped the condemnation 

that is on the world. (Rom. 5:16.) The 

only ones who have escaped this condemnation, 

so long upon all, are referred to by the Apostle 

Paul (Rom. 8:1): "There is, therefore, now no 

condemnation to them which are in Christ 

Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the 

spirit." 

These are the free ones: free from all laws 
and all penalties— free indeed. "If the Son 
shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed."— 
John 8:36. 

But can it be that God has released these entirely 
from both the Law given in Eden and 
that given at Sinai? Just so: being justified 
by the death of Christ, and released from their 
former condemnation, and having received his 
spirit, of love for God and obedience to God, 
so long as they are in Christ they are free: free 
to abide in him, by continued submission to 
his will, the essence of which is LOVE (to God 
and to man). All who come into Christ submit 
themselves to his will and voluntarily make it 
their law; and those who willingly violate this 
law thereby cease to "abide in him" and will 
be "cast forth" (John 15:6) as dead branches. 
Through him our best endeavors to do his will 
are acceptable, and we have thus passed out of 
condemnation to death into justification to life 
so long as we abide under the blood of the 
New Covenant. In no other way could any be 
accepted by God; for the law given in Eden 
was one that required absolutely perfect obedience, 
and that given at Sinai demanded the 
same. And since we know that God could not 
give an imperfect law (Jas. 3:11), and we could 
not fully obey a perfect one, we see the necessity 
for our being freed from all law and accepted 
in the merit of our beloved— Christ. 

Hence we conclude that those in Christ, 
whether they were Jews or Gentiles, are in no 
sense under the Law given at Sinai, graven upon 
stones, termed the "Ten Commandments," 



—neither to the ceremonial attachments relating 
to typical feasts, sacrifices and services.— 
Heb. 9:1. 

THE LAW ON TABLES OF STONE. 



The sanctified IN CHRIST JESUS need no such 
commands. Love to God and men, laid down 
by our Lord and the apostles, is the only rule 
under which the new creature in Christ is 
placed; and it is the very essence of his new 
mind— the spirit or mind of Christ. 

Look singly at the commandments given to 
fleshly Israel, and judge if it would not be useless 
to address such commands to the saints. 

I. "Thou shalt have no other gods beside 
me." What saint would think of such a thing? 

II. "Thou shalt not make unto thee any 
graven image, nor the likeness of any form that 

is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, 
or that is in the water under the earth: 
thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them nor 
serve them; for I. ..am a jealous God, visiting 

R1726: page 346 

the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, 
unto the third and fourth generation of them 
that hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands 
of them that love me and keep my commandments. 
For whom is such a law needful? 
Surely not to the saints, who love the Lord with 
all their heart, soul and strength, and who are 
laying down life itself in his service! 

III. "Thou shalt not take the name of the 
Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not 
hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." 
Again we remark, Surely none of the saints will 
have any desire to blaspheme or profane* their 
Father's name, but the reverse: they are laying 
down their lives to glorify his name. 

IV. This we will examine last. 

V. "Honor thy father and thy mother: that 
thy days may be long upon the land which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee." This is distinctly 

an earthly promise of the land, while the promise 
to the saints is not long life here but hereafter. 
Those who sacrifice life, lands, etc., 
become, in Christ, heirs to the heavenly promises. 
Having the spirit of Christ, they also delight to 
honor their earthly parents, but especially to 
do the will of their Father in heaven. 

VI. "Thou shalt do no murder." Do not the 
saints delight to bless others and to do good, 



even to those who despitefully use them and 
persecute them? If so, where would be the propriety 
in telling them that they must not murder 
—must not do the thing farthest from their 
desires? It would be a useless command to say 
the least. 

VII. "Thou shalt not commit adultery." 
The sanctified in Christ Jesus, who walk not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit of Christ, 
could not thus wrong others. 

VIII. "Thou shalt not steal." Do the saints 
desire to steal? Do they desire to defraud 
others? Is it not rather their spirit to "labor, 
working with their hands the thing which is good, 
that they may have, to give unto the needy?" 

IX. "Thou shalt not bear false witness 
against thy neighbor." How could one of the 
sanctified in Christ thus injure his neighbor? 
It would be entirely foreign to the spirit of 
Christ— the spirit of truth, and would prove 
that the one who knowingly and willingly bore 
such false testimony had not the spirit of Christ 
and was none of his.— Rom. 8:9. 

X. "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's 
house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, 
nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor 
his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy 
neighbor's." Covetousness is wholly foreign 
to the spirit of Christ; and to the extent that 

the spirit of Christ dwells richly in his members 
they will be free from covetousness. The spirit 
of sacrifice having in the saints taken the place 
of self-love, covetousness is forestalled. 

The preface in Exod. 20:2 shows that these 
Ten Commandments were given only to Israel 
after the flesh: "I am the Lord thy God, which 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of 
the house of bondage." So, too, in repeating 
them again, Moses declares (Deut. 5:1-5): 
"Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments 
which I speak in your ears THIS DAY, that ye 
may learn them and observe to do them. The 
Lord our God made not this covenant with our 
fathers, but with US, even us who are all of us 
here alive this day. The Lord spake with you 
face to face— saying," etc., etc.— See also Ezek. 20:10-13; 
Neh. 9:12-14. 

All these commands were proper and suitable 
enough for Israel. (Deut. 5:2,3,5-21.) They 
would have been suitable for any fallen man, 
but are surely inappropriate to any new creature 
in Christ, whose very nature, as a new creature, 
is to do right, yet who, because of the weakness 
of the flesh, cannot do perfectly though he desire 
and endeavor to do so. But though we 
can easily keep the outward letter of this Law, 



yet under our Lord's teachings we see that to 

keep it in full really means more than its surface 

indicates: that he who hates a "brother" 

has the murder spirit, and is a murderer; 

he that desires to commit adultery, lacking 

only the opportunity, is in heart an adulterer 

(Matt. 5:28); and he who loves and serves 

money and spends time and talent for it, more 

than in God's service, is an idolater. Our Redeemer's 

teaching regarding the obligations implied 

by the Law is— "Thou shalt love the Lord 

thy God with all thy heart, all thy mind, all 

thy soul and all thy strength, and thou shalt 



*See "Taking God's Name in Vain," May 15, '93. 

R1726: page 347 

love thy neighbor as thyself." From this we 
see that even we who are in Christ, with all our 
holy desires and aims, could not keep perfectly 
the spirit of that Law, according to this our Master's 
interpretation of it; because our new mind 
is hindered by the weakness of the sin-degraded 
and marred earthen vessel— the flesh. We find 
it impossible to rid ourselves entirely of inherited 
selfishness, so as to be able to love our neighbor 
as ourselves, or even to love and serve God with 
all our hearts and talents, much as our new 
minds might choose and seek to obey this, the 
spirit of the Law. It is only because we are 
dealt with by God according to the conditions 
of the New Covenant of grace in Christ that 
the Apostle could say, our best heart-endeavors 
to fulfill this law of love are accepted as a perfect 
fulfilment; and all we lack is continually 
compensated for out of the fulness of Christ, 
which is imputed to us. "Ye are not under the 
Law, but under grace"— favor. (Rom. 6: 14.) 
You are not acceptable with God because there 
is no fault in you, but because favor covers 
your unwilling imperfections of thought, word 
and deed. 

THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT OF ISRAEL'S 
COVENANT. 



"Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six 
days shalt thou labor, and do all thy work; but the 
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it 
thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy 
daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy 



cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: for in six 

R1727: page 347 

days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all 
that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore 
the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it." 

This command merely enjoins idleness on the 
seventh day of each week. It does not say to 
cease from ordinary work and engage in religious 
work, as many of its advocates seem to 
suppose; but, on the contrary, it prohibits all 
kinds of work. Many who think themselves 
bound by this command neither rest on the 
seventh day nor on the first day of the week, 
which, without orders, they make an effort to 
keep instead of the seventh day, which the Law 
appointed for those under it. On the contrary, 
to very many the first day is as busy a day as any. 
The ruling under the Law was that any one who 
even picked up sticks or kindled a fire was a 
violator of this command, and must be put to 
death. (Num. 15:32-36.) How many of those 
who claim to keep this commandment do far 
more work in the way of cooking, etc.— they, 
their sons, and their daughters, their men-servants 
and maid-servants? (See Exod. 35:3.) 
If that law is now in force and has by any 
means extended beyond the Israelites (on whom 
alone it was put), so as to cover Christians, 
then every Christian violates it repeatedly, and 
is deserving of death for each offense; for "they 
that violated Moses' Law died without mercy." 
-Heb. 10:20. 

But though our views on this subject differ 
widely from those of most Christian people, we 
are very glad that one day of each week is set 
apart for rest from business, without regard to 
which of the seven days is thus observed, or by 
what law or lawgiver it was originally appointed. 
We greatly enjoy the day, and think it not only 
a blessing to those who use it for worship and 
study, but also for those who use it merely as a 
day of rest and recreation from toil, to enjoy 
the beauties of nature, or to visit with their 
friends and families as they cannot do on other 
days. And we are specially pleased that the 
day set apart by the government under which 
we live is the First Day of the week, because of 
the same blessed memories and associations 
which gave that day a special sacredness to the 
Church in the days of the apostles. 

But for two reasons we totally dissent from 
the idea of the Sabbath common to the majority 
of Christian people. First, Because if their 
claim that we are under the Law of which the 



Sabbath day observance was a part be true, the 

day they keep as a Sabbath is not the day mentioned 

in that command. They observe the 

first day of the week, while the command designated 

the seventh day. If the Fourth Commandment 

be binding at all, it, as well as the 

other commandments, is binding as stated, and 

cannot be changed; and Second, If bound to 

the Law, the keeping of the Sabbath in any 

other than the strict way in which its keeping 

was therein prescribed is inconsistent. If the 

command be binding upon us, the manner of its 

observance, in its every minutia, is no less binding 

R1727: page 348 

If the strict significance of it has passed 
away, surely whatever destroyed its strict 
interpretation destroyed the command entirely. 
Therefore, if observed at all, it should be observed 
with all its former strictness, and it should 
be observed on the day then prescribed and observed. 
The only proper reason for the less strict 
observance of the day, or for the substitution of 
another day than the one originally designated, 
would be an order from God himself to that effect. 
Men have no right to alter or in anywise amend 
God's laws: no, not if an angel from heaven 
sanction the change. 

But God did not change that Law. It stands 
exactly as it was given, and applies only to those 
to whom it was given. If, as it is claimed by some, 
it was altered in any degree, or made applicable 
to any other people than the people of Israel, 
the evidence should be no less clear and positive 
than that of its original giving at Mt. Sinai; 
but no such evidence of its change to another 
day, or to another people, or of any relaxation 
of its original severity, exists. 

Neither did our Lord or the apostles ever authorize 
any such change; they declared that the 
Jewish Law (which included the command relative 
to the seventh day) was superseded by the 
new and more comprehensive law of the New Covenant 
thereafter in operation toward all who accepted 
Christ. The apostles used the seventh day 
as a time for preaching Christ, as they used every 
day in the week, and especially because on that 
day the Jews, their most hopeful hearers, met 
for worship and study. But the apostles nowhere 
recognized the seventh-day Sabbath as a day of 
rest, as the Jewish Law Covenant had enforced it. 
On the contrary, they taught (Rom. 14:5-8) 
that any and all days are acceptable for good 
works done in the service of God and for the 
benefit of fellow men.-Matt. 12:10,12. 



Some claim that the (first day) Christian Sabbath 
was introduced by an edict of one of the popes. 
But this is a mistake: it had its start in the fact 
that it was on the first day of the week that our 
Lord arose from the dead; and that upon that day 
and evening he met with his disciples, and expounded 
unto them the Scriptures, until their 
hearts burned within them. What wonder that, 
without any command to do so, they thereafter 
loved to meet together frequently on that day, 
to repeat the simple meal, the giving of thanks 
and the breaking of bread; recounting one to 
the other the gracious promises of God through 
the prophets, and the explanations of some of 
these which the Lord had given in person, and 
seeking yet fuller understanding of the same 
under the leading of the holy Spirit (Christ's 
representative), their guide into all truth as it 
became due. 

For a time both days were observed by 
Christians, the seventh day from Jewish custom 
(and because it furnished the best opportunity 
for reaching devout Hebrews, the class most 
likely to be interested in the gospel) and the 
first day in commemoration of our Lord's resurrection. 
Ignatius, A.D. 75, in his writings 

mentions some approvingly as "no longer Sabbathizing, 
but living in observance of the Lord's-day, 
on which also our life sprang up again." 

The earliest record found in Scripture of the 
use of the name "Lord's-day" for the first day 
of the week is in Rev. 1:10 (A.D. 96). And, 
says The Encyclopaedia Britannica (first-class 
authority), "by that name it is almost invariably 
referred to by all writers of the century immediately 
succeeding apostolic times. ...The 
first writer who mentions the name of Sunday 
is Justin Martyr: this designation of the first 
day of the week, which is of heathen origin, 
had come into general use in the Roman world 
shortly before Justin wrote. [Second century 
A.D.]. ..As long as the Jewish-Christian 
element continued to have any prominence or 
influence in the Church a tendency more or 
less strong to observe Sabbath as well as Sunday 
would of course prevail. ...The earliest recognition 
of the observance of Sunday as a legal 
duty is a Constitution of (the Emperor) Constantine, 
321 A.D., enacting that all courts of justice, 
inhabitants of towns and workshops were to be 
at rest on Sunday, with an exception in favor of 
those engaged in agricultural labor." 

It is, therefore, a misstatement to say that 
Pope Gregory or any other Pope first by decree 
instituted Sunday or the Lord's-day as taking 
the place of the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath. 



The Decretals of Gregory do enjoin 
Sunday-keeping, saying, "We decree that all 

R1727: page 349 

Sundays be observed, from vespers to vespers, 
and that all unlawful work be abstained from, 
so that in them trading or legal proceedings be 
not carried on." But it will be noted that the 
Emperor Constantine's decree was in 321 A.D., 
while Gregory did not become a pope until 590 
A.D. And Gregory refers to the fact that the 
work prohibited was already unlawful: hence 
his decree is merely confirmatory of the laws of 
Constantine and other civil rulers preceding 
him. 

The Roman Catholic church does not now, 
and, so far as we know, never did insist upon a 
strict observance of Sunday. In Catholic 
countries to-day both priests and people attend 
service in the forenoon, and give up the afternoon 
to various forms of pleasure— in beer 
gardens, parks, etc. 

INFLUENCE OF THE LAW AMONG EARLY 
CHRISTIANS. 



Many Christians do not realize the conditions 
which existed in the Church in the beginning 
of the Gospel age. The Jews as a nation had 
been typically justified by typical sacrifices, from 
the Adamic curse, or condemnation, and put 
under the Law given at Sinai, as a covenant 
under which, if obedient, they were to have life. 
But the Law proved valueless to them so far as 
giving them the hoped-for life was concerned, 
though it taught them some good lessons. All 
the other nations, known as Gentiles (heathens), 
were still under the original condemnation of 
Eden. Consequently, when our Lord came, 
both Jews and Gentiles were under condemnation 
to death,— the Jew by the Law from which 
he had expected so much, but with which he 
was unable to comply, because of the flesh; and 
the Gentile by the original sentence upon father 
Adam, from which he had in no sense escaped, 
not even typically as the Jew had. But the Redeemer 
whom God provided was sufficient for 
both; for in the one sacrifice of himself he accomplished 
the redemption of both, and reconciled 
both unto God in one body by the cross. 
-Eph. 2:16. 

The Jewish converts (and they composed the 
majority of the early Church) could scarcely 



realize the greatness of the change from the 
Law Covenant to the New Covenant in Christ, 
and were continually adding Christ's teachings 
and his law of love to their Mosaic Law, thus 
adding to their already heavy burden, instead of 
accepting the sacrificial death of Christ as the 
atonement for their sins under the Law, and as 
the end of the condemnation of that Law Covenant. 
(Rom. 10:4; 3:20,28.) It is not surprising 
when we remember their early prejudices 

R1728: page 349 

in favor of the Law, that the spirit of truth was 
able to guide them but slowly into the full truth 
on the subject. Even the Apostles were slow 
to learn, and we find Peter so slow to follow 
the lead of the spirit, that he had to be taught 
by a special vision that Gentiles needed no longer 
to become Jews and to conform to the Law of 
Moses before they could share divine favor, but 
that they had access to God through Christ 
and the "New Covenant in [instituted by reason 
of] his blood" (Luke 22:20), regardless 
of the Law Covenant. 

Some complained to the other apostles and 
brethren about Paul's recognition of Gentiles, 
and this brought the question before them all, 
and led to an investigation of God's dealings 
in the matter. "When they heard these things 
they held their peace and glorified God, saying: 
Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance 
unto life. "--Acts 11:18. 

Paul, most easily led of the spirit, got clear 
views on the subjects earliest, and had to oppose 
others among the apostles less strong and 
less spiritually clear-sighted. (Gal. 2:11.) 
Jerusalem was long considered the center of the 
Christian religion, the largest number and 
oldest believers and apostles living there; and 
as Paul's views of the changed condition of 
things became clearer and clearer, and he did 
not hesitate to preach boldly what he saw to be 
dispensational truth, some prejudiced ones desired 
to know whether the brethren at Jerusalem 
would concur in the advanced views; and Paul 
and Barnabas and others went up to Jerusalem 
to lay the matter before them and to bring 
back a report. A great debate and examination 
of the question on all sides followed. 
Peter and James, finally agreeing with Paul, influenced 
the entire council. Peter reminded 
them of God's wonderful dealing with Cornelius, 

R1728: page 350 



who was justified and made acceptable 
to God through faith in Christ, and not 
through keeping the Law, and urged, "Now, 
therefore, why tempt ye God, to put a yoke 
[Moses' Law] upon the neck of the disciples 
which neither our fathers nor we were able to 
bear?" James said, "My sentence is that we 
trouble not them which from among the Gentiles 
are turned to God." Then the council 
so decided, and sent a written message to the 
confused Gentile believers, saying:— 

"We have heard that certain ones who went 
out from us [here] have troubled you with 
words subverting your souls [destroying your 
faith], saying, 'Be circumcised and keep the 
Law'— to whom we gave no such commandment. 
...It seemed good to the Holy Spirit 
and to us to lay upon you no greater burden 
than these necessary things: That ye abstain 
from meats offered to idols, and from blood, 
and from things strangled, and from fornication." 
(Acts 15:9-29.) And even these suggestions 
were given as advice, and not as so much 
of the Mosaic Law, with penalties attached. 

THE LAW COVENANT A MINISTRATION OF 
DEATH. 



The Apostle Paul's epistle to the Galatians 
(who had been Gentiles) was written expressly 
to counteract the influence of the Judaizing 
teachers who mingled with the believers of Galatia 
and endeavored to subvert the true faith in 
Christ by pointing them away from the cross 
of Christ, to a hope of acceptance with God by 
keeping the Law of Moses in connection with 
faith in Christ: thus making the New Covenant 
merely an addition to the Law Covenant and not 
instead of it. This he calls "another gospel," yet 
really not another, for there can be but one; 
hence it was a perversion of the real gospel. 
(Gal. 1:7-9.) And here Paul indicates that he 
knew that the apostles at Jerusalem had at first 
only a mixed gospel, and that he went up to 
see them on the occasion mentioned in Acts 15:4, 
by revelation, to communicate to them 
that fuller, purer, unmixed gospel, which he already 
had been able to receive, and which he 
had been teaching; and, he says, he communicated 
it to them privately, lest their reputation 
should hinder them from receiving the truth— 
and even then some false brethren, spies, sought 
to compel Titus (a Greek) to be circumcised. 
Gal. 2:2-5. 



It is further along in this same epistle that 
Paul tells of Peter's vacillation on the question 
of the Law (chap. 2:1 1-16) and his words of 
reproof to Peter— We who are Jews by nature, 
knowing that a man is not justified by the 
works of the Law, but on account of faith in 
Christ, even we have believed in Christ that we 
might be justified by faith in Christ, and not 
by obedience to the Law. Why, then, should 
we attempt to fetter others, or longer bind ourselves, 
by that which has served its purpose, 
in bringing us to Christ and the New Covenant? 

O foolish Galatians! who has deluded you? 
As many as are trusting to obedience to the 
Law are under its condemnation or curse. 
"Christ hath redeemed us [Israelites] from the 
curse of the Law, that the blessing of Abraham 
might come to the Gentiles through Christ 
Jesus, and that we [Israelites] might receive the 
promise of the spirit through faith." And surely 
God's Covenant with Abraham, made four 
hundred and thirty years before the Law was 
given, cannot be annulled by that Law.— 
Gal. 3:1,10,13,17. 

Next, the Apostle answers a supposed inquiry 
as to what was the object of the Law, and why 
it was given, if not necessary to the attainment 
of the Abrahamic promises. He says the Law 
was added because of sin, to manifest sin in its 
true light— that sin might be seen to be a great 
and deep-seated malady. The law was a pedagogue 
or servant, to bring to Christ all Israelites 
who desired to learn the true way of life.— 
Gal. 3:24; Matt. 11:28-30. 

As children are under nursery laws and subject 
to teachers until an appointed time, so were 
we (Israelites) under the Law, and treated as servants 
rather than as sons. We were kept under 
restraints, though we were the heirs through 
whom, according to the promise, others were 
to be blessed. But in the fulness of time God 
sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under 
the Law, to redeem them that were under the 
Law that we (Israelites), being liberated, might 
receive the adoption of sons. And so also, 

R1728: page 351 

"because ye [who were not under the Law, but 
were Gentiles or heathens] are [also now] sons, 
[therefore] God hath sent forth the Spirit of 
his Son into your hearts." We were sons under 
tutelage, and you were aliens, foreigners 
and strangers, but now you and we, who are 
accepted of God in Christ, are fully received 
into sonship and heirship, and neither of us is 



subject to the Law.— Gal. 4:1-7. 

Tell me, you that desire to be under the 
Law Covenant, Do you not understand what 
it is? It is a bondage, as allegorically shown 
in Abraham's two sons. Abraham, here, is a 
figure of God; and Sarah, the real wife, is a 
figure of the real covenant of blessing, out of 
which the Christ should come as heir of all, to 
bless the world. For a long time Sarah was 
barren; so, too, for a long time the original 
Covenant of God (made with Abraham: In 
thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be 
blessed) brought forth no fruit— until Christ 
Jesus. Hagar, the servant of Sarah, in the 
meantime was treated as Sarah's representative, 
and her son as the representative of Sarah's 
son. Hagar represented the Law Covenant, 
and fleshly Israel was represented by her child, 
Ishmael. For the time they represented the 
true Covenant and the true seed of blessing, 
though they were always really servants— child, 
as well as mother. When the true son of the 
real wife, the heir, was born, it was manifest 
that the son of the bondwoman was not the 
heir of promise. And to show typically that 
the Law Covenant was not to have any rule 
over the spiritual sons of God, Hagar was not 
allowed to become the governess of Isaac, but 
in his interest was dismissed entirely.— Gal. 4:21-31; 
Gen. 21:10. 

The Apostle's argument, based on this allegory, 
is, that we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
seed to whom the promise was made; we are 
not children of the bondwoman, the Law Covenant, 
but children of the original, Abrahamic 
Covenant, born free from the slavery and conditions 
of the Law Covenant. And not only so 
born, but the Law is entirely put away from us, 
and has nothing whatever to do with us. "Stand 
fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made us free, and be not entangled again 
with the yoke of bondage"— the Law Covenant. 
"If ye be led of the spirit, ye are not under the 
Law [Covenant]. "-Gal. 5:1,18. 

But Paul asks— "Shall we continue in sin [wilfully], 
because we are not under the Law [Covenant]?" 
(Rom. 6:15.) Shall we take advantage 
of our liberty to break away into more sin— because 
we are sons and heirs, and no longer commanded 
as servants.— Thou shalt, and thou shalt 
not? No, no; as sons, begotten of the spirit, 
partakers of the spirit of holiness, the spirit of 
the truth, we delight to do our Father's will; and 
the law of obedience to his will is deeply engraven 
upon our hearts. (Heb. 8:10; 10:15,16.) 
We gladly sacrifice our all, even our 



lives, in opposing sin and error, and in forwarding 
righteousness and truth; hence we 
answer emphatically, "God forbid." We will 
not take advantage of our liberty from the 
Jewish Law Covenant, to commit sin. But if 
any man should think to do so, let him remember 
that only those led by the spirit of God are 
the sons of God.— Rom. 8:14. 

We are not under the Law Covenant, but under 
divine favor expressed in the New Covenant, 
sealed by Christ's blood (Rom. 6:14); 
and not only so, but being justified and reconciled 
to God under the New Covenant, we have 
gone further and accepted the "high calling," 
the "heavenly calling," and consecrated our 
justified lives— "even unto death,"— and been 
accepted as members of the body of Christ and 
are thus heirs of the Abrahamic Covenant. 
(Gal. 3:29.) Hence, so far from desiring to use 
our liberty to indulge in sin, we, having God's 
spirit, detest sin and love righteousness and 
delight ourselves in the "law of Christ"— love. 
Christ's word is our law— not a law of bondage, 
but of liberty. Whoso looketh into the perfect 

R1729: page 351 

law of liberty and continueth therein [free], 
being not a forgetful hearer, but one who exercises 
his liberty, this man shall be truly blessed 
thereby. Such fulfil the royal law of the New 
Covenant, the law of love.— Jas. 1:25. 

THE LAW OF THE NEW COVENANT. 



If we have proved that the Ten Commandments 
were given to Israel, and to Israel only, 
and that as the basis of a Covenant made only 

R1729: page 352 

with that nation,— and if we have shown that 
the other nations of the world have been left 
by God without any law except such traces as 
yet remain of the original law, written in the 
nature of the first perfect man, who was created 
in God's image,— and that to the Church of the 
New Covenant our Lord gave the Law of Love 
as the basis of that New Covenant, then we have 
proved that the Ten Commandments should not 
be recognized by the Gospel Church, the Church 
of the New Covenant, except as they are in harmony 
with the Law of the New Covenant— Love. 
The Mediator of the New Covenant has a 



standard for all who accept him, as Moses, the 

Mediator of the Law Covenant, had ten commands 

for a standard. The Law of God is the 

standard of the New Covenant. It is the same 

law that was expressed in the ten commandments, 

but a more refined and more comprehensive statement 

of that law, designed for a more advanced 

class. The people put under the Law Covenant 

and baptised unto Moses were a household of servants, 

while the people of the New Covenant are 

a household of God's sons. Thus we read, 

"Moses verily was faithful as a servant over all 

his house [of servants], but Christ [was faithful] as 

a son over his own house [of sons], whose house 

are we, if...."— Heb. 3:6. 

The expression of the divine law given at 
Sinai was exactly suited to the house of servants 
to whom it was given: it was a series of instructions, 
—Thou shalt, and Thou shalt not. 
The expression of the law of the New Covenant 
is very different, and implies much more liberty. 
It simply tells those who are God's sons, and 
who therefore are begotten of his spirit, You may 
do or say anything in harmony with love. Pure 
love for God will lead not only to obedience to 
his will, but to the study of his will, in his Word. 
Pure love governing our conduct toward our 
fellow-men and the lower animals will seldom 
work to their injury. It will come more and 
more under the guidance of the Lord's Word, 
and thus we will be perfected in love. But from 
the first it is a safe law: it is a "law of liberty," 
in that it requires us merely to act out, according 
to our own judgments, that which we voluntarily 
consecrate ourselves to do, our own wishes as 
new creatures. 

Since this New Covenant is made only with 
those whose desires are changed, who no longer 
love sin but are seeking escape from it as well as 
from its penalty, who now love God and his 
righteousness,— it would be manifestly improper 
to give these "sons of God" the statement of 
God's Law or will in the same form that it was 
expressed to the house of "servants." The sons 
are granted a law of liberty, the servants a law 
of bondage. The servants were told what they 
might and might not do; because they were servants, 
not sons, not begotten of the Father's spirit; 
hence they needed positive commands, restraints 
and penalties. This is forcibly expressed by the 
Apostle in his exposition of this very subject in 
Galatians 3. 

How strange you would think it if we were to 
say, We feel it our duty to tell the readers of this 
journal who are saints, that they should not 
make or worship images, that they should not 



blaspheme God's name, that they should not 
steal from their neighbors, that they should not 
murder their neighbors, nor slander them, nor 
bear false witness against them. The intelligent 
and consecrated reader would feel offended, and 
that justly. He would say, The Editor has a 
very low opinion of his readers, or he would not 
so address them. 

Just so it would be strange indeed if God or 
Christ had given the Ten Commandments to the 
Gospel Church as the basis of the New Covenant. 
And the truly consecrated and spirit-of-love-begotten 
ones, would have been justified in 
questioning the wisdom and love of putting them 
under an expression of the divine law so far below 
their nature and wish and covenant as to be 
almost an insult. 

But the law of love, while it is a law of liberty 
and an "easy yoke" to such as have the Lord's 
spirit, is nevertheless a most searching law— discerning 
scrutinizing, judging the very thoughts 
and intents of our hearts— as well as our actions 
and words. In that one word, Love, is expressed 
the very essence of the divine law. Love to God 
implies full obedience, full recognition of divine 
character— wisdom, love, justice and power: full 
harmony with and service of God, and the exercise 
of those qualities of character in all our 
thoughts, words and deeds. 

R1729: page 353 

THE "LAW OF THE SPIRIT OF LIFE, 
IN CHRIST JESUS." 



This law of love to God and our fellowmen, 
which we delight to obey to the extent of our 
ability, not of compulsion, but of a willing 
mind as partakers of the spirit of Christ, is the 
only law with which we have to do. While it 
entirely ignores the Mosaic Law, its "thou 
shalt," and "thou shalt not," it really accomplishes 
far more than the Mosaic Law; for, with 
his heart ruled by love for God and man, who 
would desire to dishonor God or to injure his 
fellowman? 

But as of the Mosaic Law it was true that its 
utterances were only to those under it— Israelites 
—for "whatsoever the Law saith it saith to 
them who are under the law" (Rom. 3: 19), 
so it is true of the Law of Love, the law of the 
New Covenant: it speaks only to those who are 
under it, and these are only the consecrated 
believers in Christ. It is a law of liberty, in 



that all who are under it are under it from 
choice. They came under it voluntarily, and 
may leave it when they please. In this it 
differs greatly from the Law put upon fleshly 
Israel as a nation, in which they had no individual 
liberty or choice, being born under 
bondage to that Law Covenant. Our Law is 
the Royal Law; because the "little flock" 
developed under this law of liberty and love is 
the royal family— the divine family, selected 
under their Lord and Head to be heirs of God, 
joint heirs with Jesus Christ, partakers of the 
divine nature. 

Those now being selected as members for the 
body of Christ, are only such as delight to do 
God's will, sons of God and "brethren of 
Christ," having this likeness to Christ. And 
at the close of the Millennial age, when the rod 
of iron shall have broken the proud hearts, and 
shall have caused the stiff knees to bend in obedience, 
and when the obstinate are cut off as 
incorrigible, wilful sinners, then the law of love 
and liberty will again be virtually in force over 
all God's creatures. All who shall be permitted to 
enter upon that grand age of perfection following 
the Millennial reign of Christ will first have 
been tested, and will have given abundant proof 
that they delight to do God's will and that his 
righteous law is continually their hearts' desire. 

ALIVE WITHOUT THE LAW ONCE. 



In his letter to the Romans (chapter 7), the 
Apostle reasons to Jewish converts to Christianity; 
"For," he says, "I speak to them that 
know the Law." 

He then represents the Law Covenant as a 
husband, and Israelites bound by it as a wife to 
a husband. He shows that as it would be a 
sin for the woman to unite with another man 
while her husband lives, so it would be wrong 
for Israel to leave Moses and his Covenant of 
the Law, and to unite with Christ and his 
New Covenant of grace, unless released by 
death;— either the death of the Law Covenant 
or their death to the Law Covenant. 

It is a common mistake to suppose the 
Scriptures to teach that the Law Covenant 
died, or was destroyed by our Lord. It still 
lives; and all the children of Jacob are still 
bound by it, unless they have died to it. Only 
those who realize that they could not gain 
everlasting life through their union with Moses 
(the Law Covenant) are ready to abandon all 



hope of saving their life by that union with 
Moses, to become dead to all such expectations, 
and to accept the death of Christ, the 
ransom for Adam and all his race, as the basis 
of a new hope of a new life. Hence, only 
such Israelites as by faith reckoned themselves 
hopelessly dead under the Law Covenant, and 
as risen with Christ to a new life secured by 
his sacrifice, and who in will are dead to sin,— 
only such could be united to Christ as the new 
husband, under his New Covenant. Thus, according 
to the Apostle's reasoning, the thought 
of blending the two covenants, and being 
united to both Moses and Christ, was wholly 
out of the question.— Compare Rom. 6:2. 

The text, "Christ is the end [or fulfilment] 
of the Law [Covenant] for righteousness to 
everyone [under it] that believeth" (Rom. 10:4), 
does not conflict with the above, because 
only believers are specified. (Compare Rom. 3:31; 
Gal. 2:19.) Eph. 2:15 should be read: 
"Having abolished in his flesh the enmity of 
the law of commandments contained in ordinances," 

R1729: page 354 

etc. Col. 2:13,14 refers to "quickened" 
Jewish believers for whom the handwriting 
of ordinances is blotted out. Verse 20 
refers to the Gentile converts who had to become 
dead to the "rudiments of the world," 
before entering the New Covenant, even as 
the Jews must become dead to the rudiments 
of their Law Covenant. 

That the Law Covenant with Israel is still 
binding upon that nation is further evident 
from the fact that upon their national rejection 
of Christ, they were nationally blinded 
until the end of the Gospel age (Rom. 11:7,25), 
and that God declares that he has "not 
cast away his people" of that Covenant, but 
that under that Covenant he will yet open 
their eyes to see Christ as the only door of 
hope, and that of a new life purchased with 
his own. (Rom. 11:2,27,29; compare Deut. 30:1-9.) 

R1730 : page 354 

Meanwhile, we have the evidence 
that their Covenant continues in force in the 
fact that, as a nation, they have for centuries 
been receiving the very "curses" specified 
under their Covenant.— See Deut. 28:15-67. 
Verses 49-53 describe the Roman siege, etc.; 
verses 64-67 describe the condition of Israel 
since. (Isa. 59:21.) As heretofore shown*, the 



Lord in Leviticus (26:18-34-45) declared the 
symbolical "seven times," 2520 years, of Israel's 
subjection to the Gentiles; and their deliverance 
— A.D. 1914. Thus their present experience 
was foretold as a part of their covenant. 

Rom. 7:6 is not out of harmony with 
this explanation (that the Israelite who would 
unite with Christ must die to his nation's 
Covenant, and that the Law Covenant is not 
yet dead); for, properly rendered, + it reads, 
"But now we are delivered from the Law 
[Covenant], being dead to that wherein we 
were held; that we should serve in newness 
of spirit [with our minds, our wills]," and not 
[be required to serve] the very letter of the old, 
Law Covenant, which has passed away. 

What was defective in the old or Law Covenant? 
Was it sinful or bad? No. How came 
it, then, that under that Covenant we learned 
so much about sin? 

Because, previous to receiving the Law, Israelites 
were like the remainder of the world- 
dead in trespasses and sins; and, being already 
under sentence of death, we were like the remainder, 
unrecognized of God, and without 
any special commands; and hence we could not 
disobey or increase our sin by disobedience, 
until the Law Covenant began to command us. 

But, notwithstanding that death sentence 
under which we and all the world rested, we 
Israelites were "alive" before the Law Covenant 
came, because God had promised our father 
Abraham that somehow and at some time he 
would bless his seed, and through it all the 
families of earth. Thus, in God's promise to 
Abraham, a future life was assured to us all, 
before the Mosaic Covenant was made; but 
just as soon as that Law Covenant went into 
force, and required that we must obey its every 
command, in order to secure life, that soon we 
found that we could not absolutely control our 
poor, fallen bodies, however much we willed to 
do so with our minds. And, as sin developed, 
we died— our hopes of life expired, because we 
could not keep that Law Covenant. I speak 
for, or as representing, our whole nation. 
Thus we found that the Law Covenant, promising 
life to the obedient, really sentenced us 
to death, because we could not obey its 
requirements. 

Thus we acknowledge that the Law and the 
Covenant were good in themselves, but not 
helpful to us, because we were fallen beings. 
But God intended that it should show us how 
imperfect we really are. (Verse 13.) For the 
Law is adapted to all who are in full harmony 



with God's spirit— perfect beings— and this 
we Israelites were not; we were and are by 
nature carnal, depraved, even as others. And 
if our hearts be right, we can and will admit 
that we are unable to obey God's perfect law 
and that perfection is not to be found in our 
fallen flesh, even though in our mind we 
approve God's law and would gladly obey it. 
This is the wretched condition in which we 
find ourselves (verse 24), wanting to obey 
God's Law, and to have his favor and the everlasting 
life promised to them that love and 
obey him, and yet unable to do so because of 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., pages 88-93. 
+See marginal reading, Revised Version and Diaglott. 

R1730: page 355 

our dead bodies— fallen and sentenced through 
Adam's transgression. Oh! How can we get 
release from this, our difficulty? We cannot 
obey God's law, and God cannot give us an 
imperfect Law to suit our fallen condition. 
Oh, wretched hopeless condition! 

But no, brethren, there is hope in Christ! 
Not a hope of our fulfilling the Law Covenant 
—no hope of doing those things commanded, 
and living as a result; nor any hope of saving 
anything out of the wreck of Adam's fall and 
sentence. That must all be abandoned. We 
Israelites must die under the Law Covenant, 
as unsaved by it as we were before it was made, 
as unsaved as the Gentiles who never had a 
share in it. But as we realize ourselves dead 
under the terms of the Law Covenant, we see 
that Christ has died for Adam's sin, paid his 
penalty and thus redeemed him and all— lost 
through his disobedience— Jew and Gentile, 
bond and free, male and female. And this 
relieves us Jews, because Christ was a Jew, 
"born under the Law" Covenant, that he 
might redeem those who were under it. (Gal. 4:4,5.) 
In consequence, therefore, God can 
be just and accept all who serve his law in 
their minds and wills, and whose only hindrance 
from perfect obedience is the weakness 
of the fallen flesh. 

Thanks be unto God for this unspeakable 
gift; a new life, purchased by the precious 
blood. This we can obtain under the terms of 
the New Covenant, even though we could 
never justify the Adamic life by obedience to 
any law that God could give. 



SABBATH VIEWS OF THE REFORMERS. 



We do not cite these as of authority on the 
question, for the words of our Lord and the 
apostles are the only authorities we recognize; 
yet it is worthy of note that as the eyes of the 
early reformers, Luther, Calvin and others, 
opened to the truths of this Gospel dispensation 
due in their day, they saw at once that 
the Law Covenant was not given to the 
Gospel Church. They saw what every casual 
reader should observe, that the Apostle Paul 
contrasts the righteousness or justification 
which comes by faith in the real sacrifice, 
Christ, with that which was reckoned to Israel 
by reason of the blood of bulls and goats 
(Heb. 10:1-10), and which needed to be renewed 
yearly. The leaders in the Reformation 
all recognized the difference between 
Moses the prophet and Moses the law-giver, 
maintaining that as law-giver his authority 
extended only to Israel. They therefore denied 
that the Ten Commandments were laws 
for Christians, though they recognized them 
as valuable indications or interpretations of 
principles, to all time and to all people. 

Said Luther: "The Ten Commandments 
do not apply to us, Gentiles and Christians, 
but only to the Jews. If a preacher wishes to 
force you back to Moses, ask him if you were 
brought by Moses out of Egypt." 

Calvin was no less explicit. He declared that 
"the Sabbath is abrogated," and denied "that 
the moral part of it, that is, the observance of 
one day in seven, still remains;" while he 
added, "It is still customary among us to assemble 
on stated days for hearing the Word, 
breaking the mystic bread and for public 
prayers; and also to allow servants and 
laborers a remission from their labor." 

Justification by faith, and not by the observance 
of either Mosaic Laws or Roman 
Catholic fasts or penances, was the plea upon 
which the Reformation was started. 

"KEEP MY COMMANDMENTS." 



"If ye love me, keep my Commandments."-- 
John 14:15. 

When the young man came to our Lord, 
saying, "Good Master, what good thing shall 



I do, thai I may have eternal life?" our Lord 
replied, "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the 
Commandments," and then enumerated the 
ten commandments of the Law. Our Lord 
could not and did not ignore the Law Covenant, 
neither in his own conduct nor in his 
teaching; but, on the contrary, he testified 
that not one jot or tittle of the Law could fail 
or be ignored until all be accomplished, and 
therefore any one violating or teaching others 
to violate one of the least of them, would (if 
he got into the Kingdom at all, Matt. 5:20) 
be of a lower grade; and whoever would 
practice and teach those commandments would 
be great in the Kingdom. Our Lord himself 
was the only being under that Law Covenant 
who ever kept or taught it perfectly and He 

R1730: page 356 

is the greatest in the Kingdom: he inherited 
all of its blessings and promises.— Matt. 5:19. 

Our Lord knew that neither the young man 
who inquired, nor any of the fallen race, could 
keep those commandments. He therefore 
said, If thou desirest life, do this,— and then, 
in view of his soon fulfilment of the Law 
Covenant, and the subsequent divine acceptance 
of truly consecrated ones under the New 
Covenant, at Pentecost, he added: "Come, 
follow me." Had the young man obeyed, he 
would have been one of those accepted of the 
Father at Pentecost, an heir of life under the 
New Covenant and its law of love and liberty. 

But while our Master was obeying and fulfilling 
the commandments of the Jewish Law 
Covenant, he was giving "a New Commandment," 
not to the world, but to his followers, 
the letter, substance and spirit of which was 
LOVE. In various ways he illustrated and 
amplified this, his one command, which thus 
was made to summarize all his commandments 
—in honor to give each other preference, to 
forgive one another until seventy times seven 
times, to follow his example in sacrificing their 
lives for each other's and the truth's sakes, to 
love even their enemies and feed them if 
hungry, to pray for even those who persecuted 
them. To obey all these commands was the 
requirement of the new command, Love, which 
was the substance also of all the commandments 
given to Israel. 

Of these commands of our Lord, and not of 
the Ten Commandments of Israel's Law Covenant, 
does the Apostle John speak, saying:— 

"Blessed are they that do his commandments." 



--Rev. 22:14. 

"And hereby we do know that we have 
known him: if we keep his commandments." 
--1 John 2:3. 

"Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because 
we keep his commandments and do those 
things that are pleasing in his sight. [The 
Jewish Law cannot here be referred to, because, 

R1731 : page 356 

"By the deeds of the Law [Covenant] 
shall no flesh be justified in his sight." And 
so we read in the next verse following, that 
the commands which we keep are not those 
given at Sinai, but "This is his Commandment 
[to us, under the New Covenant], that 
we should believe on the name of his Son, Jesus 
Christ, and love one another, as he gave us 
commandment. And he that keepeth his 
commandments dwelleth in him, and he in 
him; and hereby we know that he abideth in 
us, by the Spirit which he hath given us." 

These commandments, under which we are 
placed, are not grievous and impossible to 
obey as were those of the Jewish Law Covenant 
to those under it; for Christ's yoke is 
easy, and his burden is light, to all who have 
his Spirit; and "if any man have not the spirit 
of Christ, he is none of his." 

The fact, however, that we are not under the 
Jewish Law Covenant, and not dependent on 
it for life, but are hoping for life as a favor, 
or gift from God (through him who fulfilled 
the Law Covenant and canceled all claims 
against all who come into him, both Jews and 
Gentiles), does not hinder God's free children, 
justified through faith in Christ's redemption, 
and not by the Law, from using the Jewish 
Law and every other expression, fact, figure 
and type, at their command, whether from 
nature or Scripture, in determining what would 
be acceptable and pleasing to their Heavenly 
Father. Thus, for instance, Paul, who repudiated 
over and over again the dominion of 
the Law Covenant over any in Christ, quotes 
one of the Commandments as an evidence to 
Christian parents of what God's will is with 
reference to their government of their children. 
(Eph. 6:1-4.) But mark that he does not in 
any wise present it to them as a command. 
It never was a command to parents, but to 
children. The Apostle's admonition is to parents 
concerning their conduct towards their 
children. Nor does the Apostle intimate 
justification as a reward; for he writes to those 



children who are already justified, not by deeds 
of obedience to the Law Covenant, but by faith 
in their Redeemer,— "Children obey your 
parents in the Lord." 

OBJECTIONS OF SEVENTH-DAY ADVENTISTS 
ANSWERED. 



The following claims made by Seventh-day 
Adventists we consider worthy of notice and 
reply:— 

R1731 : page 357 

(1). The Sabbath-day was observed before 
the Law was given at Sinai.— Exod. 16:23-30. 

Answer. Yes; but the Law Covenant was 
really in force from the time Israel left Egypt. 
The Passover was a prominent feature of the 
Law, and it was instituted the night before their 
exodus began. Moses had already been appointed 
of God, and, as we have seen, God's 
dealings were only with him, as the typical father 
or representative of that nation. In accepting 
and obeying Moses, Israel had already made 
the covenant to obey the laws he would give. 
The demonstration at Sinai was a formal ratification 
and acknowledgment of their covenant. 

The Sabbath-day was instituted about two 
weeks before the formal giving of the Law on 
tables of stone at Sinai; viz., at the giving of 
the manna in the wilderness— a most favorable 
opportunity for giving them an object lesson in 
the double supply of manna on the sixth day, 
and none on the seventh. (Exod. 16:22-30.) 
It was inaugurated as a memorial of their deliverance 
from Egyptian bondage, in which they 
had no rest from their task-masters. This is 
clearly stated in Deut. 5:15— "Remember that 
thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and 
that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence 
through a mighty hand and a stretched-out arm; 
therefore, the Lord thy God commanded thee to 
keep the Sabbath day." The Law Covenant is 
continually referred to as dating from that time 
—"When I took them by the hand to lead them 
out of the land of Egypt. "-Heb. 8:9; Jer. 31:32; 
Ezek. 20:5,6,12,20. 

(2). God ordained the Sabbath at creation 
(Gen. 2:2,3; Exod. 20: 1 1), and evidently 
it was observed all along, and was merely repeated 
and enforced in the Law given by Moses. 

Answer. This is a mistake. The account 
does say that God rested upon the seventh 



creative day, but not one word is said about 
the seventh day having been commanded or 
ordained, until it was given to Israel. On the 
contrary, there is no mention made of the 
Sabbath during the entire period of two thousand 
years preceding Israel's exodus from Egypt, 
and then we are told, as above quoted, that it 
was ordained for that nation and as a memorial 
of their deliverance. 

From the entire account it is evident that it 
was something new to the Israelites. Its explanation 
to them (Exod. 16:20-30), as well 
as Moses' uncertainty in the case of the first 
transgression of this law (Num. 15:32-36), 
proves that it was new, that it had not been previously 
known among them or their fathers. 

We should remember, too, that the account in 
Genesis was written by Moses, and that he very 
appropriately called attention to the fact that 
the seventh-day Sabbath commanded in his law 
was not without a precedent. 

But while God's resting on the seventh day 
of his week was properly noticed as a precedent 
for Israel's observance of a seventh-day Sabbath, 
it does not at all follow that God's rest-day 
was a twenty-four hour day; nor that God 
rested in the same manner that the Israelites 
were commanded to rest. 

The Apostle (Heb. 4:3,4,9-1 1) explains 
that Israel did not enter into the real rest or 
Sabbath,— although they zealously observed 
the seventh day. He says that the reason was, 
that they did not exercise the faith by which 
alone the real rest can be enjoyed. "We that 
believe do enter into rest [and thus have a perpetual 
Sabbath]." "For he that is entered into 
his rest [the rest of heart, in faith, given by 
Christ], he also hath ceased from his own works 
[from attempting self-justifying works], as God 
did from his [works— i.e., as God left the work 
of redemption and recovery for Christ to do, 
so we also accept Christ's finished work, and 
rest in faith therein, with all the obedience 
possible]." Those who trust in the Law Covenant 
or who blend its requirements with those 
of the New Covenant cannot fully enjoy this 
rest, which is for the New Covenant keepers only. 

God's rest day, instead of being a twenty-four-hour 
day, is a day seven thousand years 
long. It began as soon as sin brought God's 
curse upon Adam. Instead of undertaking 
Adam's recovery out of sin and death, God 
rested from any further works on behalf of man 
and earth, and let things take their natural 
course, purposing in himself that Christ should 
have full charge of man's redemption and restitution. 



God gave promises and types and 

shadows in the Law, but he did not work toward 

R1731 : page 358 

man's recovery. The first work for man's recovery 
was the ransom paid by our Lord Jesus 
for Adam and his race. 

The Heavenly Father has therefore already 
rested six thousand years; and he will similarly 
rest during the Millennium of Christ's reign,— 
until its very close, when Christ shall deliver 
up the Kingdom to God, even the Father.* 

(3). The Command to keep the Sabbath is 
associated with nine moral precepts which are 
binding upon all men for all time. 

Answer. We have already shown that God 
had a law before the giving of the Ten Commandments 
to Moses and Israel; that it was 
graven in man's nature in Adam; and that it 
was a perfect expression of the mind of God on 
all questions of obligation to God and to man, 
—much more so than that written upon the 
tables of stone. Hence, the moral precepts of 
the Decalogue, a secondary statement of the 
divine law, are not to be ranked as the only 
moral standard, nor the superior one, when we 
know that a new standard was chosen for the 
New Covenant and remember that the original 
standard is promised for the future.— Jer. 31:31. 

The fourth of the Ten Commandments is 
not at first seen to have any parallel in the law 
of Love, the law or standard of the New Covenant. 
It enjoins a rest every seventh day. 
However, its parallel in the law of the New 
Covenant is brought to our attention by the 
Apostle's words in Hebrews 4:1-1 1. The 
word Sabbath signifies rest; and the Apostle 
here teaches that our rest by faith in Christ, 
our realization that we are "accepted in the 
Beloved," is the refreshing antitype of the 
literal rest-day commanded to Israel under 
their Law Covenant. Seven is the symbol for 
completeness, and hence the seventh day foreshadowed 
the more desirable and complete rest 
of the true Israel of God. And only those who 
thus rest by faith in Christ can continue under 
the blessed provisions of the New Covenant; 
for it is specially a covenant based upon faith, 
and "without faith it is impossible to please 
God;" and the true faith cannot be exercised 
without rest of heart, the true Sabbath-keeping. 

The poor Jew never could experience such a 
rest, but on the contrary had such experiences 
as the Apostle describes when personating them, 
"O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver 



*Thus we find the key to the period of creation; for if 
the seventh day be a period of seven thousand years, as 
we think we have proved, then each of the preceding 
days were doubtless of similar length. This period 
agrees well with the results of scientific research, and 
gives ample time for the gradual development of vegetable 
and animal life up to the time of man's creation; 
and at some other time we purpose showing the full agreement 
of the account of creation given in Genesis with the 
record of the rocks,— Geology. 

Thus considered, the period from the beginning of the 
ordering of creation on the Earth down to the surrender 
of it perfect to the Father, at the close of the Millennium, 
is a period of seven times seven thousand years, or a total 
of forty-nine thousand years; and the grand epoch then to 
begin will be the fiftieth thousand, or a great Jubilee, on 
a grand scale,— not the Jubilee of Israel, nor the Jubilee 
of general restitution, but the Jubilee of Earth. 

R1732: page 358 

me?" The nearest approach to the real rest 
of heart was the typical one given them in the 
Fourth Commandment of their Law Covenant. 

(4). There were two laws given to Israel, 
a ceremonial and a moral law; and it was the 
former only that was done away by Christ, 
while the moral law remains. 

Answer. There is no Scriptural authority 
for such a division. On the contrary, there 
was but one law,— its ceremonial features providing 
typically for the cleansing away of sins 
resulting from the violation of its moral precepts. 
If it could be seen as the Covenant mediated by 
Moses, it would be evident that all of its parts 
must stand or fall together. But after comparing 
Exod. 34:28; Deut. 4:13,14; and Heb. 8:6-8, 
there should be no question on the part 
of any one that the Ten Commandments were a 
part of the Covenant which was supplanted by 
the New Covenant sealed with the blood [death] 
of Christ, its mediator. 

When the Apostles wrote to the new Gentile 
converts respecting the Law— determined not 
to put upon them the yoke of the Law which 
they as Jews had been unable to keep— and contradicting 
certain teachers who had said that 
they "must be circumcised and keep the Law," 
James remarked incidentally that the law of 
Moses to which they referred was that "read in 
the synagogue every Sabbath day."-- 
Acts 15:9-11,24,28,29,19-21. 

(5). We Seventh-day keepers claim that God's 



commands are, that we labor six days and rest 
on the seventh; and many of us have gone to 
prison because of our conviction that it is our 
duty to labor on the first day and on all days except 
the seventh. And we believe that the time 

R1732: page 359 

is coming when the keeping of Sunday will be a 
yet more severe test, and bring further suffering 
upon us. 

Answer. We have nothing to do with the 
making of the social laws which prohibit labor 
on the first day of the week; but we obey them 
as civil laws, as commanded in the Scriptures 
(Rom. 13:1-7; 1 Pet. 2:13); and we find it to 
be to our profit as well as to our pleasure. We 
sincerely sympathize with the poor people who 
are deluded by such an argument, and suffer 
therefor; and we admire their willingness to suffer 
for what they consider to be the truth. But 
they are mistaken. The laws of this land do not 
compel any man to violate his conscience by 
working on the seventh day or any other day. 

And it is not sound reasoning to claim that 
a man must labor during the other six days. If 
so, are those days of twenty-four hours, or of 
how many hours? In such a case, for a man to be 
sick, or to go on a journey or on a visit, would 
be to violate the Law, and fall under its curse. 
What nonsense! False reasoning has surely blinded 
whoever cannot see that the Fourth Commandment 
of Moses' Law means, "[Within] six 
days shalt thou labor and do all thy work!" 

As for future persecution on these lines, it is 
probable; not because of any opposition to 
Seventh-day-keeping but because, according to 
the Scriptures, there will ere long be a federation 
or union of religious systems which, giving increased 
prestige and honor, will make the 
demands of popular religionists more arrogant 
—supposedly in the interest of peace and the 
cause of Christ. 

(6). We Seventh Day Adventists claim, that 
as the Mosaic Covenant had a tabernacle, with 
a holy place in which the high priest offered for 
the sins of the people during the entire year, 
and a Most Holy in which he finished that work 
on the last day of the year, so there is a Holy 
and Most Holy in Heaven; and that Christ has 
officiated for the sins of his people in the Holy 
during the Gospel age, and will for a short time 
before its close officiate in the Most Holy. 
This we understand to be the "cleansing of the 
Sanctuary." We consequently used to teach 
that all probation ended about 1845, when 



Christ (we believe) went from the Holy into 
the Most Holy. We hold, therefore, that the 
judgment is all over, and that naught remains 
except for Christ to come forth and receive us 
Seventh Day Adventists, and to destroy all the 
remainder of mankind. 

We hold, too, that we Seventh Day Adventists 
are fulfilling the "Third Angel's Message" of 
Rev. 14:9-12. In the expression, "Fear God 
and keep his commandments," we place the 
stress upon the Fourth Commandment. 

Answer. You err respecting the antitypes 
of the Jewish Atonement Day and Tabernacle. 
The antitypical Holy and Most Holy are "heavenly," 
in the sense of being higher (such is the 
meaning of the word heavenly). In Israel's typical 
service these were places: in the antitype 
they are conditions. All of the antitypical or 
"royal priesthood" have access to the Holy 
condition as soon as they consecrate themselves 
or present their bodies living sacrifices to God's 
service. (Heb. 9:6.) They at once have access 
to the antitypical "shewbread" (Lev. 24:9), 
"meat to eat that the world knoweth not of." 
They at once have the light of divine revelation, 
represented by the "golden candlestick," which 
the natural man perceiveth not. (1 Cor. 2:5,7,9-12.) 
They at once have access to the 
Incense Altar, and their prayers and services are 
acceptable to God through Christ as sweet incense. 
Thus the first apartment of the Tabernacle 
represents the present condition of the 
Church while still in the flesh. Thus we are 
now blest with Christ Jesus "in heavenly 
places [higher conditions]."— Eph. 1:3. 

But the vail (death) still separates between us 
and the perfect spiritual condition— the divine 
nature into which Christ has entered, and into 
which he has promised to conduct all his faithful 
joint-sacrificers and joint-heirs at the close 
of the Antitypical Day of Atonement. 

You err also in supposing that Israel's typical 
Day of Atonement was at the end of the year, 
to atone for past sins. It was, on the contrary, 
for the nation, and at the beginning of their 
year, to make atonement for the whole nation 
and to bring the whole nation into God's favor 
for the year following it. And the thank-offerings, 
peace-offerings and trespass-offerings, 
offered by individuals during the year following, 
were acceptable upon the basis of that Atonement 
Day offering. At the close of the year, 
for which the Atonement Day sacrifices applied, 
the people were again as defiled as the residue 
of Adam's race, and required a new Day of 
Atonement as a basis for another year's acceptance 



with God as a typically justified nation. 

You err also in supposing that the coming 
out of the Great High Priest at the close of the 
Day of Atonement will be for the blessing of 
seventh-day keepers. He comes out to bless, 
first, the "royal priesthood"— they that have 
made a covenant with him by sacrifice. (Psa. 50:5.) 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord, 
in that day when I make up my jewels." 
(Mai. 3:17.) But, as in the type, not priests 
only were blessed, but "all the people," so in 
the antitype all the families of the earth shall 
be blessed at the revelation of Christ Jesus, when 
he shall come to be "glorified in his saints, and 

R1732: page 360 

to be admired in all them that believe in that 
[Millennial] day" (2 Thes. 1:10.) The sacrifices 
and offerings subsequent to the typical 
Day of Atonement will find their antitypes in 
the Millennial age, when all those who desire 
fellowship with God will come to him through 
the Royal Priesthood, who will offer their 
sacrifices for them.* 

You are in serious error, also, respecting the 
Cleansing of the Sanctuary; but for our view 
of this subject we must refer you to MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. III., Chap. 4. 

As to the Third Angel's message: Suppose 
we were to admit your claim, that you are fulfilling 
Rev. 14:9-12. That would prove nothing as 
to the truth or untruth of your message. The 
Book of Revelation is a symbolic prophecy,— 
a history written in advance. What is occurring 
and what will occur are faithfully related 
—often without comment;— just as the old 
Testament prophecies relate evil things as well 
as good things, and often without comment. 
For instance, Daniel 7:8 tells about the Papal 
horn "speaking great things," but does not say 
whether they are great truths or great untruths. 
So, too, in Revelation, Papacy is described and 
its language quoted without adverse criticism. 

(7). Christ said that he came not to destroy 
the Law and the prophets, but to fulfil them.— 
Matt. 5:17. 

Answer. Yes, that is just what we hold: he 
fulfilled the Law Covenant— met all of its requirements, 
and obtained its reward, Life. 
That fulfilled it, for that was the end for which 
it was intended and given. 

(8). Christ said, "The Sabbath was made 
for man, and not man for the Sabbath." (Mark 2:27.) 
We understand this to mean that the 
Sabbath was made for all mankind. 



Answer. Your inference is not reasonable. 
If the Sabbath were meant for all mankind, the 
fact should and would have been clearly stated 
to all mankind. But the facts are that it was 
commanded only of one nation, and that Christ 
and the Apostles did not so command. In this 
text our Lord is showing to the Jews, to whom 
the command was given, that they were putting 
an extreme construction upon the command 
when they refused to do good on that day— to 
a fellow creature, as well as to an ox or an ass. 
The Sabbath was intended for the blessing of 
the men who were commanded to keep it: they 
were not created nor called as a nation simply 
to serve the day. 

(9). In Isa. 66:23, the Sabbath is mentioned 
in connection with the new heavens and new 
earth— which to us means that it will be a perpetual 
institution— throughout eternity. 

Answer. It is possible that in the beginning 
of the Millennial age the Lord's dealing with the 
world of mankind, then in process of restitution 
and trial, will resemble his dealing with the house 



*For a fuller treatment of this subject see Tabernacle 
Shadows of Better Sacrifices— 104 pages, leatherette, 
10 cents. 

R1733: page 360 

of servants— Israel. He may restore laws respecting 
the Sabbath and various festivals, and 
even sacrifices, to teach the world by these as 
object lessons. Some scriptures seem so to hint. 
(Jer. 33:18; Ezek. 46:19-24; 47:12; 48:10,11.) 
We must remember that the liberty of 
sons of God, now granted to us, is in view of our 
being spirit-begotten, new creatures. However, 
we may be assured that the Law Covenant will 
never be placed over the world as it was over 
typical Israel; for it made nothing perfect; and 
righteousness could not come by the Law Covenant 
to others any more than to Israel. The 
New Covenant will remain open all through the 
Millennial age, for all who desire to flee from sin 
and to return to full harmony with God. But 
by that time, the "seed" of Abraham having 
been completed, none will then have the privilege 
to become joint-heirs of that promise, but 
can come under the blessings which will flow 
from that Seed. 

The expression, from new moon to new moon, 
and from Sabbath to Sabbath, to a Jew would 
merely mean, from month to month, and from 



week to week; and would not of necessity relate 
to any special observance of the days. 

The Seventh-day Adventists are surely doing 
a world-wide work, and, whether right or 
wrong, might not improperly be mentioned in 
the prophecy of Revelation. It does seem, however, 
rather preposterous to claim that their 
advocacy of the Fourth Commandment of 
Israel's Decalogue constitutes them alone the 
champions of God's commandments and the 
faith of Jesus. God's commandment to the 
Gospel Church of the New Covenant is, "This 
is my beloved Son. Hear ye him!" And neither 
he nor any whom he sent forth as his special ambassadors 
and representatives ever said one word 
in favor of the observance of the seventh day. 

(10). The Roman Catholic Church claims to 
have originated Sunday keeping, admits that 
there is no authority for it in the Scriptures, and 
claims its right to make the change. 

Answer. The Church of Rome is quick to 
turn any point to her own favor; and this is 
one which furnishes a specially good opportunity. 
It is nothing to admit that Sunday 
is not commanded in the New Testament (but 
neither is the seventh-day Sabbath), and it 
furnishes an excellent chance to emphasize 
Roman Catholic doctrine,— that tradition is 
equally authoritative with God's Word. 

R1733: page 361 

But this boast that Papacy changed the 
seventh-day Sabbath to the first-day Sunday 
amounts to nothing. Where is the proof of it? 
Nowhere. The facts are that the New Covenant 
provides no day for rest, but a rest for 
every day; and the early Church met on either 
or both days according to convenience or advantage. 
The custom of meeting on the first 
day came down and gradually crystallized into 
a habit, and, later, a supposed duty. But Papacy 
cannot point back to any date and show by the 
decisions of any Council that she changed the 
Jewish Sabbath into the Christian Sunday. 

A Catechism, entitled "The Catholic Christian 
Instructed," in answer to the question, 
"What are the days which the Church commands 
to be kept holy?" says, "(I). The Sunday, 
or our Lord's day, which we observe, by 
Apostolic tradition, instead of the Sabbath." 
Thus Romanists do not claim to have changed 
the day. 

(II). The name Sunday is heathenish, and 
doubtless at one time marked a day on which 
the Sun was worshiped; consequently the day 



should not be recognized nor the name used. 
Answer. Some great infidel may have been 
named Robert or Thomas, but this would not 
make an infidel of you if you had been given 
his name. So the propriety of worshiping God 
on the first day of the week or on any other 
day is not governed by its common or general 
name. We have no special choice of name— 
Lord's-day, Sabbath or Sunday would any of 
them serve our purpose, and we could worship 
God in spirit and in truth on that day as well 
under one name as another. Sabbath is a good 
name, and reminds us of our rest by faith in 
Christ's sacrifice and New Covenant. Lord's-day 
is also good, and reminds us that the first 
day of the week marks the greatest token of 
divine favor ever manifested— the resurrection 
of our Lord. Sunday reminds us of the Sun 
of Righteousness— our resurrected Lord, and 
all the blessings present and prospective that 
we and the whole world may anticipate through 
him. If the heart be right, any of these 
names will become fragrant with precious 
memories of God's grace through Christ. 

THE SUM OF THE MATTER. 



We group below the foregoing conclusions. 

(1). The word Sabbath-day signifies 
rest-day. 

(2). Any rest-day might therefore with 
propriety be called a Sabbath-day. Indeed, 
this was a custom with the Jews. All of their 
feast-days they called rest-days or Sabbaths— 
as, for instance, the first and last days of the 
Passover were called Sabbaths, no matter upon 
what day of the week they occurred. 

(3). The Sabbath-day commanded in the 
two tables of stone, delivered by God to 
Israel by the hand of Moses at Mt. Sinai, was 
the seventh day of the week, not the first day; 
nor was it merely one day in seven; this 
was particularly indicated by the extra supply 
of manna on the sixth day. 

(4). While any day of the week would have 
suited equally well, so far as Israel was concerned, 
God evidently had a choice. The 
seventh day, chosen by him, was evidently 
typical, as were all of God's arrangements for 
and with that typical people. We understand 
that it typified the rest experienced by spiritual 
Israel, and referred to by the Apostle in 
Hebrews 4:9. 

(5). The fourth commandment was as 



binding as the others of the Decalogue, and 
hence if the others continue in force against 
fleshly Israel, to whom they all were given, so 
does this one. But neither the fourth nor any 
other of the ten commandments was ever given 
to, or made a law for, any other nation than 
Israel. None could come under its provisions 
except by becoming Israelites, and practicing 
circumcision. 

(6). The Decalogue was the foundation of 
the covenant between God and Israel, called 
the Law Covenant.— Deut. 4:13. 

(7). Since the death of Christ the arrangement 
between God and those whom he acknowledges 
as his children is called the New 
Covenant— sealed or made of force by Christ's 
death,— by the precious blood of Christ. Its 
provisions or benefits are not for one race or 
family of mankind merely, but are open for 
all people,— through faith in Christ. 

The Jews, and, for that matter, some among 
the Gentiles also, who sought communion and 
fellowship with God, were continually striving 
to do something which would atone for their 
sins and open communion and harmony with 
God; but the most earnest were "weary and 
heavy laden" and almost discouraged with 
their failure. It is to such that our Lord addressed 
himself, saying, "Come unto me, and 
I will give you rest."— Matt. 11:28. 

(8). As the Law Covenant had the Ten 
Commandments for its foundation, so the 
New Covenant has a new law for its foundation 
—the law of Love. "A new commandment 
give I unto you, that ye love one 
another." The new command was not one 
added to the ten of the old Covenant,— not 
an eleventh,— but was instead of the ten of 
the Law Covenant, and much more comprehensive. 

R1733: page 362 

Love is the only command of the New 
Covenant, and bears only upon those who 
have accepted the New Covenant. The 
world in general has nothing to do with the 
New Covenant, its privileges, its blessings 
and its law, even as it had nothing to do with 
the Law Covenant and its decalogue, etc. 
Only those under the Law Covenant were 
bound by it or helped by it; and only those 
under the New Covenant are recognized by it. 

(9). The people of the world in general 
are not recognized by God; they are called 
"the children of this world," "children of the 
devil," "children of wrath," etc.; and we are 



told that they have not "escaped the condemnation 
that is upon the world," through "one 
man's disobedience," that they cannot escape 
except through the provisions of the New 
Covenant, and that hence "the whole world 
[God's covenanted people being exceptions] 
lieth in that wicked one." 

The world once had a law from God, but 
they have lost it, or most of it, and are now 
strangers and foreigners unrecognized by God. 
(Rom. 1:21; Eph. 2:19.) The original law 
was not written upon tables of stone, but was 
incorporated in man's very character, so that 
when perfect in God's image, he knew right 
and wrong instinctively— his conscience was a 
safe and accurate guide. But six thousand 
years of degradation, as slaves of Sin and 
Death under Satan, have almost effaced that 
original law from man's heart— have warped 
his judgment and conscience, and made his will 
the plaything of his animal propensities and 
hopes and fears. 

Provision was made that these might, if 
they chose, become Israelites, and by circumcision 
and the observance of the Law Covenant 
be joint-heirs with Israel to all the favors and 
typical privileges granted to that nation. 
But they were not under either the blessings 
or the curses of that Covenant unless they 
voluntarily accepted it. So now, under the New 
Covenant, arrangement is made for the world 
to come in under its provisions— under its 
justification or forgiveness of sins, and under 
its law of love. But only those who have put 
themselves under it are sharers of either its 
blessings or its responsibilities. 

But there was no provision made for any 
Sabbath-day under the New Covenant— every 
day was to be a Sabbath or day of faith-rest 
in Christ, to all under the New Covenant, and 
to no others. And the Apostle was careful to 
guard the early Church against the esteem of 

R1734: page 362 

one day above another as more holy. (Rom. 14:5-8.) 
Our Lord's ministry was under the 
Law Covenant, and hence he observed the 
seventh-day Sabbath even while he assured 
the people that he was "Lord also of the 
Sabbath-day." But neither he nor any of the 
Apostles ever commanded or even suggested 
the observance of any special day as a Sabbath. 
And one of these Apostles declared that he 
had "not shunned to declare the whole counsel 
of God;"— thus proving that the observance 



of a Sabbath day was no part of 

God's counsel to sons of the New Covenant. 

(10). There was no authorization of a 
change from the seventh day to the first day 
as a Sabbath or rest day. The early Church 
was composed chiefly of those who had been 
God's servants under the typical Law Covenant, 
and it required time for them to appreciate 
the fact that the Law Covenant had 
ended and a New Covenant had been introduced; 
and they were warned frequently 
by the Apostles against Judaizing tendencies 
and teachers, and a tendency to mix the New 
Covenant and its law of love and liberty with 
the Law of the old Covenant. Naturally, 
they still observed the seventh day from 
custom and convenience, and because in 
Palestine it was the civil law, and also because 
on that day they could most successfully reach 
with the Gospel of Christ the most hopeful 
class of hearers. 

Our Lord's resurrection on the first day of 
the week, and his subsequent showing of himself 
to them upon that day, seems to have 
started in the early Church the custom of 
meeting together on every first day, and having 
a simple meal, and recounting with prayer 
and praise the Lord's mercies, and remembering 
their risen Redeemer and how his words 
burned in their hearts when first on that day 
he had explained to them redemption through 
his blood, how it was necessary for Christ to 
die and to rise, etc. 

(11). This pleasant custom grew upon the 
Church, but without any law, for the Apostles 
assured them that there is no law but love to 
them that are in Christ Jesus. It was 
merely a privilege which they prized and used 
profitably. It was not until centuries had 
passed, and Papacy had arisen with the false 
idea that its mission was to convert the world, 
by force, if necessary, that laws were made 
respecting the first day of the week as the 
Lord's day or Sunday. Having gathered into 
the Church multitudes of "tares," who did 
not appreciate the liberty or the love of the 
New Covenant, and who really were as much 
as ever "children of the devil," some laws or 
regulations were made for their restraint. 

R1734: page 363 

(12). The New Covenant law controls only 
"believers"— "the faithful in Christ Jesus"— 
and leaves these entirely free to do or observe 
whatever love might dictate; for it is lawful to 



do good— to do anything that godly love would 
dictate or approve— on any day; and it is improper 
to violate the dictates of love upon any 
day. 

Mankind has laws upon the subject, however, 
and it is God's command to his people that 
they be subject to civil rulers in all matters 
not in violation of their consciences respecting 
his wishes. On whatever day or however 
frequently the civil law commands rest from 
secular labor, it becomes our duty to obey. 
We can rejoice that we are at liberty to worship 
how and whom we please, and should 
gladly use every opportunity wisely, nor forsaking 
the assembling of ourselves for spiritual 
refreshment. We are glad, too, and thankful 
that the day specially set aside as a Sabbath 
by civil governments is the very one of all 
others that we prefer, because it memorializes 
the beginning of the new order of things,— 
begun by the resurrection of our dear Redeemer. 
Hence, in outward conduct we conform 
to the laws of men on the subject, while 
in our hearts, having fullest freedom toward 
God, we delight to use the first day of the 
week specially to his pleasement and praise, 
in doing good to others, particularly to the 
household of faith. 

"STAND FAST IN THE LIBERTY." 



We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the 
weak, and not to please ourselves.— Rom. 15:1. 

Our liberty in Christ, under the terms of 
the New Covenant, must take care that others 
are not injured by our use of liberty; for this 
would be condemned by our law of Love. The 
Apostle clearly emphasizes this in his letter to 
the Romans.-Chap. 14:1 to 15:7. 

He there points out that all are not alike 
strong in the faith. Some, weak in the faith, 
can see that Christ is our Redeemer, but cannot 
as yet realize the liberty we have in Christ; 
for one realizes his liberty to eat whatever 
agrees with him, while another one, who is 
weak (in bondage), eats vegetables only, lest 
he should violate some law under which he 
thinks himself. Each should learn to grant 
the other full liberty of conscience: the stronger 
should not despise the weaker, nor should the 
weaker judge others by himself. It should be 
sufficient to know that God accepts even the 
weakest ones. So it is also with reference to 



the observance of days: One man esteems 
one day above another, while another esteems 
all days alike. Let each carry out fully the 
conviction of his own mind. 

The Apostle does not here teach, as so many 
suppose from the common translation, that 
each should make up his mind and stick to 
it, whether right or wrong; nor does he teach 
that one is as right as the other. On the 
contrary, he urges growth into the full liberty 
of Christ, but counsels patience and consideration 
on the part of the stronger for the weaker. 
He approves the stronger, and plainly states 
that the brother who thinks himself under a 
bondage regarding meat, or Sabbath days, fast 
days, etc., is the weak brother. But he urges 
that if such a weak brother observes such a 
bondage, not as an attempt to "keep the Law" 
and to justify himself before God, ignoring 
Christ's redemption sacrifice, but because he 
thinks that our Redeemer wishes him to be 
bound by such ordinances, then the stronger 
ones should not rail at, or make light of, his 
conscientious weakness, but rather receive him 
fully as a brother, trusting that discipline and 
experience and growth in grace and knowledge 
will gradually bring him to the liberty which 
others reach more quickly. 

And those strong ones who enter fully into 
the spirit of the Apostle's remark, "It is 
good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, 
nor anything whereby thy brother stumbleth, 
or is offended, or is made weak," and deny 
themselves what their own consciences permit, 
have the greater blessing. They can realize 
in an additional degree that they are following 
in the Master's steps; for "Even Christ 
pleased not himself."— Rom. 14:21; 15:2,3. 

For if the stronger brethren by sarcasm and 
influence were to force the weaker ones to use 
a liberty they did not realize, it would be 
forcing them into sin; for any violation of 
conscience is sin. (Rom. 14:23.) Therefore 
the weaker brethren should be left to the liberty 
of their consciences. They should be received 
as brethren, the influences of love and 
truth alone being brought to bear upon them, 
in the hope of gradually educating them to 
an appreciation of their full privileges as free 
men in Christ. Thus the body may be full of 
charity and unity, each one carrying out the 
convictions of his own mind as to the Lord's 
will, and each seeking to grow in grace and 
knowledge, out of childhood's weakness into 
manhood's strength, as rapidly as possible; 
being developed as he feeds upon God's Word. 



The Apostle again refers specially to the 
observance of days as a sign of weakness, childishness 
and lack of development, saying (Gal. 4:10,11): 

R1734: page 364 

"Ye observe days, and months, 
and times, and years. I am anxious on your 
behalf, lest my labor for you has been in vain." 
He here addresses those who had once known 
the liberty of the sons of God, but who were 
now getting into bondage through false teaching. 
He recognized by these weaknesses for 
the things commanded by the Law Covenant, 
an evidence that they were not growing into 
the liberty of sons of God, but going backward 
toward the servant condition (see verses 6-9; 
19-31); and he was even fearful that 
this weakness and failure to maintain the 
liberty of sonship, and this subservience to the 
Law Covenant might lead them to reject the 
true gospel, that Christ gave himself for our 
sins, and accept as a gospel a hopeless substitute 
—that Christ would save them if they kept 
the Law.-Gal. 1:4-8; 5:2. 

In Col. 2:14-17, the Apostle declares the 
same truth with reference to the liberty of all 
who are in Christ, in respect to the Law: 
especially singling out the festivals, new moons 
and Sabbaths. He pointedly declares (verse 13) 
that those believers who had been Gentiles 
were pardoned fully and freely from all 
condemnation, while concerning those who 
had been Jews he says (verse 14), Christ blotted 
out the written Law which was against us 
[believing Israelites], removed it from our way, 
nailing it to his cross; having stripped away 
from the original [law] and its authorities [all 
obscurities], he made a public illustration of 
them [in his life of obedience to them], triumphing 
over them by it [in obedience even 
unto death, even the death of the cross]. 
"Therefore," reasons the apostle, because 
our Lord has made both you Gentiles and us 
Jews free, "permit no man to judge you in meat 
or drink, or in respect to a holyday, or of the 
new moon, or of the Sabbaths, which are shadows 
of future things, the substance [or antitypes] 
of which appertain to the Anointed 
[Head and Body]." 

Glorious is the liberty of the sons of 
God! Let us stand fast in it ! And let us 
enjoy to the full our rest of faith; for we can 
rest (enjoy Sabbath) whether the world 
has a Sabbath or not: whether any day 
or no day is commanded by human law, our 



rest abides. It lasts seven days in each week 
and twenty-four hours in each day, and is not 
broken by physical labor, nor is it dependent 

R1735: page 364 

on physical ease. It is a deep and lasting rest, 
and can be broken only by doubt— by a rejection 
of the basis on which it must abide, the 
ransom,— or by living after the flesh, and 
thus disturbing conscience and our relationship 
toward God. 

How blessed is the state of all in Christ, as 
mature sons of God under favor, not servants 
nor infants under Laws! (John 15:15; Rom. 8: 15; 
Gal. 4:1-6.) How blessed to us is the 
true rest of faith in Christ's finished work, 
which rest neither the world nor the Law 
could give, and which, from us that are free, 
they cannot take away. We realize that Israel's 
Sabbath (not only their weekly Sabbath, 
but also their yearly Sabbath and their Jubilee*) 
was as far inferior to the real as was their Passover 
inferior to our Passover, and their sacrifices to 
our sacrifices, and their altar and candle-stick 
and table of shew-bread to ours. The realities, 
in all these, are a thousand times grander 
than their shadows. 



*See M. DAWN, Vol. II., Chap. 6. 



R1735: page 364 

THE TWELVE CHOSEN. 

IV. QUAR., LESSON VI., NOV. 1 1, MARK 3:6-19. 

Golden Text— "I have chosen you and ordained 
you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit." 
-John 15:16.- 

For full treatment of the main point of 
this lesson— the ordination of the twelve 
apostles— see our issue of May 1, '93; also 
the last page of June 15, '93. 

Other points of interest in the above selection 
are (1) our Lord's fortitude in pursuing 
his work, notwithstanding the opposition 
which conspired even against his life. 
—Verses 1-5. 

(2) We observe his caution in subsequently 
withdrawing from that locality 



when duty no longer necessitated his stay. 
He did not unnecessarily expose himself to 
danger and then look for miraculous interpositions 
of providence for his protection, 
and claim such interposition on the strength 
of the fact that his hour to die had not yet 
come. He used natural means and precautions 
for his preservation and protection until 
"his hour was come," and then, as a sheep 
before her shearers is dumb, so he opened 
not his mouth, nor exerted himself in the 
least to preserve his life.— Verses 6,7. 

(3) The completeness and instantaneousness 
of his cures evidence a miraculous gift 

of healing. At the word of his command 
the man's hand was restored whole as the 
other.— Verse 5. 

R1735: page 365 

(4) His wonderful works were drawing 
the attention of multitudes from various 
quarters— both Jews and Gentiles— and thus 
creating a popularity for the gospel which 
would be favorable to its dissemination 
later.— Verses 7,8. 

(5) Verses 9,10 indicate that many of 
his healings of the sick were accomplished 
by imparting a measure of his own vitality, 
thus impoverishing himself to bless 

others. (See also Luke 6:19; 8:43-46.) Feeling, 
therefore, his own loss of strength after 
continued service of this kind, he withdrew 
for rest and refreshment, both physical and 
spiritual. 

(6) Regarding the testimony of the unclean 
spirits concerning Christ, see our issue 

of July 15. 



R1735 : page 365 

THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VII., NOV. 18, LUKE 6:20-31. 

Golden Text— "As ye would that men should do 
to you, do ye also to them likewise."— Luke 6:31. 

This sermon of our Lord to the disciples, 
and specially to the twelve apostles whom 
he had just ordained, is a very precious one 
to all who are endeavoring to walk in their 



footsteps. The twelve, specially, had left 

all their earthly prospects, ambitions, possessions 

and friends to follow the Lord 

through evil and through good report, with 

no hope of earthly gain, but, on the contrary, 

forewarned of hardship, persecution, 

pain and loss, yet with the eye of faith fixed 

upon heavenly things.— Matt. 19:27-29. 

Considering the fulness of their consecration, 
the Lord looked tenderly and approvingly 
on them (verse 20), and out of 
the fulness of his heart sought to impress 
upon their minds a sense of blessedness of 
their privilege of service and even of suffering, 
saying— "Blessed are ye poor,"— who 
have nothing to call your own; and ye that 
"hunger now"— for righteousness and truth; 
and that "weep now"— in sympathy with 
the groaning creation; and that are "hated 
and persecuted" and "reproached" and have 
"your names cast out as evil, for the Son of 
man's sake,"— for the kingdom of heaven 
is yours; your hunger shall be satisfied, and 
your sorrow shall be turned into joy. All 
these things are occasions for great rejoicing, 
in view of the new order of things to be inaugurated 
at the appearing and kingdom 
of our Lord and Savior.— "Rejoice ye in 
that day, and leap for joy; for behold your 
reward is great in heaven." 

But to those who receive their consolation 
now, in riches and fulness of bread; 
who revel in luxury and pleasure now, all 
unmindful of the suffering and death and 
sorrow and mourning that reign abroad; 
who enjoy the favor of the world because 
they partake of its selfish spirit; to these is 
coming a time of reckoning. And the 
evasive answer, "Am I my brother's 
keeper?" will not avail to turn aside the 
wrath of God which will burn against all 
sin and selfishness until it is consumed. 
"Woe, woe," is coming upon all such— a 
time of trouble such as never was since 
there was a nation: the iron rod of Christ's 
rule must bring down every high thing and 
subdue all things unto him.— Verses 24-26; 
Rev. 19:15; Psa. 2:9. 

Verses 27,28 urge upon all the Lord's 
people a loving spirit— a love which reaches 
out even to enemies and makes due allowance 
for hereditary taint and weakness and 
temptation; which seeks to heal the wounds 
and bruises which have resulted to them 
from the fall, rather than to have revenge 
upon them; and which prays for their deliverance 



from the snares and delusions of 
Satan and the blindness which hinders 
them from discerning the beauty of holiness. 

Verses 29,30 inculcate the principle of 
non-resistance, in contradistinction to the 
world's usual method of exacting their 
rights to the fullest extent possible, and 
often more than their rights. The Lord's 
people are to manifest an opposite spirit — 
a spirit of generosity, which prefers to let 
men take some advantage in temporal 
things, rather than, by contention, to indicate 
that their treasure is on earth instead 
of in heaven. 

Comparison with Matt. 5:39-42 makes 
the matter quite clear, indicating that if no 
LAWFUL redress can be obtained, the smiting, 
the parting with the cloak, etc., are to 
be endured gracefully and with due reverence 
for law and order and respectful submission 
to the powers that be. We may 
only strive lawfully for our rights, unless 
they are too small to be worthy of such consideration. 
—"If any man will sue thee at 

R1735: page 366 

the law, and [so lawfully, even though it 
may be unjustly] take away thy coat, let 
him have thy cloak also"— let the law take 
its course, and give something over to show 
your generosity, rather than be found kicking 
against the pricks. 

The Lord would have his people a noble, 
generous, order loving and law-abiding 
people, far above the petty bickerings 
of a small and mean disposition. Lend to 
the borrower; don't be exacting with the 
debtor; be generous, unselfish, frank and 
courteous— giving place unto wrath and 
meanness, and overcoming them by showing 
a more excellent way. Thus may we 
honor the worthy name we bear. 

The Golden Text— the Golden Rule— is 
a very safe measure to apply to all our actions, 
and should be in constant use every 
day of our lives. 



R1735 : page 366 
OPPOSITION TO CHRIST. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VOL, NOV. 25, MARK 3:22-35. 

Golden Text— "He came unto his own, and 
his own received him not."— John 1:11. 

As the fame of Jesus increased, because 
of his miracles and teaching (Luke 4:14,15,33-37; 
5:12-15,19,25,26; 7:16,17; 
8:1-4; Matt. 4:23,24; 9:18,26,35; Mark 1:27,28; 
3:20), the opposition to him became 
more and more pronounced, especially 
from the Chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, 
as they were brought into competition 
and unfavorable comparison with him as 
public teachers; and the indications were 
that all the people would be drawn after 
him, and that they would soon be left out 
of their official positions and the accompanying 
honors and emoluments. For such a 
change they were not in heart-readiness, although 
the prophet had foretold that "unto 
him [the Messiah] shall the gathering of 
the people be." (Gen. 49:10.) They did 
not have the humble, unselfish spirit of John 
the Baptist, who meekly said, "There 
standeth one among you, whom ye know 
not: he it is who, coming after me, is preferred 
before me, whose shoe's latchet I am 
not worthy to unloose:. ..he must increase, 
but I must decrease."— John 1:26,27; 
3:30. 

Instead of manifesting such a spirit, they 
allowed pride, envy and malice to fill their 
hearts and actuate their conduct, and sought 
by every means in their power to obstruct 
and counteract the Lord's teaching. In 
this way they shut the door of the Kingdom 

R1736: page 366 

of Heaven against themselves and against 
all those into whom they infused the same 
evil spirit. (Matt. 23:13.) They wickedly 
blinded their own eyes, and then, with their 
deluded followers— the masses of the whole 
Jewish nation— they stumbled into the ditch 
of divine disfavor, where as a nation they 
must remain until the fulness of the Gentiles 
—the elect number to constitute the bride 
of Christ— has come into possession of the 
Kingdom and eternal glory, which they 
proved themselves unworthy of and therefore 
failed to receive, although it was 
offered to them first. 

In the instance of this lesson, it seems 
probable that these caviling scribes were 



commissioned by the Jewish ecclesiastics at 
Jerusalem (verse 22) to come as spies to 
watch his words, withstand his teachings and 
if possible, find some occasion against him. 

While the multitudes marvelled at the 
miracle which cast a devil out of a dumb 
man, enabling him to speak and to be 
clothed in his right mind, saying, "It was 
never so seen in Israel" (Matt. 9:32-34), 
these Scribes and Pharisees circulated the 
idea among the people that Jesus was 
possessed of a devil, and that he cast out devils 
through the power of the prince of devils. 

When this report came to the Lord's 
notice, he called the objectors to him and 
made manifest the absurdity of such teaching, 
saying in substance, with reference not 
only to the miracle just performed, but to his 
entire work as known and opposed by the 
Scribes and Pharisees, "How can Satan 
cast out Satan?" etc. That would be 
suicidal. It would be equivalent to a king 
stirring up strife in his own kingdom and 
working against his own cause; or the head 
of a house alienating and disrupting his 
own family and opposing the operation of 
his own plans. It is not presumable that 
Satan would thus seek to thwart his own 
purposes and oppose his own plans, unless 
he had reached great straits and found his 
kingdom already falling from his grasp. -- 
Verses 23-26. 

Again our Lord reasoned with them 
(verse 27), that "No man can enter into a 

R1736: page 367 

strong man's house and spoil his goods, except 
he first bind the strong man; and then 
he will spoil his house." The "strong man" 
here referred to is Satan, who is the powerful 
"prince of this world"— his dominion 
or house. He will surely hold his dominion 
and pursue his own policy as long as possible, 
and will diligently resist every binding 
influence which threatens the loss of 
his power. The work and teachings of 
Jesus were just such binding influences; 
and the opposition which his word met was 
what might be expected as a manifestation 
of Satan's wrath. During the Gospel age 
generally the Prince of Darkness has 
flourished, and consequently a large portion 
of it is known as the "dark ages." But 
since the beginning of the time of the end, 
in 1799, God has specially let in the light, 



—and particularly since 1878. The more 
the "light" shines, the more active is this 
adversary to preserve his power; but God's 
assurance is that Christ, as the Strong 
Messenger, will now quickly bind Satan's 
power and release humanity from his dominion. 
(Rev. 20:1,2.) Then Christ, already 
the Redeemer, will be the Savior or 
Deliverer of all who come unto God by 
him. That will be salvation to the uttermost. 
What we now enjoy is salvation by 
faith and hope. (Rom. 8:24,25.) 

That Satan's house is now dividing 
against itself is manifest in that we see those 
who with deep and cunning sophistries 
oppose the truth, teaching the doctrines of 
Satan, at the same time doing the good 
works of healing, etc. Thus, for instance, 
Christian Science (falsely so-called, for 
there is nothing either Christian or scientific 
in it) denies both the redemption by 
Christ Jesus and also the very existence of 
God, and yet its advocates undoubtedly perform 
marvels of healing. Can any one 
claim such healings to be of God? Not 
unless God's kingdom is divided against itself. 
Which horn of the dilemma shall we 
accept? Is it likely that God would thus 
endorse the doctrines of Satan? Is it not 
more probable that Satan would exert his 
power to imitate the works of God, thereby 
to support his doctrines and to deceive? 
Such must be our conclusions in view of the 
warnings given us to the effect that thus it 
should be in the last times. 

Before Satan will submit to the binding 
influences of the rightful Prince of this 
world, who now comes to take the dominion 
to himself, we should, as we are forewarned, 
expect Satan to transform himself into a 
minister of "light" (2 Cor. 1 1:14,15), that 
he may preach false gospels and perform 
"many wonderful works," healing, etc., 
insomuch as to "deceive, if it were possible, 
the very elect." Such manifestations (and 
we now see them multiplying all around us 
—in Christian Science, Spiritism, Theosophy 
and other delusions of which we 
were forewarned (Matt. 24:24; 2 Thes. 2:11), 
are evidences that Satan's kingdom 
is being hard pressed by the truth and is 
nearing its end. 

Our Lord's reasoning, although clear and 
logical, did not change the attitude of those 
malicious, wilful opposers, who manifested 
a large measure of Satan's spirit. The 



Lord saw this, and hence the rebuke and 
solemn warning which followed.— See 
verses 28-30. 

The sin which cannot be forgiven, and 
which, therefore, must be expiated or 
punished before the sinner's repentance can 
be accepted, is that of blasphemy against 
the holy spirit, or wilful opposition against 
that which is known to be holy and of 
divine appointment. The spirit which instigates 
such conduct is that of treason 
against God, and those who manifest it in 
any degree are in danger of eternal condemnation 
—eternal death; for, according 
to Heb. 10:26-31; 6:4-8, wilful opposition, 
in the face of clear, full knowledge of the 
divine will, incurs that penalty. Consequently, 
every approach to such a treasonable 
spirit is dangerous. And a manifestation 
of any measure of that spirit is a sin 
which must be punished with stripes. 
(Luke 12:47,48.) Every sin against light 
increases the danger of going into the second 
or eternal death. 

The punishment meted out to such is, 
however, no part of the satisfaction to 
divine justice whereby deliverance from 
Adamic death is secured: that was done by 
Christ, whose sacrifice was the all-sufficient 
ransom which reconciles the repentant 
sinner to God. The "stripes" for every 
measure of wilful sin against the light which 
emanates from the spirit of God are a necessary 
part of the corrective discipline of 
Christ in bringing the reckoned ly justified 
but erring ones back to full harmony 
with God. But if the corrective discipline 
does not produce reform, the increase of 
knowledge and experience will shortly 

R1736: page 368 

make it a wilful sin against full knowledge, 
for which the full penalty would be inflicted 
—second death. Verses 20,21,31 
(See Emphatic Diaglott), seem to indicate 
more of a spirit of fear and anxiety on 
the part of the Lord's mother and brethren, 
than of opposition. His brethren did not 
believe in his claims and doctrines at that 
time, and seemingly could not understand 
why he was so revolutionary in his teachings 
and so antagonistic to all the recognized 
religious teachers of his day, etc., 
etc. (John 7:5), while his mother doubtless 
still pondered the mystery in her mind. 



Yet hearing of the attention he was attracting, 
and the increased murmurings 
of opposition and violence against him, they 
came from Nazareth to see and talk with 
him, and doubtless to urge him to greater 
caution for his safety and to more care for his 
physical necessities of rest and refreshment. 

The occasion of their call upon him was 
an opportunity for the expression of his 
strong and tender affection for all that do 
the will of God. The heavenly relationship 
was the one dearest to him. 

In the opposition which our Lord incurred 
and the manner in which he met it, 
there are valuable lessons for all who are 
similarly tried. Opposition and persecution 
are the inevitable concomitants of 
activity in the service of God, and they 
should be met with reason and candor; and 
when these fail of their purpose, then, with 
solemn warnings of the dangers of such a 
course, the wilful opposer should be left to 
pursue his own course while we turn to 
others with the message of salvation. 



R 1736 : page 368 

CHRIST'S TESTIMONY OF JOHN. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON IX., DEC. 2, LUKE 7:24-35. 

Golden Text— "Behold, I send my 
messenger before thy face."— Luke 7:27. 

This testimony of our Lord concerning 
John was another pointed proof of his own 
identity with the predicted Messiah. John 
himself had claimed to be the fulfilment of 
Mai. 3:1 and Isa. 40:3 (John 1:19-27)- 
not the Messiah, but the forerunner of the 
Messiah, then present, but not yet made 
known to them. Now the Messiah had 
been introduced to them by John, and he 
had been proving his claims by many 
wonderful works of which they were witnesses; 
and yet they believed not. They 
had accepted John and his claim to be the 
forerunner of Messiah, and multitudes of 
them had been baptized of him for the remission 
of sins, believing the preaching of 
John that the Kingdom of God was at hand 
and the Messiah already in their midst. 



Why was it then that they could not believe 
in the Messiah attested by so many 
wonderful works and all the evidences of 
prophecy, even after they had recognized 
and received his forerunner? It was because 
their hearts were not right. It mattered 
not what sort of evidences were 
brought forward, they were not prepared 

R1737: page 368 

to receive any evidences: they were like 

children in the market places who, having 

no interest in what was going on for entertainment, 

showed no response to either the 

gay or melancholy music. No matter what 

kind of evidence was produced, they were 

so out of harmony with the truth that they 

objected to everything. 

"But," our Lord added, "wisdom [the 
divine wisdom, divine truth] is justified 
[proved right— accepted] of all her children:" 
those who have the spirit or disposition 
of the truth are not slow to understand 
the evidences nor to accept the facts. 

Our Lord's testimony of John was that he 
was not only a prophet, and the greatest of all 
the prophets, but much more than a prophet, 
and the greatest man that had lived up to 
his time. That is, he was the most highly 
honored of all men in being privileged, not 
merely to foretell the coming of Messiah, 
but to stand in his very presence and introduce 
him to Israel and the world. That 
honor John evidently appreciated (John 3:28,29), 
but the world did not then; but 
we can see in what esteem such honored 
and faithful ones of the past will be held 
when the light of the new dispensation is 
thrown upon them, as they take their places 
in the earthly phase of the kingdom. 

It was in comparative reference to the 
relative glory of the two phases of the 
Kingdom— the spiritual and the human 
(See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chap, xiv.) 
—that the Lord added to his eulogy of John 
the statement of verse 28— "But he that is 
least in the Kingdom of God [in its spiritual 
phase] is greater than he. 



page 370 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



CHANGE OF ADDRESS. 



Some of the friends have been in the habit of 
addressing letters to the Editor and his wife at 
their home. Such are notified that hereafter all 
mail should be addressed to the care of the 
WATCH TOWER office, Bible House, 58 Arch st., 
Allegheny, Pa. We have given up housekeeping 
and are now boarding, believing that 
this will the better enable us to economize time, 
and work to the general interest of the Truth 
and the Lord's "sheep," whom we seek to serve 
more and more. 



R1737: page 370 

Some of our readers, seeing the letter in Oct. 
15 TOWER from C. S. L., who, as a Hebrew, 



found the generally accepted doctrine of the 
trinity an obstacle to the acceptance of Christianity, 
have inquired our view of the subject. 
We refer all inquirers to our issue of June 1 & 
15, 1892 (double number), which contains a 
full treatise of this subject, the Holy Spirit, etc. 
These we supply at eight cents per copy. 



Mr. Gregory Ware publishes the following 
table to indicate the spread of Ritualism in the 
Church of England during ten years: 

Number of churches in 

which used. 
1882. 1892. 



Eastward position, 1,662 3,918 

Eucharistic vestments, 336 1,029 

Altar lights, 581 2,048 

Incense, 9 177 



page 370 



Our next issue will contain the Zion's Watch 
Tower Tract Society's report for the fiscal year 
ending Nov. 30, 1894. 



We continue the offer to send the November 
and December issues of the TOWER free to all 
new subscribers for 1895. 



R1737: page 370 

While the reading of the three volumes of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN is first in importance to 
Bible students, our experience is that the good 
seed seldom brings forth much fruit unless the 
WATCH TOWER'S regular visits serve to water it. 

He, therefore, that circulates the DAWNS does 
well; but he that continues the work by securing 
an interest in the TOWER does betters- 
brings more fruit to perfection. 



R1737: page 371 
