R311 :pagel 

VOL. III. 

PITTSBURGH, PA. , JANUARY, AND FEBRUARY, 1882. 

NOS. 7 AND 8. 

WITH TABERNACLE SUPPLEMENT. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave. , PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P. O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 



N. B. -This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Service held in "Curry Institute Hall, " corner Penn avenue and 
Sixth street, Pittsburgh, at 3:00 o'clock P. M. , every Sunday. Every 
Wednesday evening, at No. 80 Cedar avenue, Allegheny, at 7:30 
o'clock P. M. All are cordially invited. 



R311 :pagel 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

THE thousands of letters which still continue to come in from all 
parts, have been greatly increased within the last three weeks, by 
letters and cards, inquiring about the January number. 

We regret the delay of this number, but it was unavoidable. Part of 
the paper on which the supplement is printed was detained by the 
railroad blockade: We had a part of it and a part of THE WATCH 
TOWER printed and could not finish either; nor could we find a 
paper to match closely enough to substitute. Now that it has come, 
we hope it will be satisfactory to you all. The supplement is larger 
than we had at first expected to make it. 

The work in general progresses; the interest of old and new readers 
seems to increase daily. Two new preachers are preparing 
themselves for the field, Bros. Boyer and Leigh, both are here at 
present, and with two others are endeavoring to obtain and 
systematize the Bible teachings, so they can the better present them 
to others. 

Oh that more could realize what a privilege it is, to preach the "glad 
tidings. "The pay is extraordinarily large, but will scarcely allure 
any but the wholly consecrated. It is as follows, paid regularly— viz. 
: Trials of faith, of patience, of perseverance, of privations, of 
forbearance, of forgiveness, of self-sacrifice; these are also sure- 
plain bread and water, sometimes more. You shall, in all, have a 
hundred fold more of houses, lands, brothers, sisters, etc. , than you 
gave up to enter the service; and (here comes the grand and glorious 
part of our wages) in the world (age) to come, eternal life and glory. 

Many who receive "calls" for their services at from $2,000 to 
$10,000 would consider the above a very poor call indeed. But it is 
a poor call, only to those who look at the dollars which are seen, 
and not at the glory which is unseen. Ours, is the same "call" that 
Jesus had to the ministry however— He, (not for ease, comfort, 
wealth, respectability or honor,) but for the joy that was set before 
him, endured the cross and despised the shame. It was our call that 
Peter, Paul, and others received, and they said it was a "High 
calling," a "Heavenly calling. "Let us, like all of these, esteem our 



calling to suffer for a while, and to be glorified after (1 Peter 5:10) 
a great privilege; and as we draw our wages of shame and reproach 
daily, let us rejoice that we are accounted worthy to suffer the 
reproaches for Christ and the words of his testimony, and esteem 
these greater riches than all earthly things; for while so doing "the 
spirit of glory and of God resteth on you. " (1 Peter 4:14.) 

Now some are so situated with families dependent on them, that 
they cannot see their way clear to go forth in the mission work of 
teaching these glad tidings; and quite a number have expressed 
regrets, thereat. To such we would say, one talent or one 
opportunity used to the best of your ability, will as thoroughly 
demonstrate the degree of your sacrifice as ten could; and we know 
it to be one of the Lord's ways, to increase the talent and 
opportunity as we make use of it. Let us see how one talent of 
ability could be used. You could study and plan the more 
thoroughly, how these subjects could best be presented privately to 
your Christian neighbors and friends. If you have many talents of 
ability and only one of opportunity, then try to use it, study how 
you may say much in few words, pointedly. Deprive yourself of 
some of the time you spend otherwise, and have a meeting in your 
room for Bible study on Sunday, and on a week evening. Or call on 
any fruit bearing consecrated Christians you may know of; hand 
such a tract with a few brief expressions relative to your own view 
concerning it. Always have three or four charges of such 
ammunition in your pocket. If you attend any meeting, be sure you 
make it count for TRUTH if there are any who seem to have "an ear 
to hear. " 

But let us remember always, that it is their fear of God which is 
injuring them, (Isa. 29:13) and hinders their coming into the 
sunshine of his love. We remember that we, (as all, "of this way") 
first got to see a little of the Love of God, and then we found the 
entire plan to be "just like him"-Love. "The love of Christ 
constraineth us. " (2 Cor. 5:14.) 

Love is the lever which will move men's hearts in the Millennial 
Age, when they will learn of God's love as exhibited in the 
selection of the "little flock" to bless them; and the love of the 
"head and body of Christ," whom they persecuted and who suffered 
patiently, etc. ,— yes, that will move where fear will not. 

And it is this same mighty lever that must now be used by us, to 
move all who are running the heavenly race to press with vigor on, 
and so run as to obtain the prize of our high calling. Then let all be 
actively engaged in the service- preaching the TRUTH by act and 
word— "doing with our might what our hands find to do"-that "so 
an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord. " (2 Pet. 1:11.) -Thus we may 
have it true of us- He or "she hath done WHAT she could," the 
Lord expects no more: but how few, are doing all they could. 



Let us not forget that while we may be deeply interested in doing 
good to the world, in such ways as preaching temperance, etc. , yet 
that is not our mission now. The injunction is always "Preach the 
Word;" "Feed the flock;" "Feed my sheep;" "Feed my lambs. " Are 
you a partaker of the Spirit of the Anointed one? If so, remember it 
was not designed to qualify you for any work except preaching— in 
some sense, in action or word; as we read: The Spirit of the Lord 
God is upon me (head and body) because he hath anointed me to 
preach the glad tidings to the meek, etc. (Isa. 61:1.) 

The fact that what is preached generally is very bad tidings of great 
misery to more than nine-tenths of the race, makes it the more 
necessary for those of us who have some knowledge of the "good 
news" to let it be known; that all hearts may bow before our God 
and worship, and in truth adore. 

Among the many refreshing letters received, we wish you to enjoy 
with us, the spirit of the following: 



AUSTINTOWN, O. , Jan. 16, 1882. 

DEAR BRO:— The publication entitled, "Food for Thinking 
Christians," was duly received a few weeks ago, and I have 
carefully distributed the greater portion of them among such as 
would appreciate such teachings; and they all speak volumes of 
praise. It is indeed food for Christians -rich food. Would to God 
we could only have the whole world read and fully understand. 
May God bless the work, and may the blessed seed sown sink deep 
in each and every heart, and bear much fruit to the honor and glory 
of God. 

Please send me a few copies of the Tabernacle and its Teachings, 
and much oblige. 

Yours, etc. , 


