From Our Readers
Death for Sale  Thank you for this series of informative articles. (July 8, 1989) I appreciated the way they gave you the facts on the damage smoking does to the body and also the information regarding its side effects. I believe that all smokers who would like to stop the bad habit should obtain a copy of this magazine.
C. T. M., United States
Wall Street  Thank you so much for the honest and insightful articles on Wall Street and the stock market crash. (August 8, 1989) The financial world is now waging an all-out campaign to assure the general public that the crash was a ‘non-event,’ and that it is safe to jump in the water again. The intelligent person who has his feet on the ground knows that the world is in deep financial trouble. I urge readers to steer clear of the stock market, pay off debt, and save money instead of spending it.
B. W., United States
In view of the world’s shaky economy, it certainly makes sense to be prudent financially, and the risks involved in making stock market investments cannot be ignored. However, all investments​—including bank deposits—​can be said to involve some element of risk. Individuals must therefore make a personal decision as to how much risk they are willing to take. The articles in question were not intended to serve as an investment guide or particularly to discourage stock market investments. They served to highlight that greed is at the root of many of the world’s financial woes and that government by God is the only solution.​—ED.
School Bullies  As a single parent with a teenage son to take care of, I find much guidance, and answers to the many questions and problems I face, in the “Young People Ask . . ” articles. The recent one on bullies (August 8, 1989) was just what my son needed. He read it three times the day he received it.
V. B., United States
Homosexuality  “The Bible’s Viewpoint” article about homosexuality (July 8, 1989) gave me second thoughts about being a homosexual. You see, I have been having sex with men since I was 12 years old. Now I’m 47. I have also appeared in many pornographic movies. But I think it is about time I lived a normal life, and I have started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Thank you very much for the wonderful article.
T. M., United States
Making Conversation  The article “How Can I Improve at Making Conversation?” (May 22, 1989) caught my attention. I have had difficulty sharing in conversations and was very much like some of the youths mentioned in the article. With the help of Jehovah God and of the good suggestions you gave, I now note much improvement in this regard. I believe that thousands of youths feel grateful for the provision of the “Young People Ask . . ” articles.
M. C. M., Brazil
Depression  Thank you for the article on depression in your October 22, 1987, issue. I’ve read it so many times I almost know it by heart. You packed so much information into 15 pages! Even the pictures were encouraging. Sometimes I just think of the cover photo of that woman looking sad and then smiling, and I feel so much better. Depression is agony. But reading about all those others who have experienced it helps. You seem to have so much insight into how a depressed one feels. It is as if the article was talking just to me.
J. A., United States

