From Our Readers
Hair Loss  I waited a long time for the article “Alopecia​—Living in Silence With Hair Loss.” (April 22, 1991) I have been suffering from alopecia universalis for several years, and I have contacted many doctors with no apparent result. I tried to learn more about alopecia but with little success. The article has helped me to accept my situation with serenity, waiting for the time when no one will say: “I am sick.”​—Isaiah 33:24.
R. C., Italy
Nightclubs  The article “Young People Ask . . . What About Nightclubs?” (February 8, 1991) really hit home with me. My life started to go downhill after I began to go to a nightclub at the age of 15. It was harmless fun at first. I danced with friends from school. Nonalcoholic drinks were served at a soda bar. My Christian parents didn’t know I went​—I would secretly climb out of my window to go “clubbing.” Well, “harmless” dancing led to drinking, then to drugs, and then to homosexuality. I finally pulled myself out of the nightclub world, but now I am paying the price for having lived a double life. I just wanted to share my experience in hopes that perhaps someone out there will now think twice about nightclubs.
L. E., United States
Rap or Rock?  I’m glad you took notice of the obscenity problem in popular music in your article “Obscenity Set to Music.” (March 8, 1991) However, you were in error when you classified the group “2 Live Crew” as a rock group. Actually, they are a rap group, which recites, rather than sings, the lyrics.
D. L., United States
Thanks for the clarification. Of course, some would consider rap to be merely another form of rock music. Be that as it may, Christians must be selective about their choice of music, regardless of what name is attached to it.​—ED.
Hospital Stays  Thank you for the concise, sound information in the series “Hospitals​—How Can You Cope?” (March 8, 1991) I would like to add that in a nonemergency situation, after an accurate diagnosis has been made, you should learn as much as you can about your illness and treatments thereof. Only by being well-informed can you make sound decisions. The local library or the hospital library often contains much helpful information.
E. D., United States
Narcolepsy  I am writing to express my appreciation for the article “Narcolepsy​—The Sleeping Illness.” (April 8, 1991) You have no idea what it meant to me to see this illness acknowledged in an international magazine! Narcolepsy struck me at age 15, and I still have it at age 77!
M. S., England
I was favourably impressed by the accuracy of the writer’s exposition and the sympathy with which he treated the subject. I wish that we could rely upon all journals to adopt such an approach. You have done a kindness to sufferers, particularly those who meet a lack of understanding of their disorder.
P. J. H. S., Honorary Secretary,Narcolepsy Association [U.K.]
Color Blindness  For a long time, I have waited for an article such as the one entitled “Color Blindness​—A Curious Defect.” (February 22, 1991) As one suffering from color blindness, I have always caused laughter and curiosity when I said that my blood is green or that a rainbow has but two colors. But thanks to your article, I will be better understood. I trust in Jehovah that one day I will be able to see the rainbow in full color.
I. F. O., Brazil

