“Eating Disorders”​—Our Readers Respond
THE Awake! articles on the theme “Eating Disorders​—What Can Be Done?” (December 22, 1990) generated an unusual volume of mail. Readers from around the world wrote in to thank us for covering this sensitive and often painful subject. The articles touched many who have long struggled with eating disorders.
For instance, one woman wrote: “Dear Sir or Madam: The Watchtower Bible and Tract Society deserves the highest commendation for its article on eating disorders. Diagnosed with anorexia at 9 years of age, I have struggled with it for 34 years. Having read nearly all the available literature on eating disorders and having been exposed to a variety of therapies, I can truthfully say that the presentation in Awake! is the best I have ever encountered. No literature or any counselor has presented a spiritual perspective as comprehensive as the Awake! article. For the first time, I see anorexia as God sees it.”
Many are already putting the articles’ counsel to work. A woman writes: “When I read the article, ‘Who Develop Eating Disorders?’ I was amazed to read a description of my character. Every single point mentioned in the article ‘Winning the Battle!’ has helped me very much. I have corrected my views. It was a relief to know that others, even Christians, have this same problem. I thought perhaps I was the only one.”
A 25-year-old woman wrote: “I have been suffering with bulimia since I was 13. I spent the entire year of 1989 and some parts of ’88 in a deep, debilitating depression. I even tried to commit suicide twice. I can readily identify with these most touching articles and have already been practicing some of the suggestions and sound counsel. The articles have given me more focus and direction. This is definitely one issue that I will truly TREASURE and refer to often!”
“I keep reading and rereading the magazine,” writes a young woman who has struggled with eating disorders for ten years. “I’ve just started to admit I have a problem. To know that Jehovah wants to help and doesn’t give up on us if we have a setback is a tremendous comfort.”
“I felt I was reading about my own feelings!” wrote a young girl. “This article helped me to open up and talk with my mom, and now I’m better able to handle my feelings about myself.” A 16-year-old girl writes: “I’m recovering from anorexia nervosa. I had been praying to Jehovah for someone who would understand my illness. The Awake! showed me that I already have those people around me. I have my family, the many Witnesses of Jehovah who are my friends, and especially I have Jehovah. I hope the December 22 issue of Awake! helps others as much as it has helped me and my family.”
A 20-year-old woman in the full-time ministry writes: “For the longest time, I tried to handle my eating disorder on my own. I even felt at one time that it was stupid to pray about it. It brought tears of joy to my eyes to know that Jehovah must really consider such a thing so important.”
“It was excellent! I mean it!” wrote another woman. She continues: “I am a survivor of multiple childhood traumas, the two worst being sexual abuse and ritual abuse. The first two paragraphs under the subheading ‘Feelings of Inadequacy’ hit the core. It truly is a matter of retraining the mind to learn to like oneself, and one cannot do it alone, as was so well stated.”
Many seemed to feel that the articles came as an answer to their prayers. “These articles were not written by chance because Jehovah does answer prayers!” exclaimed one reader. She adds: “Even though I have been fighting the ‘Battle of the Bulge’ for most of my life, it was only after I read the article that I realized that I have a serious eating disorder (bulimia).” Said a 19-year-old who has struggled with bulimia for six years: “I was just getting ready to write to you early this month to see if you could come up with a well-written article on this subject. I am so happy that you went into detail with it and didn’t just sweep the issue under the rug as most people do.”
One letter simply read: “I’ve prayed and waited patiently for the articles on eating disorders. I would have requested information if I had not been so embarrassed about it. The compassion you showed me as an individual in the articles strengthened my faith to overcome this problem once and for all.” A high-school girl writes: “I developed anorexia nervosa and bulimia and consequently suffered both mentally and physically. I prayed to Jehovah for help, and these articles came out. I couldn’t help crying for joy.”
For many, reading the articles was an emotional experience. “As soon as I opened it up,” writes a young woman, “the cover almost jumped out at me. I was almost scared to touch it. I put it on the bed beside me and just looked at it for a few minutes. All I could do was thank Jehovah for the articles. I can really see that Jehovah does love me. The articles helped me to reappreciate that my body is a precious gift and I should treat it that way.”
“When I read the articles,” writes one woman, “and even as I type this letter, I cannot keep the tears from rolling down my cheeks. I am a recovered bulimic and have been longing for an article from the Society on this subject. Learning to accept myself​—believing that I have worth and value in Jehovah’s eyes and not allowing other people’s way of thinking to affect how I view myself—​has been one of the hardest things I’ve ever had to do. Some days it’s easier than others, but I am still working on it.”
“It was with tear-filled eyes that I grabbed this magazine to my heart,” writes a 21-year-old woman. “For nearly nine years, I have been fighting with all three disorders mentioned. I was always too afraid to tell anyone. Now, as a result of the practical advice given, I feel I can tackle this problem with God’s help. This is just what I’ve been praying for.”
Finally, a Christian elder writes: “I have found these articles to be of tremendous help. How vital it is that we elders carefully study and absorb this information so as to assist others, both inside and outside the congregation!”
These excerpts come from just some of the letters of appreciation we have received. It is our earnest hope and prayer that the articles continue to help people around the world to cope with these distressing disorders.

