“The Greatest Gift”
PARENTS who do their best to raise their children to be decent, law-abiding, and God-fearing are very pleased when their young ones express appreciation for their efforts. This is especially the case in these “last days” when one sign of the times is widespread ‘disobedience to parents.’​—2 Timothy 3:1, 2.
Nancy, a 15-year-old high school student, was raised by parents who are Jehovah’s Witnesses. One day her English teacher gave the class an assignment to write about the greatest gift they had ever received. The following is what Nancy turned in, under the title “The Greatest Gift”:
“There are many kinds of gifts and givers. There are gifts of love, friends, and talents. Also, there are gifts that you don’t want, like hatred and poverty. There are many kinds of givers. Those who give selfishly and those who give because they want to. The best gift I ever received is the gift my father gave me, the gift of knowledge about God.
“This gift is one that will last a lifetime, not like other gifts that will be thrown out after they’ve been worn out. The things I have learned will inspire me throughout my life and influence everything I do. By studying about the God of the Bible, I have come to know him on a personal basis, as a friend I look up to and respect.
“Until my father’s death this year, I looked to him when I needed guidance. Others did too. Often I did not see my father after he came home from work because he was busy visiting and giving support to those in the hospital. Now I realize how giving of his time he was. Although he is not with me now to give me the support and guidance I need, I can rely on my heavenly Father for the things I need throughout my life.
“I appreciate this gift very much, and I thank God for giving me such a strong and faithful father. His example will have an everlasting effect on me. Hopefully, I will be able to show my appreciation as I grow older and follow the example that my father set for me.
“Knowledge of God is and always will be my most valuable gift, and I thank both of my parents for giving me this gift. Their great example of faithfulness will always remain with me.”
This essay was appreciated by the teacher, who said that it touched her very much, and she read it to the class. She marked the paper with two A-pluses, one for contents, and the other for grammar and punctuation.
Nancy’s mother also appreciated the essay. She said: “It pleased me very much. Not knowing exactly how your children feel all the time, it helped me to understand that Nancy is progressing and is accepting things as well as she can.”

