Announcements
FEARLESS IN ACTION, TRUSTING IN JEHOVAH
Although opposers are many, Jehovah’s witnesses continue to serve Him actively, free from fear. They fear not man, but put their entire trust in Jehovah God. (Isa. 12:2, AS) They delight to do his good pleasure and strive always to carry out his will. This includes witnessing to his supremacy in this time of world crisis, carrying on the work of proclaiming the good news of his kingdom and the approaching of the battle of Armageddon, that great day of God Almighty that will mean the destruction of the wicked. Fearlessly they proceed with confidence and assurance, keeping in mind the inspired words of the psalmist: “They that trust in Jehovah are as mount Zion, which cannot be moved, but abideth for ever.” (Ps. 125:1, AS) During December Jehovah’s witnesses will present at the doors a volume of the New World Translation of the Scriptures together with a book on a contribution of $2. All are invited to share in this grand work directed by Jehovah.
WHAT DO THE SCRIPTURES SAY ABOUT “SURVIVAL AFTER DEATH”?
“Test the inspired expressions to see whether they originate with God,” wrote John, the apostle. (1 John 4:1, NW) From this admonition it is evident wicked spirit sources do exist. Do you know how to heed John’s counsel? It is vitally important, because the growing tide of spiritualism already has a greater hold on human society than most people may realize. And even prominent spiritists themselves disagree as to the real identity of the spirits they consult. What does a testing of the inspired expressions of spiritualism reveal? that they originate with God or with his enemies, the demons and their leader, Satan the Devil? How can you be sure? The written Word of God is the expression inspired by his holy spirit. Jesus said of it, “Your word is truth.” (John 17:17, NW) If you are not to weaken in the fight against all the untruthful propaganda of the wicked spirit forces in the unseen places of attack, you must hold to the unerring Word. Deliverance or destruction awaits all mankind. Your choice lies with you. Do not gamble your hope of eternal life on vague and misleading “evidences” of a “hereafter” produced by lying spirits. Read What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? with your Bible and then follow the Word of God for life. Send 10c today for your copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
December 18: “Jehovah Is in His Holy Temple,” ¶1-23. Page 688.
December 25: “Jehovah Is in His Holy Temple,” ¶24-45. Page 695.

