
Teach Your Children
“He Kept Sticking to Jehovah”




HAVE you ever been told to stick to something?—a Parents and teachers may tell young ones to stick to their studies. This means to view them as important. We want to talk about a person who the Bible says “kept sticking to Jehovah,” the true God. The person’s name is Hezekiah. Let’s see what we can learn from his example.
Hezekiah had an unhappy childhood. His father, Ahaz, the king of Judah, turned away from serving Jehovah. Ahaz took the lead in worshipping false gods when Hezekiah was a boy. Ahaz even had at least one of his sons—Hezekiah’s own brother—killed and offered up in sacrifice to a god that Ahaz worshipped!
Even though Ahaz continued to do bad things, Hezekiah kept obeying Jehovah. Do you think that this was hard for him to do?— It must have been. But Hezekiah did not give up! Let’s learn how he was able to stick to Jehovah, and how we can do the same.
Hezekiah learned about others who had stuck to Jehovah. David was such a person. Even though David lived hundreds of years earlier, Hezekiah could learn about him in the Scriptures. “In case my own father and my own mother did leave me,” David wrote, “even Jehovah himself would take me up.”
Do you see what helped David to obey Jehovah?— It was his faith! David was sure that if he was obedient, Jehovah would help him. David had no doubt about it! Thinking about David surely helped Hezekiah stick to Jehovah by obeying Him. You too can be sure that Jehovah will help you if you keep sticking to him by obeying him.
What, though, if your father or your mother does not worship Jehovah?— God says children should obey their parents. So you should obey yours. However, if your parents tell you to do something that God says you should not do, you can explain why you cannot do it. You should not lie, steal, or do any other bad thing that God says is wrong, no matter who tells you to do it. You are right to obey God!
There are good examples we can follow. Hezekiah had not only the example of David but also that of his own grandfather Jotham. Hezekiah could learn from him, even as we can in our Bibles today. Can you think of other good examples we can follow?—
True, in the Bible you can learn about some mistakes that Hezekiah, David, Jotham, and other imperfect people made. But those people loved Jehovah, admitted their mistakes, and tried to do what was right. Remember, only God’s Son, Jesus, was perfect. Let’s especially study about him and try to follow his example.



Read in your Bible
2 Kings 18:6; 2 Chronicles 28:1-3

Psalm 27:10; Ephesians 6:1; Colossians 3:20

2 Chronicles 27:1, 2; 1 Peter 2:21




If you are reading with a child, the dash provides a reminder to pause and encourage the child to express himself.

