
Draw Close to God
“The Former Things Will Not Be Called to Mind”

MEMORIES can be a blessing. Reflecting on pleasant times with loved ones can warm our heart. But in other cases, memories may seem more like a curse. Are you plagued by painful memories of hurtful past experiences? If so, you may wonder, ‘Will these sad memories ever fade from my mind?’ We find a most reassuring answer in words recorded by the prophet Isaiah.—Read Isaiah 65:17.
Jehovah purposes to cut off painful memories at their source. How so? By removing this wicked world with all its suffering and replacing it with something infinitely better. Jehovah through Isaiah promises: “Here I am creating new heavens and a new earth.” Understanding this promise can fill our hearts with hope.
What are the new heavens? The Bible gives two clues that can help us. First, the idea of a new heavens is mentioned by two other Bible writers, and in both cases the words are associated with sweeping changes on this earth. (2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 21:1-4) Second, in the Bible the term “heavens” can represent rulership, or government. (Isaiah 14:4, 12; Daniel 4:25, 26) The new heavens, then, is a new government, one capable of establishing righteous conditions on earth. There is but one rulership able to accomplish all of that—God’s Kingdom, the heavenly government that Jesus taught us to pray for. That Kingdom will cause God’s righteous will to be done earth wide.—Matthew 6:9, 10.
What is the new earth? Consider two Scriptural facts that help us reach the right conclusion. First, in the Bible the term “earth” at times refers to people, not the globe. (Psalm 96:1) Second, the Bible foretold that under God’s rule, faithful humans would learn righteousness, which would spread earth wide. (Isaiah 26:9) The new earth thus refers to a society of people who would submit to God’s rulership and live by his righteous standards.
Can you begin to see how Jehovah will cut off painful memories at their source? Soon Jehovah will completely fulfill his promise of a new heavens and a new earth, establishing a righteous new world.a In that new world, the causes of hurtful memories—physical, mental, and emotional suffering—will be things of the past. Faithful humans will enjoy life to the full, and they will treasure the pleasant memories of each passing day.
What, though, about the pain that may burden our hearts at present? Jehovah’s promise through Isaiah continues: “The former things will not be called to mind, neither will they come up into the heart.” Any pain we have experienced in this old world will gradually fade away. Does that prospect appeal to you? If so, why not find out how you can draw closer to the God who promises such a bright future?
Suggested Bible reading for March:
▪ Isaiah 63-66–Jeremiah 1-16
[Footnote]
For more information about God’s Kingdom and what it will soon accomplish, see chapters 3, 8, and 9 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Blurb on page 19]
Jehovah purposes to cut off painful memories at their source

