Our Readers Ask . . .
Does God Value One Race Above Others?
▪ No, he does not. The Bible clearly states: “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”—Acts 10:34, 35.
God’s viewpoint in this regard is much loftier than that of imperfect humans. Many people believe that one race (usually their own) is superior to others. Such bias reflects the thinking of Charles Darwin, who wrote: “At some future period, . . . the civilised races of man will almost certainly exterminate, and replace, the savage races.” Sadly, many have indeed been victimized by those of other races who saw themselves as superior.
Do feelings of racial superiority have any merit? For example, has science proved that some races are genetically superior, while others are inferior? On the contrary, geneticist and Oxford professor Bryan Sykes states: “There’s no genetic basis for any kind of rigid ethnic or racial classification. . . . I’m always asked is there Greek DNA or an Italian gene, but, of course, there isn’t. . . . We’re very closely related.”
Such findings harmonize with what we read in the Scriptures. The Bible teaches that God created just one man and one woman, from whom all other humans descended. (Genesis 3:20; Acts 17:26) In God’s eyes, then, there is really only one race—the human race.
Jehovah attaches no significance at all to a person’s skin color or facial features. Rather, He values something of far greater importance—our figurative heart, or the person we are inside. He states: “People judge others by what they look like, but I judge people by what is in their hearts.” (1 Samuel 16:7, Contemporary English Version) Remembering that fact can be of great encouragement to us. How so?
Regardless of our racial background, many of us are dissatisfied with aspects of our physical appearance, yet we have little power to change such things. However, we can improve what matters most—the thoughts and feelings of our heart. (Colossians 3:9-11) If we are honest with ourselves, we may realize that we are inclined to feel at least a little superior, or perhaps inferior, to people of another race. Since neither viewpoint is compatible with God’s thinking, we should work hard to remove any such feelings from our heart.—Psalm 139:23, 24.
As we strive to see ourselves and others the way Jehovah does, we can be sure of his help. His Word reminds us: “As regards Jehovah, his eyes are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him.” (2 Chronicles 16:9) That is true no matter what race we happen to belong to.

