Soon Crime “Will Be No More”
“Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more.”—PSALM 37:10.
OUR Creator, Jehovah God, is profoundly interested in his human creation; he is not aloof, as some believe. (Psalm 11:4, 5) What is more, he sees every crime and every injustice, including those that escape human notice. “The eyes of Jehovah are in every place, keeping watch upon the bad ones and the good ones.” (Proverbs 15:3) So rest assured, the wicked are truly “on slippery ground.”—Psalm 73:12, 18.
However, the blameless and morally upright, even though they may be materially poor and even downtrodden, have a wonderful prospect. “Watch the blameless one and keep the upright one in sight,” wrote the psalmist David, “for the future of that man will be peaceful.” (Psalm 37:37) Those words can be of special comfort to us today, for we have the hope of seeing them fulfilled worldwide in the not-too-distant future.
We Are Living in the Last Days
Some 2,000 years ago, disciples of Jesus Christ asked him a far-reaching question. “Tell us,” they said, “what will be the sign of . . . the conclusion of the system of things?” (Matthew 24:3) Jesus’ answer is spelled out in detail in the Bible in chapter 24 of Matthew, chapter 13 of Mark, and chapter 21 of Luke. These complementary Gospel accounts describe the last days of the present world as being characterized by wars, famines, diseases, great earthquakes, and a significant increase in lawlessness.
The critical conditions that Jesus foretold began in 1914. As historian Eric Hobsbawm states in his book Age of Extremes, the 20th century “was without doubt the most murderous century of which we have record.”
Concerning the present proliferation of evil, the Bible states: “When the wicked ones sprout as the vegetation and all the practicers of what is hurtful blossom forth, it is that they may be annihilated forever.” (Psalm 92:7) Yes, the evidence is clear: Today’s bumper crop of lawlessness—like the sprouting of vegetation in season—is, in reality, an indication that the annihilation of the wicked is imminent! Is that not good news?—2 Peter 3:7.
“The Righteous . . . Will Possess the Earth”
“The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it,” says Psalm 37:29. Every form of crime and injustice will then be a thing of the past. Therefore, everything related to crime will be gone: security alarms, locks, courts, lawyers, police, and prisons. “The former things,” the Bible promises, “will not be called to mind, neither will they come up into the heart.”—Isaiah 65:17.
Yes, the earth and human society will experience a transformation the likes of which has never occurred before. (Isaiah 11:9; 2 Peter 3:13) That is the valid hope Jehovah’s Witnesses have, and they invite you to see for yourself that it will soon be a reality. Remember, the One who inspired the Holy Scriptures “cannot lie.”—Titus 1:2.
[Box/Picture on page 9]
SPIRITUAL HELP FOR INMATES
  Over the years, Jehovah’s Witnesses in the United States have received correspondence from inmates in 4,169 correctional institutions, hospitals, and drug-rehabilitation facilities. Some inmates ask for Bible literature; others request a free Bible study. Qualified Witnesses follow up on these requests. Worldwide, in fact, the Witnesses regularly visit prisons to conduct Bible studies with inmates, male and female, who have sought spiritual help. A number of these have made remarkable changes in their personality, have been baptized as Christians, and have gone on to lead law-abiding lives.

