VOL. XXI. AUGUST 1, 1900. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 



"Let Us Draw Near" 227 

Privileges of the Royal Priesthood 227 

Having Our Hearts Sprinkled 228 

Washed With Pure Water 228 

Ye Are Complete in Him 229 

Poem:-Unto Him Belongeth All 229 

The Great Shepherd and His Son, 

the Good Shepherd 229 

Christ the Door of the Sheep-Fold 231 

The Lord Appointed Seventy Others 
Also 232 

Rejoice in Things Unseen 235 

Is the Restitution Call Now Open? 236 

Chicago Convention— New Date 240 

The Pilgrim Harvest Service 226 

page 226 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2672 : page 226 



THE PILGRIM HARVEST SERVICE. 



We will be glad to have at once postal card requests for Pilgrim 
visits from all parts of the United States and Canada. 
(British friends please address cards to our British branch office, 
London.) We are re-arranging our "Pilgrim" routes and want 
the following information in few words on postal cards (not 
letters) for easy reference. Remember that these "Pilgrim" 
visits involve no expense for the Pilgrim or his traveling expenses 
—all of which are borne by the Society. We merely request 
entertainment for the Pilgrim during his two or three 
days' stay. Answer the questions by number as follows:— 

(1) Do you hope for public meetings,— as well as for private 
ones for those already interested? 

(2) Could and would the friends secure the use of a school 

or church building or a public hall if public meetings are desired? 

(3) Would a suitable room in a private house be provided 
for the private meetings? 

(4) How many friends of present truth reside in your 
vicinity? (5) How many of these have been consulted and 
concur in the answers you are sending us? (6) How many of 

these are WATCH TOWER readers? (7) Do you now meet regularly 
for worship and study of the Word, as per Hebrews 10:25? 
Most of these questions can be answered by either Yes or 
No or by figures. Number your answers, and add whatever 
may seem expedient, but do not crowd the card and make it 
difficult to read and understand. 



R2670 : page 227 

"LET US DRAW NEAR. 



"Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, 

having our hearts sprinkled from a consciousness of evil, and our bodies 

sprinkled with pure water."— Heb. 10:22. 

NOT TO SINNERS is this invitation addressed. 

The invitation to them is a very different 

one, vis.,— Repent, and believe on the Lord Jesus 

Christ, and thus obtain the remission of your sins, 

and then you will be in the attitude to receive the invitation, 

Draw near to God. The Apostle is addressing 

those who have already believed unto justification, 

receiving to themselves the benefits of the Lord's 

promise, "Their sins and iniquities will I remember 

no more." (Verse 17.) The Apostle is addressing 

the brethren, and not sinners, and urges them, saying, 

"Having therefore, brethren, boldness [courage, confidence, 

privilege] to enter into the holiest by the 

blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, ...let us 



draw near." 

The Apostle's words carry our attention to Israel's 
Tabernacle in the wilderness, and the spiritual things 
which it illustrated. The Court, entered through the 
gate, signified the state or condition of the justified, 
who must pass the Altar representing Christ's sacrifice 
for sins; secondly, approach the Laver of water for 
cleansing from defilements; and then be ready to pass 
under the first Vail into the apartment of the Tabernacle 
called "The Holy." This "Holy" apartment 
represented the state or condition of God's consecrated 
people (typified by Israel's priests) while yet in the 
flesh, and had its Golden Candlestick for their enlightenment, 
its table of Shewbread, representing their 
privilege of fellowship with God,— drawing near to 
him in prayer, praise and communion. The next step 
beyond the "Holy" was the "Most Holy," representing 
heaven itself; but this could be entered only from 
the "Holy" and by passing under the Second Vail, 
which represented the actual death of the priest, even 
as the First Vail represented the reckoned death or consecration. 
The Apostle has this same thought in mind 
when elsewhere he mentions the consecrated Royal 
Priesthood as "seated together with Christ in heavenly 
places"— in the heavenly condition, the condition represented 
by the first apartment or "Holy" of the 
Tabernacle and of the Temple. 

PRIVILEGES OF THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD. 



It is in reference to this proposition to advance 
from the "Court" condition of justification into the 
"Holy" or heavenly or spirit-begotten condition, 
reached through consecration (and the closest possible 
approach to God) that the Apostle urges, "Let us 
draw near." His language implies that there may 
properly be a diffidence on our part in respect to this 
privilege. We might properly hesitate to expect to 
have communion, fellowship, close approach to the 
great Creator, realizing that by nature we are imperfect, 
"children of wrath, even as others," and that in 
whatever degree we differ from others and are accounted 
worthy of such a privilege of drawing near to God, it 
is not on account of personal worth on our part, but 
on account of God's grace bestowed upon us through 
Jesus our Lord. The Apostle therefore speaks to believers 
in an encouraging voice: "Let us draw near;" 
let us have courage to draw near; let us have faith in 
God, who has made us such gracious arrangements 
and promises. 

The Apostle intimates that a close approach to 
God cannot be effected, except we have first a "full 
assurance of faith." Only those who trust the Lord 
implicitly, "as a little child" (Luke 18:17) would trust 



R2671 : page 228 

its earthly parent, can expect to progress and to have 
the courage, the confidence, necessary to approach 
God in this very intimate manner; and the desire to 
draw nearer and nearer to God must be in the justified 
believer's heart, else he will never go on and attain 
to this his privilege. And this desire to draw near to 
God is a manifestation of our hunger and thirst after 
righteousness, which the Lord expects to see before 
he fulfils to such his engagement that they shall be 
filled, satisfied. -Matt. 5:6. 

Satisfaction will not be attained fully in the present 
life, tho the believer who progresses and draws 
nearer and nearer to God will have more and more 
of this satisfaction to the end of his journey in the 
present life, receiving the full measure of satisfaction 
in righteousness and perfection on the other side the 
vail. Similarly, in our drawing near to God, we may 
continue to draw nearer and nearer to him, as we obtain 
deeper experience in his grace, growing also in 
knowledge and love in the present life; but the full 
attainment of our privilege of drawing near to God 
will not be reached until we shall have passed the 
Second Vail— passed through death, and been changed 
from human to spirit beings, and have entered into 
heaven itself, the perfect heavenly condition. There 
and then we shall be fully at one with the heavenly 
Father and with our Lord Jesus, having drawn near 
to the full extent of the invitation and to the full of 
the opportunities granted us in the new and living 
way, the narrow way to life, consecrated for us, through 
the vail, by our Lord's death as our ransom price. 

There are, however, certain conditions specified 
as necessary to progress along these lines. As no one 
can draw near to God except by attaining a "full assurance 
of faith," neither can he have a full assurance 
of faith unless he have his "heart sprinkled from a 
consciousness of evil," for, as the Apostle elsewhere 
declares, "If our heart condemn us, God is greater 
than our heart." (1 John 3:20.) We may be sure that 
if our course as new creatures is condemned by our 
own consciences it would also be condemned by God. 
Whoever, therefore, would make progress in drawing 
near to God must seek continually to have "a conscience 
void of offence toward God and man" (Acts 24: 16); 
—a conscience that is clear, that can say, I am 
striving to do that which would be pleasing to God, 
in harmony with my covenant of self-sacrifice, and I 
am striving to do that which would be approved also 
by righteous men. Nothing short of this is at all permissible 
in those who have consecrated themselves to 
be royal priests, to offer themselves as living sacrifices 
in the Lord's service, and to draw near to him in the 
name and under the merit of the great High Priest of 



our profession, Christ Jesus. 

HAVING OUR HEARTS SPRINKLED. 



How very much is implied in this expression, 
"Having our hearts sprinkled from a consciousness 
of evil" ! It not only means that we are to avoid sin, 
and to take heed that the words of our mouths and 
the meditations of our hearts are acceptable to the 
Lord, but it means additionally that our hearts, having 
covenanted self-sacrifice, shall be able to look up 
to the Lord confidently and realize his blessing and 
approval, because of the honest, earnest efforts on our 
part to comply with the terms of our consecration. 
But since we cannot fully comply with the terms ourselves, 
it is requisite that we shall apply to ourselves 
by faith the merit of the precious blood of Christ, the 
blood of sprinkling, the blood of consecration, and 
that we shall realize that our acceptance is only in the 
Beloved One. 

WASHED WITH PURE WATER. 



The expression, "Having our bodies washed with 
pure water," figuratively represents the continued process 
of "cleansing ourselves from all filthiness of the 
flesh and of the spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence 
of the Lord," as elsewhere enjoined by the Apostle. 
(2 Cor. 7:1.) By nature we are all imperfect, 
sullied, more or less depraved; and our devotion to 
the Lord is manifested, first, by our full acceptance and 
full assurance of faith in the merits of Christ's sacrifice; 
and secondly, by our earnest efforts to put away 
from our flesh, as we have already put away from our 
hearts, all things defiling and displeasing in the Lord's 
sight: that thus we may more and more become copies 
of his dear Son, our Lord. This "washing of water 
through the Word" is elsewhere represented (Eph. 5:26) 
in a similar manner as being a part of the duty 
and privilege of all of the Lord's people throughout 
the remainder of their earthly lives. And we can see 
how beautiful is the illustration here used, that the 
Word of God, like water, is purifying, cleansing; as 
the Apostle declares, speaking of the Christian's good 
hopes in the precious promises once delivered to the 
saints, "He that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, 
even as he [who called him] is pure."— 1 John 3:3. 

As it is necessary to a thorough cleansing of our 
natural bodies that we should wash with "pure water," 
so much the more is it necessary to this cleansing of 
which the Apostle speaks, the cleansing of our moral 
characters, that we should have the pure water of 



divine truth, and not the muddy and polluted teachings 
of the Adversary, or of those whom he has blinded. 
And as we look about us upon the many streams of 
Babylon— the various sectarian theologies which profess 
to be the truth— we find that altho there is something 

R2671 : page 229 

of truth in them all, yet it is sadly befouled and 
wholly incapable of cleansing their votaries from filthiness 
of the flesh and of the spirit,— wholly incapable 
of perfecting them in holiness of the kind which the 
Lord requires. For instance, false ideas of God and 
of his character and his plan are incentives to those 
who so believe to copy these misrepresentations and 
perversions of justice and love, and are well calculated 
to develop in the devotees of such a theory a low standard 
of character, because the low standard which they 
set for themselves and other fellow-mortals is really 
higher than that which they ascribe to the Creator. 
How important, then, is the truth, and how much 
meaning we find in our dear Redeemer's prayer to the 
Father on our behalf,— "Sanctify them through thy 
truth; thy Word is truth." Let us not attempt to 
sanctify ourselves through any other washing than 
this; let us not be satisfied with anything short of the 
"pure water," the pure Word of God, the pure truth. 

"YE ARE COMPLETE IN HIM. "-Col. 2:10. 

Now view the class described by the Apostle: 
they are believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thus 
accepted with the Father through the Beloved One. 
More than this, to them has been opened up the narrow 
way to life, consecrated, made possible, through 
the sacrifice offered by our great High Priest. They 
are invited to become under-priests, sharers both of 
the sufferings, and also later on, if faithful, sharers 
of the glories of Jesus, the Chief Priest of this order. 
As a means of attaining the glorious end of their calling 
they are to cleanse themselves from defilement, 
and for their use in this respect the Word of God has 
been provided: it is at once a mirror to show them 
their blemishes, and water wherewith to cleanse themselves 
—the stimulus for the correction of life being 
the exceeding great and precious promises set before 
them in the Scriptures. Their hearts, justified by 
faith, and honest before God, are fully consecrated to 
him and to his service, and are to be so kept continually 
—by obedience to the best of their knowledge 
and opportunities, and by the blood of sprinkling 
which covers unintentional errors and failures. This 
is the class that is called to be associated with the 
Lord in his Kingdom; they are styled his Brethren, 
the Royal Priesthood, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, 
and various other names representing their near and 



dear relationship to the heavenly Father: and all of 
these who are faithful to the end of the race-course 
are to be made partakers of the divine nature, with 
its glory, honor and immortality. 

But let us not deceive ourselves in this matter of 
having hearts that do not condemn us; let us remember 
that our covenant was unto sacrifice and not unto 
self-preservation; that it was a covenant to lay our all 
upon the altar— time, influence, means of every kind; 
and that we agreed with our Lord that we would reckon 
this our reasonable service. Do our hearts condemn 
us in this matter, or do they justify us? Do we feel 
that we are doing all in our power to serve the Lord 
and his truth and our brethren? If so, let us rejoice, 
and let us continue in the same way, patiently hoping 
for the glorious results promised to the faithful. But 
if our hearts condemn us, let us not be discouraged; 
but on the contrary remember that this is a part of 
the cleansing of the flesh and of the spirit necessary 
to our preparation for the Kingdom, and let us afresh 
bind our sacrifices to the altar (Psa. 1 18:27), and be 
more and more zealous in expending our little all in 
the service of him who loved us and who bought us 
with his own precious blood. Thus doing, it will be 
our privilege day by day to draw nearer and nearer to 
the "Most Holy," and thus finishing our course with 
joy we shall have share in the first resurrection, awaking 
in our Lord's likeness.— 2 Cor. 5:14,15; Rom. 6:5; 
1 John 3:2; Psa. 17:15. 

R2678 : page 229 

UNTO HIM BELONGETH ALL. 



"Just why I suffer loss 

I can not know; 
I only know my Father 
Wills it so. 
He leads in paths I cannot understand; 
But all the way I know is wisely planned. 

"My life is only mine 

That I may use 
The gifts he lendeth me 
As he may choose; 
And if in love some boon he doth recall, 
I know that unto him belongeth all. 

"I am his child, and I 

Can safely trust; 
He loves me, and I know 
That he is just; 
Within his love I can securely rest, 
Assured that what he does for me is best.' 



R2672 : page 229 

THE GREAT SHEPHERD AND HIS SON, THE GOOD SHEPHERD. 

JOHN 10:1-16.-AUGUST 26. 

"The Good Shepherd giveth his life for the sheep." 

DAVID, THE PSALMIST, wrote prophetically, 
"Jehovah is my shepherd; I shall not want" 
(Psa. 23); for in David's day the arrangements for the 
Shepherd and the flock of this lesson had not been 
completed. True, the heavenly Father had purposed 
his entire plan as respects humanity's redemption and 
return to his care as his flock, but he had not yet sent 
his only begotten Son, the Good Shepherd, to give his 
life for the sheep, to call the flock, to open the door 
and to lead them out and into pasturage and to rest. 
Nevertheless, in the Lord's providence the nation of 
Israel had already been gathered, as those who would 
be prepared to be the flock of the Good Shepherd when 
he should come. These were "shut up under the Law" 
(Gal. 3:23), waiting for the coming of the Good Shepherd 
to open the door and to call them by name as his 

R2672 : page 230 

own sheep. Others, indeed, came before the Messiah, 
affecting to be the true shepherd, leaders sent of God, 
but they were mere pretenders, who sought their own 
good and glory, and not that of the sheep. They were 
thieves and robbers, who sought to gain possession of 
the sheep for their own selfish ends. 

The "porter" (representing the Law) would not 
recognize any of these pretenders, nor approve them, 
nor open to them access to the sheep. But when the 
true Shepherd came he satisfied the Law (the porter), 
and bought the sheep from Justice, giving his own life 
as their redemption price. Thus he gained the full 
right to open the door, the full sanction of the porter, 
the full authority to lead forth the sheep to the green 
pastures and still waters of divine truth which then became 
due to them. 

At the time of the giving of this parable our Lord 
was laying down his life, and at the same time uttering 
his voice, that the true sheep might learn to know him. 
And not only will all the true sheep learn to know the 
Shepherd, but, precious thought! the Shepherd knoweth 
his own sheep individually, so that he calleth each 
by name as he leads them out. This suggests to us the 
intimacy of the relationship between Christ and each 
member of his flock. 

The treatment of sheep in this part of the world is 



very different from that described in the parable, which 
is still maintained in Oriental countries. Here sheep 
are driven, and have little or no acquaintance with the 
herdsmen. But in Palestine, for instance, every sheep 
has a personal acquaintance with its shepherd, and he 
with it, and it is said that this acquaintance is so particular 
that the shepherds have a separate name for 
each sheep, and know each individually by its name, 
and that the sheep knows its own name and will respond 
to a call from its own shepherd at any time. How 
beautifully this illustrates the close relationship between 
Christ and his flock, the Church! He gives to each one 
of us a new name, and we are each personally known 
to him— our peculiarities of character, temperament, 
etc., our strong points and our weaknesses— he knoweth 
them all. He loves us, cares for us, helps us over our 
trials and difficulties, and shields us from the temptations 
which would be too strong for us. "He will not 
suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will 
with the temptation provide also a way of escape," 
and causes that "all things work together for good 
to them that love God, the called ones according to his 
purpose"— his "little flock" of this Gospel age. 

We note also the care of the Shepherd over the 
sheep, for he says, "He putteth forth his own sheep 
and goeth before them." The words "putteth forth" 
have the significance of looking after them, that they 
all get started in the way to the green pastures and 
still waters for soul refreshment. He is not heedless, 
careless, respecting them, whether they go or do not 
go; nevertheless, having started them in the way he 
will not drive them: he goeth before them to lead, that 
they may follow. Our Good Shepherd has indeed set 
us a noble example, so that we may walk in his steps; 
and whoever will, to the extent of his ability, trustfully 
do this, will find his wants abundantly supplied, for 
"No good thing will he [the Shepherd] withhold from 
those who [thus] walk uprightly." "He will guide 
them with his counsel, and afterward receive them to 
glory."-Psa. 84:11; 73:24. 

Our Lord's parable does not tell us about the disciplines 
which the sheep are sure to receive, but these 
are set before us in the prophetic psalm on the subject, 
in the words, "Thy rod and thy staff, they comfort 
me." The thought is that the Shepherd, while going 
before and not driving the sheep, nevertheless has such 
an interest and care that he will not suffer one of the 
sheep to wander away without administering certain 
chastisements designed for its good, and to correct it and 
to bring it back into fellowship in the flock. This is a 
comfort, and yet it should certainly be the desire of all 
true sheep to follow the Shepherd so closely that the 
rod shall not often be necessary. 

The link between the Shepherd and the sheep, as 
here indicated, is love. The Shepherd loves the sheep, 
and has demonstrated this in having laid down his life 



for them; and the sheep speedily learn to love the Shepherd, 
as their care-taker; they recognize him through 
his voice— the Word of God. This voice appeals to 
the hearts of all the true sheep, who quickly respond, 
"Never man spake as this man." 

The voice of the Good Shepherd is a blending of 
various sounds in a manner in which they are blended 
by no other voice. His voice sounds forth the chord 
of justice commingled with the chord of love, and the 
whole intoned with wisdom and with power. Other 
theories, plans and schemes of men and of devils, have 
no such harmony of sound as has the message which 
the great Shepherd has sent us through his Son. His 
voice speaks to us of a just penalty for sins— death; it 
speaks of love, in our redemption and the forgiveness 
of our sins, and the opening to us of the way of life, 
through resurrection. This "word of grace" constrains 
all the true sheep as no other message or voice could 
do. Moreover, when the true sheep hear the voice of 
the Good Shepherd, it satisfies their longings as nothing 
else could do. They will no longer be in danger of 
being attracted by other sounds or voices, theories or 
schemes, but will reply to all, 

"Jesus has satisfied; Jesus is mine." 

There are many false voices in the world today, 
seeking to lead the Lord's sheep astray, and these are 

R2672: page 231 

sometimes sounded in deceptive tones, to imitate the 
Shepherd's call, to draw away sheep after those who 
would be shepherds, but whom the great Shepherd has 
not appointed; shepherds who not only have not purchased 
the sheep, but who seek to ignore the great sacrifice 
by which the Good Shepherd did purchase them. 
We might mention many such false voices, or false 
would-be shepherds,— Christian Science, Theosophy, 
Spiritism, Evolution, Higher Criticism, etc., but we 
have the Good Shepherd's word for it, that his true sheep 
will not be deceived by any of these. Well do they 
know his voice, and its combination of justice, love, 
and mercy cannot be duplicated by others,— its message 
of redemption by the precious blood, justification by 
faith, the high calling, the begetting of the holy spirit, 
the by-and-by deliverance of the sons of God, and eventually 
of all who will obey him of the entire groaning 
creation, through restitution. 

This voice, once heard, can never be mistaken for 
another; and those who know this Shepherd and his 
voice need never be misled by others. The Lord's true 
sheep, whom he knows by name and who follow him, 
will not heed the voice of strange shepherds, but will 
flee from them. They know when they hear a false 

R2673 : page 231 



voice, that it means that the Adversary is seeking to ensnare 
them; and such will flee from the voice of error 
that they may come the closer to the true Shepherd, 
who gave his life for the sheep. If, therefore, we see 
some whom we had supposed were of the Lord's flock 
heeding another voice and following after strange shepherds, 
and heedless of the voice that speaketh from 
heaven, we need not be fearful; for if they are true 
sheep of the Lord's flock they cannot long be deceived, 
if at all. We may indeed sound out the voice of the 
Good Shepherd, calling their attention afresh to the 
harmonies and beauties of the "voice from heaven," 
but if still they do not hear and heed, we may know 
that they do not belong to the flock which our Shepherd 
is now collecting and shepherding. 

Amongst those who heard this parable from our 
Lord's lips, not many comprehended, not many had the 
hearing ear for the true Shepherd's voice: only a small 
proportion of the Jewish people followed him and became 
his true sheep. Similarly now, many are professing 
to be the true sheep of the Lord's flock, but in 
this day of the Shepherd's presence his voice, the truth, 
becomes the test. All of the true sheep will hear and 
be attracted by the voice of truth now uttered, and will 
obey it. Those who are not of the Good Shepherd's 
flock, and who have not his spirit, he desires shall now 
be separated; to this end they will hear the voice of 
other shepherds, and be deceived thereby: because they 
are not truly of the Lord's flock. 

Dr. Porter tells of a scene he witnessed, in which 
several flocks of sheep were for a time commingled, 
and how, when the due time was come, the separation 
took place. He says:— 

"As we sat and looked, almost spell-bound, the 
silent hillsides around were in a moment filled with life 
and sound. Thousands of sheep and goats were there, 
grouped in confused masses. The shepherds stood together 
until all came out, and then they separated, each 
shepherd taking a different path, and uttering, as he 
advanced, a shrill, peculiar call. The sheep heard 
them; at first the mass swayed and moved as if shaken 
by some internal convulsion; then points struck out in 
the directions taken by the shepherds. These became 
longer and longer, until the confused masses were resolved 
in long, living streams flowing after their leaders." 

So at the present time there are many sheep in the 
nominal Church, but they are not all the Lord's sheep. 
Some belong to human leaders of various sects, and 
some are God's. The harvest, or end of this Gospel 
age, the time for separating the wheat from the tares, 
is the time for separating the different flocks of sheep. 
In harmony with this, we now hear various voices calling 
the sheep in various directions, as never before. 
This is, in the Lord's providence, for the purpose of separating 
all others from his own "little flock." His 
sheep will hear his voice and follow him— other sheep, 



consecrated to human leaders, human institutions, human 
theories, human efforts, will follow their own bents, 
and thus be separated from the "little flock," and this 
is now the Lord's good pleasure. Thus he will "gather 
out of his kingdom all things that offend and them 
that do iniquity," before the glorifying of his Church 
and the great time of trouble that will follow. 

CHRIST THE DOOR OF GOD'S SHEEP-FOLD. 



As a further explanation of the matter, our Lord 
refers to himself as the Door of the sheep-fold, the lawful, 
proper entrance-gate, by which God's people might 
enter into rest. All who had ever come previously, 
claiming to be messiahs, had attempted to climb up by 
some other way than that of keeping the divine law and 
purchasing the sheep. They were thieves and robbers, 
attempting to take what they had not secured a right 
to, and that for selfish gain. But none of the true 
sheep would heed them nor follow them. Now, however, 
the Good Shepherd had come, and had purchased 
the sheep, opening a legal door of entrance to them and 
liberty for them, and it was appropriate that all of the 
true sheep should know it. Now it had become possible 
for the sheep to have in Christ the liberty so long desired, 
and to be led out and into pasturage and refreshment 
and to rest and security. Henceforth Jehovah's 
flock should never lack for pasturage; because, 
having bought them through his Son, they shall be 
cared for. They may now say, "Surely goodness and 
mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I 
shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever." 

R2673 : page 232 

Others who had approached the sheep, seeking 
to be their leaders, had done so selfishly; had been 
willing to sacrifice the sheep in their own interest; but 
the Good Shepherd, solicitous for the best interests of 
the sheep, demonstrated this by the sacrifice of his own 
life on their behalf, that they might have life more 
abundant, better than they had ever known hitherto,— 
eternal life. Hireling shepherds labor for the hire, and 
not from personal interest in the sheep, and consequently, 
instead of being ready to lay down their lives for the 
sheep in times of extremity and persecution for righteousness' 
sake, they are ready rather to flee the trouble 
and avoid persecution. They think chiefly of their own 
ease and comfort, honor and dignity, and of how much 
of the golden fleece they can get from the sheep. They 
are not very deeply concerned respecting the spiritual 
progress of the sheep, their growth in grace, and in all 
the fatness of love and spiritual welfare; but specially 
in numbers and collections. 



Perhaps never more than at present is this truth 
clearly illustrated amongst those who are professedly 
representatives of the Good Shepherd— under-shepherds 
in his flock. Many of them give evidence of wanting 
to be on the popular side of every question— of unwillingness 
to suffer anything for the sake of the truth; of 
carelessness respecting the real spiritual condition of 
the flock: of interest rather in the human institutions 
through which they obtain their support, and with 
whose welfare their honor, dignity and titles are associated. 
Of such shepherds Milton, the poet, wrote, 
styling them— 

"...blind mouths. 
The hungry sheep look up and are not fed, 
But, swollen with wind and the rank mist they draw, 
Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread." 

The Christian philosopher, John Ruskin, commenting 
upon this, says: "These two monosyllables, 
'blind mouths,' express the precisely accurate contraries 
of the right character in the two great offices of 
the Church,— those of bishop and pastor. A bishop 
means a person who sees; a pastor means one who feeds. 
The most unbishoply character a man can have is, 
therefore, to be blind. The most unpastoral is, instead 
of feeding, to want to be fed,— to be a mouth." 

Nevertheless, the Good Shepherd will always be 
represented amongst the sheep by those who have his 
own characteristics, and who are seeking to walk in his 
footsteps; and through these he will utter his "voice," 
and lead his own sheep to pasture and to rest. These 
will not only have the same voice, the same Word, the 
same good tidings, but they will have the same devotion 
to the interests of the sheep— to feed the sheep, to 
lead them into the green pastures and by the still waters 
of present truth, and to preserve their liberties in the 
Lord, and not to pen them up as their own, nor to 
make merchandise of them. 

The Father, the great over-Shepherd, Jehovah, is 
referred to by the Good Shepherd, Jesus, in verse 16. 
"The Father knoweth me" [has confidence in me— has 
entrusted the care of the sheep to me] and even so I 
know the Father [having full confidence in him, and 
recognizing him as my Shepherd, director, leader], and 
[it is in harmony with his arrangement for me and for 
the sheep that] I lay down my life for the sheep." 

The sheep that I am now calling and leading to 
pasture and caring for and calling by their own names, 
and who know me, are a very special lot of sheep; in 
all only a "little flock," for whom Jehovah, the Great 
Shepherd, has made special arrangements and provisions 
in his Kingdom of glory. However, these are 
not all of his sheep, tho they are all yet called and led 
forth. "Other sheep I have that are not of this fold." 
I bought the whole world with the one sacrifice for 
sins, and all who have the true sheep disposition, all 
who desire to be in harmony with righteousness, truth, 



and the author of these, I must recognize as my sheep, 
and must search them out far and near, until every one 
of them shall be found. But not yet: this will be by 
and by, after the present "little flock" shall be glorified 
with me. Then they, with me, shall be the shepherds 
who will gather in all of the true sheep, delivering 
them all from the power of the enemy, and bringing 
so many as will obey my voice ultimately into that 
glorious condition of oneness, harmony with the heavenly 
Father and with myself, in which condition, 
as my sheep, they will be entitled to everlasting life. 
"Then there shall be one fold and one shepherd," as 
it is written, "Of whom the whole family both in heaven 
and in earth is named."— Eph. 3:15. 



R2674 : page 232 

"THE LORD APPOINTED SEVENTY OTHERS ALSO.' 

-LUKE 10:1-1 1,17-20. -SEPT. 2.- 

"The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few." 

OUR LORD HAD previously sent forth the twelve 
apostles, as heralds of himself and the Kingdom. 
(Luke 9:1-6.) The sending forth of seventy was 
evidently some little time afterward, probably in the 
last year of his ministry. Their commission reads almost 
in the same words as that given to the twelve, tho 
they are not recognized anywhere as apostles on an 
equality of authority with the twelve. The fact that 
seventy men would voluntarily go forth as ministers of 
the Lord, without hope of earthly reward or salary, is 
a sufficient evidence that a strong influence had already 
been exerted by Jesus' teaching. In this connection 
we remember the Apostle's statement that 
above five hundred brethren were sufficiently advanced 
in knowledge and zeal to be accounted worthy of meeting 
the Lord after his resurrection, which implies a 
keen interest on the part of several times that number. 
We may reasonably suppose that these seventy were 
representatives of a much larger company of deeply 
interested ones. They were sent into the various cities 
and villages, whither the Lord himself would go. They 
were to prepare his way by announcing the Kingdom 
at hand, and by performing the miracles intended to 
demonstrate the authenticity of their message. 

R2674 : page 233 

An explanation of why they were sent forth is 
given (verse 2): it was because the harvest was great 
and the laborers too few to properly consummate the 
work in the time appointed of the Father. All interested 



were expected to share in this appreciation of the 
greatness of the work, and the necessity for more laborers 
being sent forth; and it is but reasonable to suppose 
that the seventy sent were chosen from amongst those 
appreciating the situation and anxious to be 
commissioned. 

There are several lessons for us in this matter: we 
too are in a harvest time— in the harvest time of the 
Gospel age, as they were in the harvest of the Jewish 
age. Now, as then, the harvest work is great, and the 
laborers are comparatively few; and now, as then, we 
cannot hope that any would succeed in doing harvest 
work unless specially commissioned or sent forth by 
the Chief Reaper. Hence, all who appreciate the work 
now in progress, should pray to the Lord to send them 
forth in his service, or if already engaged in it, that he 
would graciously open to them doors of opportunity 
for greater usefulness in his service. In the beginning 
of this harvest comparatively few were used of the Lord 
in connection with the harvest work; but as we progress 
we find that the Lord is graciously pleased to send forth 
and use more and more those who are zealously anxious 
to lay down their lives for the truth. 

The expression, "The harvest is great," does not 
necessarily mean that the amount of ripe "wheat" to 
be garnered is great. It means rather that the difficulties 
and oppositions, and multitudes of "tares," make 
it difficult to reach all of the "wheat" class. The work 
is great here, as it was great in the end of the Jewish 
age; yet only a "little flock" will be gathered now, as 
only a remnant was gathered from Israel, as the Apostle 
Paul pointed out. (Rom. 9:27.) The mass of Israel 
professed to be the Lord's people, but their piety 
was little more than profession. They drew nigh to 
the Lord in attendance at the synagogues, and in celebrating 
the feasts, felt full and self-satisfied, and looked 
with pity upon the Gentile nations, and had a great 
spirit of missionary aggressiveness, and "compassed 
sea and land to make a proselyte" to Judaism. Nevertheless, 
the Lord, who read the heart, recognized that 
theirs was only a formal lip service, and that their 
hearts were far from him; and we see conditions to-day 
very similar to this, in nominal spiritual Israel. 

None were fit to be sent out as heralds of the Kingdom 
except such who thoroughly believed in the Kingdom 
—such as had accepted Jesus as the Messiah; such 
as believed in his presence— such, therefore, as could 
speak forth with earnestness and power the message 
they were sent to bear. And so it seems to be in this 
harvest time. The Lord is sending forth more laborers 
continually; yet only such as recognize the Kingdom 
as nigh, even at the door; only such as recognize 
the parousia of the King; only such as have a zeal to 
tell the joyful tidings to others, are being used and 
blessed of the Lord in the gathering together of his 
elect,— the ripe "wheat," his "jewels."— Psa. 50:5; 



Mai. 3:16,17; Matt. 13:39,41. 

It is not supposable that our Lord meant that any 
should appeal to him to send forth more laborers into 
the harvest, who at the same time would not be willing 
and anxious, to the extent of their ability, to enter this 
harvest service themselves. There may be some, but 
we trust very few, who would be prepared to pray: "O 
Lord bless, I pray thee, thy work, and send forth more 
laborers; but do not send me. Permit others to sacrifice 
time and strength and zeal, that I may rest, and 
have neither part nor lot in the matter, sacrificing little 
or nothing." Only those are properly qualified to petition 
the Lord on such a subject, whose hearts are burning 
with a desire to do with their might what their 
hands may find to do, according to their opportunities. 
Such, in praying, would be anxious, first of all, to 
themselves be used as servants of the great Chief Reaper; 
for it is "he that reapeth that receiveth wages and that 
gathereth fruit unto eternal life" now, as it was also 
in the Jewish harvest. Those who are most zealous to 
serve the Lord, and most willing to sacrifice on behalf 
of his cause, are the ones who will receive the greatest 
present blessing of spiritual fellowship with the Lord, 
and who will be the best prepared to share the glories 
soon to be revealed. 

The Lord adopted with the seventy the same 
method that he started with the twelve; viz., of sending 
them two and two; and similarly we, at the present 
time, encourage the colporteur laborers in this harvest 
to go two and two, for mutual encouragement and helpfulness, 
etc. As the poet has said, 

"So when two together work, each for each 
Is quick to plan and can the other teach; 
But when alone one seeks the best to know, 
His skill is weaker and his thoughts are slow." 

It is questionable just why the Lord chose seventy 
for this work. However, we remember that Moses chose 
seventy of the elders of Israel for his assistants, and 
that this number, seventy, was from that time onward 
preserved in Israel, and known as the "Sanhedrin," or 
committee of seventy chief men and judges. In the 
light of this fact, it would appear that if the nation of 
Israel had been in proper condition of heart to receive 
the Lord, the chiefs of that nation would already have 
embraced his cause, and the seventy members of the 
Sanhedrin would by that time have been proclaiming 
the Messiah through the length and breadth of Palestine. 
But since they had not received the King, and 
had not prayed him to commission them to announce 

R2674 : page 234 

him, our Lord commissioned others, and the work went 
on, the honor and privilege passing by those of influence 
and education who might have enjoyed it had they 
been worthy. Doubtless the seventy sent forth were, 



like the apostles, chosen from amongst the honest-hearted 
of the common people, and not many, if any 
of them, were rich, wise or learned. 

Likewise, in this harvest time, there are many 
ministers, professedly servants of the truth, and possessed 
of education, influence, etc., who by now should 
realize that we are in the harvest of the Gospel age, and 
should be seeking of the Lord an opportunity to engage 
in the harvest work; but instead, they are described 
as "dumb dogs, lying down, refusing to bark"— refusing 
to awaken the household under their care, to let 
them know that the Kingdom of God is at hand, and 
that all not received into the Kingdom are about to be 
plunged into a great time of trouble. All of the spiritual 
house of to-day must either receive a more than 
pentecostal blessing, in being "changed" and made 
sharers of the Kingdom, or else, being rejected from 
the Kingdom, receive a baptism of fiery trouble— having 
their portion with the world, not being accounted 
worthy to escape those things coming upon the world. 
-Luke 21:36. 

That the Lord did not expect the seventy to convert 
and gather in all Israel is very distinctly shown 
in his statement, "Behold, I send you forth as lambs 
among wolves." The Master knew that the majority 
of the professedly consecrated Israel of God were consecrated 
to self and selfishness, to sect and party, and 
not to the truth. The majority were represented as 
voracious wolves, not sheep. Nevertheless, there were 
lambs and sheep amongst the goats and the wolves, and 
these all must hear the message, and thus be prepared 
to receive the Messiah, when he should present himself 
to them. 

Special instructions were given to these specially 
sent-forth ones. They had a peculiar work to do and 
the conditions accorded. They were not, therefore, a 
criterion for subsequent workers under different circumstances. 
They were to carry neither purse, nor valise, 
nor extra shoes, and were to salute no man by the way. 
They would thus be dependent on the generosity of 
those to whom they ministered the truth. And the 
effect of this would be beneficial in several ways. (1) It 
would test the faith of those who went forth, and keep 
them continually depending on the Lord's supervising 
care, and trusting that he who had sent them knew how 
to make provision for their necessities while they complied 
with his commands. (2) It would furnish an 
opportunity for hospitality to those to whom they 
preached, and who, by reason of the necessities of the 
case, would be constrained to reach a decision promptly 
as to whether or not they were in sympathy with the 

R2675 : page 234 

message, and hence with the messengers, and willing 
to entertain them. The same lesson of dependence on 



the Lord was implied in the provision for no change of 
raiment. Besides, it was to be but a short tour. 

The injunction not to salute any one by the way, 
may be understood to refer to the custom in Oriental 
lands of travelers stopping frequently to chat with each 
other respecting the news. The disciples had but one 
message, the good tidings, and they were to give all 
diligence to its promulgation, and not to be general 
newsmongers. On arriving at a house they were to 
take careful note respecting their reception, and were 
to anticipate this with a prayer that peace, blessing, 
favor, might be upon that house and its inmates. If a 
son of peace, a child of God, resided there, they might 
expect that under the Lord's providence they would 
have a kind reception, and were to accept it as of the 
Lord's arrangement. If they were not so received, they 
were to consider it as an evidence that that was not the 
home of God's people, living in covenant relationship 
with him, and were to take their departure, seeking 
another and another place. Peradventure they found 
no entertainer in the village, they were, nevertheless, 
to give their testimony. And it should be given in a 
striking manner; viz., by the shaking of the dust from 
their shoes, which, to the Oriental mind, would signify 
a very solemn and final testimony; and then they were 
to say, "Notwithstanding, be sure of this, that the 
Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." 

All who are engaged in the present harvest work 
may learn some very profitable lessons here, applicable, 
indeed, to the Lord's people at any time while engaged 
in his service. We have no time for the ordinary converse. 
The time is short; the harvest work is great; 
the laborers are few; our time is consecrated; we must 
labor while it is called day, knowing that a night cometh 
wherein no man can work. We have consecrated 
our lives even unto death; we are commissioned of the 
great Lord of the harvest to seek for the true "wheat," 
and to gather it into the barn. What time have we 
for frivolities or worldliness or the many social amenities? 
Rather, we must content ourselves with giving 
very little attention to these things, and must press 
along the line, engaging heartily in the work given us 
to do, if we would have the approval of our Master, his 
"Well done, good and faithful servant." 

Altho it is not customary to-day, as it was in Palestine 
nineteen centuries ago, to salute a house and say, 
"Peace be to this house!" nevertheless all of the Lord's 
people should be peacemakers, peace-promoters, peace-lovers, 
and a blessing of peace and restfulness should 
go with them wherever they go. Alas! how many of 
them are slow to learn that God has not called us to 

R2675 : page 235 

strife, contentions, bickerings, anger, etc., but to love, 
joy, peace, etc. How few, comparatively, have learned 



how to speak the truth in love; and always to give a 
soft answer which turneth away wrath; and always to 
avoid the grievous words which stir up anger. Like 
the seventy of our lesson, in our daily avocations and 
efforts to minister to others, let the peace of God go 
with us, shining in our faces, governing our actions and 
intoning our language, so that, as the Apostle expresses 
it, our speech shall be always seasoned with grace. 

Conditions in civilized lands to-day are very different 
from what they were and still are in Oriental lands, 
so that here and now it would be unusual to be expected 
to entertain strangers; nevertheless, all who are 
of the Lord's true people should be on the look-out to 
entertain hospitably any servants of the Lord, who they 
are sure carry his message, the Gospel of the Kingdom. 
And, as the Apostle indicates, they should be just as 
careful not to entertain, not to assist, and not to bid 
God-speed to any who are bearing a false gospel, and 
denying that the Lord bought us.— 2 John 10. 

REJOICE IN THINGS UNSEEN. 



When the seventy returned from this mission they 
were full of joy; saying, "Lord, even the devils are 
subject unto us, in thy name." Our Lord assured them 
that this was what he expected, and intended, when he 
sent them forth, and explained respecting his own 
knowledge of Satan in his pre-human condition, that 
there and then he had been a witness to Satan's fall 
from high glory and privilege and position to his present 
attitude of chief adversary of God. "I beheld Satan 
as lightning [as a bright one] fall from heaven." 
It is for those who deny the personality of Satan and 
who deny there are any fallen angels, to explain away 
these plain statements of Scripture. The true children 
of God, the true sheep who hear the voice of the Shepherd, 
will not be deceived upon this point any more 
than upon others. What matters it to us that we did 
not see Satan fall from his glorious condition? Our 
Master did, and he has borne testimony, not only respecting 
Satan's personality, but also respecting his fall 
from brightness and honor. What is it to us that others 
deny that there are fallen angels, demons, who seek to 
impersonate the dead, through spiritualism, etc.? We 
have the Master's words, and the words of the apostles, 
to the contrary, and as true sheep we both hear and 
heed the Shepherd's voice and follow him. We heed 
not the voice of Satan, uttered through those whom he 
controls, telling us that there is no devil, that there is 
no Second Death, etc. 

Our Lord proceeded to tell the seventy that it was 
he who had given them the power they had enjoyed, 
and that it included immunity from the bites of serpents 
and scorpions, and from all the power of the enemy— 



all enemies, but specially the enemy, Satan: the same 
one mentioned also in the prayer which our Lord 
taught, saying, "Deliver us from the Evil One." It 
may not be amiss to note here the fact that these powers 
and authorities over Satan, poisons, serpents, etc., were 
confined to the twelve and to the subsequent seventy, 
and were never given to the Church in general. The 
only Scripture which even seems to so imply is Mark 16:9 
to the end, and these verses are not found in the 
oldest Greek MSS., and are evidently interpolations, 
added probably about the fifth century: they are omitted 
from the Revised Version and others. But while no 
such immunity from poisons and bites and stings are 
granted to the Gospel Church in general, we have what 
serves every purpose in this respect; viz., the Lord's 
promise that nothing shall by any means hurt us as 
new creatures,— that the Lord will permit nothing to 
happen to his consecrated ones that he is not both able 
and willing to overrule for their good, their highest 
welfare. 

While rejoicing with the disciples in their increased 
faith and joy, resulting from their activities in his service, 
and in the exercise of the gifts which he had bestowed 
upon them, our Lord cautioned them against 
thinking too highly of such miraculous gifts, and assures 
them that their chiefest cause for joy lay in another 
direction— in the fact that they had been accepted as 
sons into God's family (John 1:12); in the fact that 
their names were written in heaven, as prospective joint-heirs 
with Christ in his Kingdom— prospective members 
of the body of Christ, to suffer with him, and 
thus attest their fidelity, and by and by to be glorified 
with him to all eternity. This is in harmony with the 
Apostle Paul's statement in 1 Cor. 13:1, where he assures 
us that the miraculous gifts conferred upon the 
early Church by the laying on of the apostles' hands, 
such as speaking with unknown tongues, interpretations 
of mysteries, etc., are not proofs of spirit-begotten conditions; 
—that a greater proof is the possession of the 
spirit of the Lord, the spirit of love that never faileth. 

The more of the spirit of love we possess the greater 
is our likeness to God's dear Son, our Redeemer, and 
the more will we be fitted and prepared for a share with 
him in his heavenly glories. If, therefore, the Lord 
permits us to do some little service in the present harvest, 
or to bear some burdens in the heat of the day, or if 
he grants us the privilege of successfully contending 
against the great Adversary and his servants, and hinders 
us from being stung or "hurt" by their words or 
looks or deeds, and if he grants us opportunities for helping 
others out of soul-sickness by administering the 
good medicine of the present truth, let us rejoice in 
these privileges and opportunities; but let us rejoice 
still more that under the Lord's providence we are his 
children, begotten of his spirit,— that our names have 
been recorded as members of his family, and that by 



and by we may expect to be joint-heirs with our Elder 
Brother. Yea, in these good hopes we will rejoice. 



R2675 : page 236 

IS THE RESTITUTION CALL NOW OPEN? 



A DEAR BROTHER in the truth seems to think 
that the teachings of DAWN, VOL. V., differ 
from those of DAWN, VOL. III., on the question 
heading this article. He sees clearly that in DAWN, 
VOL. V., the view we present is that the restitution 
call cannot begin until the last member of the Gospel 
Church has been changed, glorified, but he thinks 
that the third volume teaches that the restitution call 
will be in progress simultaneously with the closing 
work of this Gospel age. This clearer statement of 
the subject in DAWN V., is the result of our having 
learned that some had gotten the wrong impression 
from VOL. III. In proof of his point, the Brother 
refers us to VOL. III., p. 218, where it is stated that 
"the stopping of the favor or call here, in 1881, is 
followed, or rather lapped upon, by the general call 
of the whole world to the Millennial blessings and 

R2676 : page 236 

favors on condition of faith and obedience." Also 
pp.365 and 367: "Further, where the special favor 
of the general Gospel call ceased, October, 1881, the 
blessings upon the world would seem to be due to 
have a beginning." "It (1881) was the date of the 
closing of the high calling, and hence the date for 
the beginning of the restitution call for mankind in 
general." 

On questions of so much intricacy it is sometimes 
difficult to use language sufficiently exact; 
especially if at the time of writing objections or 
criticisms are not fully anticipated. Were we to 
express the above points again we would try still 
harder, as in DAWN V., to guard our statements, and 
thus to prevent any misunderstanding. Our thought 
is, that the close of the high calling in the year 1881 
was a marked date, and that from that time onward we 
should expect manifestations along the line of restitution 
—evidences that restitution blessings were in process 
of development. We had no intention of conveying 
the thought that restitution, physical, mental and 
moral, should be expected in 1881, and onward. As a 
matter of fact, we see no such process of general physical 
restitution in operation, nor ought we to expect it 
until the Day of Atonement sacrifices (of this Gospel 



age— Christ and the Church, his body) are complete. 

We have already pointed this out in the pamphlet, 
"Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices," published 
in 1881. We there show that the high priest does 
not put on the glorious garments, representing the 
dignity and authority of rulership and blessing, until 
the "Lord's goat" has been killed, its body burned without 
the camp, its fat burned upon the altar, and its blood 
carried into the "Most Holy" and sprinkled upon the 
Mercy-Seat. (We there show also that this goat 
typified the Church, all of whose experiences there 
typified cannot be accomplished until the last member 
of the body of Christ has finished his sacrifice completely.) 
Then it was that the high priest went to 
the altar, lifted up his hands, and began to bless the 
people, who meantime lay prostrate in the dust 
awaiting that very blessing, which typically represents 
restitution. 

In the above statement that "the stopping of 
the favor or call here, in 1881, is followed, or rather 
lapped upon, by the general call of the whole world 
to the Millennial blessings and favors," we hoped 
that the reader would have in mind our further statement; 
that altho the call, in its open or full sense, 
ceased in 1881, it would be prolonged in a special or 
private sense for a time, just as Israel's national 
favor ceased five days before our Lord's crucifixion, 
when he said, "Your house is left unto you desolate," 
yet in an individual sense of the word, God's favor 
continued with Israel exclusively for three and a half 
years following that date; only that instead of being 
a national favor, it was a private, an individual favor. 
On p. 219 we endeavor to explain this continuation 
of the Gospel call, in another form, using the following 
language: 

"But tho the general 'call' has ceased, the 
'door' is not yet shut. The end of the call, and the 
shutting of the door are distinct and separate. The 
'door' stands open for some to enter the race for the 
great prize of joint-heirship in the Kingdom after the 
general 'call' has ceased. God has predetermined a 
fixed number to constitute the Church, 'the body of 
Christ,' and there can be neither one member superfluous 
nor one lacking. (See this typically taught 
in Lev. 21:17-23.) It follows that he could not 
call or invite to that honor more than would complete 
the number that he had determined, and God's 
Word shows that this number had been secured 
[called] in October, 1881. But since some of those who 
responded under the general call, and made the 
covenant with him, will fail to keep that covenant, 
fail to so run as to obtain the prize, the 'door' stands 
open after the general 'call' has ceased, to permit the 
entrance to the race, to self-sacrifice in the service of 
the truth, of some [under the private or individual 
call] to take the places of such as may, during the 



inspection, cast aside the wedding garment of Christ's 
righteousness; and also of such others as, having 
made the covenant of self-sacrifice in the service, 
love the present evil world, become overcharged with 
its cares or pleasures, and fail to perform the requirements 
of their covenant." 

Our thought is that this secret extension of the 
privileges of the call, after it has ceased as a general 
offer, must of necessity precede the beginning of the 
restitution privileges, and hence that only preparatory 

R2676 : page 237 

work in respect to the restitution and the proclamation 
of it, will be in order until the harvest of this Gospel 
age has been fully gathered. The knowledge of 
restitution is granted to the Lord's consecrated people 
now, to the intent that they should not be in darkness 
with the world in respect to the divine plan, and 
especially in view of the approaching great time of 
trouble, and also in view of the falling of the systems 
of error, false doctrines, etc. It is necessary that the 
restitution should be recognized by God's people, in 
order to keep them from falling in this day of trouble. 
But the message or call to restitution is not due to the 
world, to our understanding, in any sense of the word; 
hence it is that the efforts being made in connection 
with the dissemination of present truth are confined, 
so far as seems reasonable and possible, to the Church 
—to those, at least, who professedly claim to be the 
Lord's people, and not to the world. 

Our brother's letter suggests several questions, 
which we here propound and answer, hoping that the 
answers may be helpful, not only to him but to others. 

(1) Question.— May it not be, that both the high 
calling and the restitution call are now open? Or, if 
only one of them, would it not seem the more probable 
that the restitution call alone is open now? I fail to 
see the force of your claim that the "door" stands 
open after the "call" ceases. 

Answer.— We believe that we have shown, foregoing 
that the restitution call could not begin until 
the sacrifice of the Church is completely finished, and 
until the High Priest, with every member of his body, 
is fully clothed with the honors and dignities of his 
office, represented in the garments of glory and 
beauty. We doubt if we can make the matter of the 
open door after the general call has ceased, any 
plainer than above set forth. We think it beyond 
question, that the Lord could not call at any time a 
greater number than the elect number, even tho his 
foreknowledge assured him that many of the called 
ones would not make their calling and election sure, and 
therefore would not be amongst the chosen. We hold, 
therefore, that at such time as the full number of the 
elect had been called, the general call must of necessity 



have ceased; and yet, since the Lord clearly foretold 
that a casting out of some during the inspection 
of the guests would follow (Matt. 22:10-14), and 
since the elect number must be complete, it follows 
that there must be some way of bringing in others to 
take the places of those who would be cast out, after 
the general call ceased and the work of inspection 
began. To our understanding this work of inspection 
of the guests has been progressing for some time- 
since the call ceased. As some were found unworthy 
of their privileges and "cast into outer darkness," 
similar to that in which the whole world is, others 
were admitted to the favors of the called, and the 
attendant testings. And this work must continue 
until the full quota of elect ones shall have passed 
divine approval. We can think of no other way that 
would permit God to be just and reasonable in his 
dealings, since he will not accept less than the foreordained 
number, and since he will not call to that 
number any who, in any sense of the word, might be 
open to disappointment. "Just and true are thy 
ways, thou King of saints!" As pointed out (DAWN, 
Vol., III., page 222) these additions are illustrated 
in the parable by those admitted to labor in the vineyard 
at the eleventh hour,— after the regular calls had 
ceased. 

(2) Question.— Did not the restitution call precede 
the Gospel call? Were not Enoch, Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob, and all Israel called to restitution? If 
this be true, then the Gospel call was merely a supplementary 
one, for the time being, and in that event 
its closing or cessation would at once put in force again 
the original call which it had temporarily superseded. 

Answer.— No: none of the patriarches were called 
to restitution, nor was it possible that either they or 
others could attain restitution blessings until after the 
ransom had been paid; until after all the Atonement 
Day sacrifices had been offered. If restitution had 
been possible without the ransom, then Christ died in 
vain, so far as the world of mankind is concerned. 
But no; all that anyone enjoyed of restitution favors 
in the past, was what we now enjoy; viz., a knowledge 
of them. A slight knowledge or hint at restitution 
was given to father Adam and mother Eve. Subsequently 
a clearer statement of the same was made to 
Abraham, and confirmed to Isaac and Jacob. There is a 
vast difference between the promise of a thing and the 
thing itself. Had the restitution call gone forth in 
the true sense, anyone responding properly would have 
been restored to perfection and everlasting life. True, 
there was a kind of offer of restitution made to Israel 
under the Law Covenant— an offer that they would 
be restored to perfection and life if they would keep 
their Law Covenant inviolate. But, as we have seen, 
the keeping of that Law was impossible; and hence the 
attainment of restitution under it was equally 



impossible. 

The special merit of the patriarchies consisted in 
the fact that, living before any call to everlasting life 
was made, and with merely a hint of God's gracious 
purposes, they exercised so great faith respecting the 
same,— enduring much in their endeavors to please 
God, and because of their confidence in his promises. 
From the Apostle Paul's account, some of them endured, 
faithfully, experiences which, had they lived 

R2677 : page 238 

during this Gospel age, would have constituted them 
overcomers in the highest sense of the word, and joint-heirs 
with Christ in the Kingdom. But living before 
this high calling or any other call had been issued, 
and suffering and enduring valiantly and faithfully, 
they are promised a better resurrection, a more favorable 
resurrection than that of the world,— tho it will 
not be so wonderful a resurrection as that of the 
Church. As the Apostle remarks, God has promised 
some better thing for us (than for them), "that they 
without us should not be made perfect."— Heb. 1 1:40. 

Their resurrection will be better than that of the 
remainder of mankind, except the consecrated Gospel 
Church, in that it will be an instantaneous raising to 
perfection, while the world's resurrection will be a 
gradual one, accompanied by disciplines and testings, 
and called by our Lord "the resurrection by judgment" 
—a gradual raising up of the obedient and willing 
throughout the Millennial age, step by step, to all 
that was forfeited and lost in Eden. 

(3) Question.— Will not the restitution call be 
a call to faith and to obedience, without sacrifice? If 
we cannot imagine such a call as being now in process, 
let me ask, Why not? Was not this call the one that 
was open to Cornelius and to everybody else, both before 
and since his time, as mentioned by the Apostle 
Peter, "I perceive that in every nation he that feareth 
God and worketh righteousness is acceptable to him"? 

Answer.— Peter did not mean to be understood 
that he that feared God and worked righteousness to 
the best of his ability had always been acceptable to 
God. Peter had just learned that a new dispensation 
had been ushered in, and that since Christ had 
redeemed, not the Jew only, but the whole world of 
mankind, therefore now repentance and remission of 
sins were proper to be preached in Christ's name to 
every creature, Gentiles as well as Jews; and that 
whoever sought to do the Lord's will to the best of 
his ability would be acceptable in the Lord's sight. 

The restitution call will be a very different one 
from any that has ever gone forth as yet. It will not 
be a call to faith and to reckoned forgiveness of sins, 
but a call to obedience and to the actual blotting out 
of sins. During the Millennial age the world of mankind 



will be dealt with according to the condition of 

each, and obedience to the extent of ability will be 

required of each individual. Every obedience will receive 

its reward, in the way of mental, moral and 

physical recuperation, restitution; and every disobedience 

will receive a just chastisement, and thus 

throughout that age all who will shall have the opportunity 

of development, mentally, physically, morally, 

until, at its close, if he has been obedient to the great 

Teacher, Christ, he will again be in the image and likeness 

of God, as was Father Adam, but with additional 

experience gained,— not only during the fall, but especially 

the experiences gained under the administration 

of Christ's government, during the Millennial 

period, while rising again; while being restituted out 

of sin and death conditions, into conditions of righteousness 

and life. 

What is now known to the Church of this Gospel 
age as "justification by faith" (in like manner also the 
ancient worthies were justified) will not be in operation 
during the Millennial age, nor be necessary; because 
the conditions then will be so different from 
present conditions. It is because "we walk by faith 
and not by sight,"— because faith is now so difficult, 
and therefore so rare, that it is so highly appreciated 
and rewarded of God. But when the Millennial age 
will have been ushered in, the age of faith will have 
passed— that will be the age of knowledge,— the age 
of evidences so clear, so unmistakable, that even "the 
wayfaring man, tho ignorant, shall not err therein, 
for the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, 
as the waters cover the face of the great deep." With 
knowledge thus abundant, so that there shall be no 
need to say to one's neighbor, "Know the Lord, because 
all shall know him," it follows that special faith 
will be impossible, and hence the rewards of special 
faith will no longer be offered. 

We do not mean to say that mankind during the 
Millennium will not believe; on the contrary, none can 
do otherwise than believe: we do mean to say, however, 
that there is a difference between believing and 
exercising faith. We now believe various things by 
faith, which the world in the next age will believe, 
not by faith but on evidence, by knowledge— it will 
be impossible for them to doubt them, seeing that the 
evidences will be so indisputable. For instance, now 
God tells us to reckon all of our past sins forgiven, 
and ourselves fully justified in his sight. Nevertheless, 
we continually see evidences of our own weaknesses 
in our minds and bodies. The sins are not 
blotted out; they are merely reckonedly covered. In 
the case of the Church's sins: they will not be blotted 
out until death shall destroy these mortal bodies, and 
until the Lord, in the first resurrection, shall grant us 
glorious, spiritual, perfect bodies. In them there will 
be no trace of sin or weakness or imperfection; all our 



sins will then be actually blotted out. But now we 
are required to believe in the covering of our sins; to 
exercise faith in God's declaration. Our next step of 
faith is in connection with the high calling to sacrifice 
earthly and temporal interests for the gaining of 
the heavenly glory, honor and immortality. But the 
heavenly crown and blessing are seen only with the 
eye of faith; and whoever runs in the race now set before 

R2677 : page 239 

us in the Gospel, must not only look with the eye 

of faith unto Jesus, as the author and finisher of our 

faith, but with the same eye of faith must see the 

crown of righteousness which the Lord, the righteous 

Judge, has laid up for those who are faithful. Thus 

ours is preeminently an age of faith, of reckoned conditions, 

and of trust in the promises: and it shall have 

its great and precious reward. 

Not so will be the conditions of the Millennial 
age, when ushered in. Knowledge will be there, as 
we have seen; and each day's experiences will result 
either in mental, moral and physical development, or 
in chastisements for failures to make progress. Such 
experiences will give ample demonstration of what 
may be expected as the ultimate outcome,— restitution 
as the reward of obedience, or the Second Death as 
the punishment of disobedience. 

The matter is clearly set before us in the Scriptures, 
which clearly teach that, during this age, the 
rule of divine dealing is, "According to thy faith be 
it unto thee," while the rule of the judgment of the 
world in the Millennial age is clearly laid down in 
Rev. 20:12: "I saw the dead, small and great, stand 
before God: and the books were opened; and another 
book of life was opened [the first book of life is called 
the Lamb's Book of Life, containing the names of the 
elect Church, his Bride:— this other Book of Life will 
be the book or record of those who shall pass the restitution 
trial or judgment satisfactorily], and the dead 
were judged out of those things which were written 
in the books [the Scriptures— John 12:48] according 
to their works." 

It would be a mistake to suppose that God will 
call mankind to sonship during the Millennial age, 
and not require them to make full consecration of 
themselves to him, and to that righteousness of which 
he is the personal representative. None can ever have 
eternal life upon any other condition than this— absolute 
obedience, and more— absolute harmony with the 
very spirit of the divine law, the law of righteousness, 
the law of love. And all who will be in harmony with 
the Lord to such an extent as this, would of necessity 
sacrifice, if there were opposition to the Lord or to 
righteousness which would make necessary a sacrifice 
of any kind, rather than deny the Lord and the 



principles of his holiness. 

The reason why there will be no sacrifices required 
of the world during the Millennial age is, that sin and 
Satan will no longer be in control— "this present evil 
world" (dispensation) will have passed away, and in 
its stead will have been ushered in "the world to come, 
wherein dwelleth righteousness"— wherein righteousness 
will be the rule, wherein the King and all in favor 
with him and every feature of government will be one 
of righteousness, truth and love. 

To suppose the restitution call already commenced, 
would be to suppose that God had in some manner 
authorized some one to announce that henceforth no 
one would suffer for right doing, but only for wrong 
doing; and that henceforth whoever sought to do right 
to the best of his ability, would find himself unopposed 
therein, and that his every effort would promptly 
bring mental, moral and physical strength and recuperation, 
which, going on and on, would by and by 
reach absolute perfection. Furthermore, it would be 
to promise that any who accepted this restitution call 
would never die the Adamic death; but on the contrary, 
accepting this call heartily, would find that day 
by day, year by year, the power of death in him was 
being vanquished and the process of restitution 
progressing. 

When that call shall go forth, and those restitution 
privileges shall be offered to mankind, it will be 
as the Prophet has declared, that no man shall thenceforth 
die for Adam's sin, nor for the sin of his fathers, 
but only for his own sin. (Jer. 31:29,30.) We understand 
that this time will not be reached until after 
the time of trouble— not until A.D. 1915. To our understanding 
from that date onward, the Kingdom being 
fully established, the call of the world to restitution 
privileges will be opened, and whoever shall then die 
will die for his own sin [Second Death] and not for 
father Adam's; and whoever will then be obedient to 

R2678 : page 239 

the Lord will experience the blessings of his grace in 
restitution,— actual, perceptible recovery beginning 
at once, as the reward to the faithful under the restitution 
call. 

The sense in which Millennial blessings and favors 
are already lapping upon the Gospel age, to our understanding, 
is this: First, knowledge, inventions, 
etc., are bringing to the world of mankind blessings 
never hitherto enjoyed, and which are really intended 
for the Millennial age, and are merely being gotten 
ready or prepared in this "day of God's preparation." 
(2) Restitution blessings are lapping also, in the sense 
that these inventions, etc., are gradually leading on 
to the great time of trouble, in which present institutions, 
social, financial, political, religious, will all be 



overthrown— that in their stead God may bring in the 
better provisions and arrangements of the Millennial 
Kingdom. (3) Restitution blessings are coming to 
the Church now, in the sense that she is permitted to 
foresee these coming blessings upon the world, and to 
rejoice exceedingly, and to lift up her heart in thankfulness 
and praise to him who loveth us and who 
bought us with his own precious blood, and to realize 
how it is "the propitiation for our sins, and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." 

(4) Question.— Suppose some one should say, "I 
wish to give up this present world and all its honors 
and pleasures, to obey and follow Christ, no difference 

R2678 : page 240 

what trials and persecutions it may bring; but I have 

no expectation of salvation on the divine plane, and I 

am not running for that prize. Salvation on the human 

plane is better than I deserve, no matter how 

much it may cost me to follow Christ now, in the opening 

years of his reign, before Satan is bound. I am 

glad of an opportunity to show my loyalty under adverse 

circumstances, which will prove that I am sincere." 

Who may say that such an one might not 

come in under the restitution call? 

Answer.— The Apostle, on one occasion, said, 
"The times of this ignorance God winked at"— took 
no account of. So all the way down through this Gospel 
age, while this "high calling" has been presented, 
there doubtless have been some of the Lord's followers 
who have not clearly grasped his promises in all 
their length and strength and beauty,— many who did 
not clearly understand that the overcomers of this age 
are to be heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, 
and partakers of glory, honor and immortality. Their 
ignorance, however, did not alter the call nor the 
Lord's engagement. The heavenly Father is, so to 
speak, dealing with Christ rather than with us, and 
thus it is written that we are "accepted in the Beloved." 
Whoever, therefore, during this Gospel age, 
has fully consecrated himself to the Lord as his Master, 
fully trusting in him also as his Redeemer, and 
seeking to walk in his footsteps, the same is an heir 
of God and a joint-heir with Jesus Christ, his Lord, 
whether he knew it or not; just as it would be in respect 
to an earthly inheritance. 

It might seem strange that a son should not 
have some knowledge of his father's wealth and of his 
father's intention to give him a portion, but the son's 
ignorance would not alter in any degree the father's 
will, nor hinder him from participating in its provisions. 
So we should say respecting those of the 
Lord's faithful ones during this age, who have not 
been aware of how great things "God hath in reservation 
for them that love him." And this applies 



also to such an one as you mention in this question: 
his ignorance will not alter the divine arrangement; 
and if he faithfully follow the Lord now, we have 
every reason to believe that in the regeneration he 
shall sit in his throne, whether he expects so great a 
favor or not. Nevertheless, we should expect that 
now the Lord would graciously reveal to such a faithful 
sacrificer his goodly heritage. There surely is no 
Restitution Call at the present time— no offer, yet, of 
an opportunity to grow out of imperfection and death, 
into perfection in God's likeness, and into life 
everlasting. 



page 240 

THE CHICAGO CONVENTION. 
CHANGE OF DATE, TO AUGUST 25,26,27. 



IT HAS BEEN found necessary to change our Convention 
dates to one week earlier than announced 
in our last issue. All arrangements are now complete 
as follows:— 

RAIL ROAD RATES, ETC. We are taking advantage 
of the extremely low rail road rates granted to 
the "G.A.R. Encampment," but open to everybody: 
so Excursion Tickets for the "G.A.R. Encampment," 
(and not for our Convention), should be called for. 
Make full inquiry of your R.R. ticket agent in advance, 
respecting date when he will have these cheap 
tickets on sale. 

HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS. The Chicago brethren 
assure us that they have made very complete arrangements 
for our entertainment, at reasonable rates. 

"Hotel Grace," Cor. Clark St. and Jackson Boulevard 
has been secured for headquarters. It is centrally 
located— within walking distance of all depots. A 
number of comfortable apartments have been secured 
at 50 cents per night each person— two in a bed: a few 
choicest rooms 75 cents each person. State which you 
desire reserved for you. 

Restaurants are numerous in the vicinity of the 
hotel and hall. Plain meals can be had at from fifteen 
cents upward. 

THE CONVENTION HALL. The committee has secured 
the use of "The People's Institute," corner of 
Van Buren and Leavitt Streets. It is commodious— 
probably quite beyond our needs— having a seating 
capacity of eighteen hundred. It is about 30 minutes 
ride from our hotel headquarters, and may be reached 
by the Garfield Park train on the Metropolitan Elevated 
Road: Get off at Hoyne Station. Or take the 



Van Buren Street car to Leavitt Street, or the Leavitt 
Street Car to Van Buren St. 

BAPTISM SERVICE. Arrangements for baptism 
—robes, towels, etc., are complete; so that any desiring 
thus to symbolize their consecration can be accommodated 
on Monday afternoon, August 27. 

WRITE US FOR PARTICULARS, as soon as you decide 
that you can attend, and have learned when your 
train will reach Chicago. Make your letter brief and 
to the point; thus for instance: "Our party will consist 
of six— two males and two females single, and one married 
couple. We expect to reach Chicago at 1 1 o'clock 
A.M. August 25, via Chicago and Northwestern R.R. 
We desire the fifty cent lodgings." Mention names. 

COMMITTEE OF RECEPTION of Chicago Church 
will, so far as possible, meet the friends at depots on 
arrival of trains indicated— at the door of the Ladies' 
Waiting Room. Each may recognize the other by 
seeing a WATCH TOWER in his hand. However, should 
you for any reason fail to meet one of the committee, 
you can easily find a lunch room, and then "Hotel 
Grace" or the Convention Hall, at the addresses above 
given. 

A LARGE ATTENDANCE EXPECTED. 

All who trust in the "precious blood" as man's 
atonement price are cordially invited. We anticipate 
a large attendance, and urge that all who come shall 
seek to bring with him the Lord's blessing, that all 
in attendance may be blessed and that the influence 
of the Convention may be far-reaching for good to the 
Lord's flock and to the Chief Shepherd's praise. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY 


