Announcements
“LIVING UP TO THE NAME” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Do you profess or would you like to be one of Jehovah’s witnesses? Then you sincerely want to walk worthy of the name. You will appreciate, too, the intent of the June Testimony Period, entitled “Living Up to the Name”. We are sure you will be with us in carrying out the program of activity for this month. Toward delivering the witness in harmony with our God-given name, we are offering the three bound books “Let God Be True”, “The Kingdom Is at Hand” and “The Truth Shall Make You Free”, on the nominal contribution of one dollar for all three books. It is mutually strengthening to have your cooperation in this testimony, and our joined efforts work together to give a more impressive witness and to prove that the Most High God has a people on earth who uphold the honor of his name. He knows all the efforts you put forth, not for praise from man but from him. Nevertheless, we should appreciate your making out a report of the month’s work and results, on our form therefor, that we may compile a combined report.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 16: “A Victory Dedicated to Jehovah’s Honor,” ¶1-22 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15, 1950.
Week of July 23: “A Victory Dedicated to Jehovah’s Honor,” ¶23-43 inclusive, The Watchtower June 15, 1950.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
From August 26 to September 5 inclusive the Bethel home and factory printing plant will be closed down to give the family a rest period. No mail or correspondence will be handled during this period. This announcement is made now so that all company servants and pioneers can make plans early and order needed supplies before that time.
The Bethel family will be busy during the entire convention period, but the factory and home will be opened for visitors the Monday and the days following the convention and will be operating for three weeks thereafter until the vacation period begins, on August 26, 1950.
SAVE
your personal or home copy of each issue of The Watchtower. Do not throw them away, but preserve them in a binder or drawer or on library shelves. At the end of each year, in its December 15 issue, The Watchtower contains an index of subjects and an index of all the scriptures cited, quoted and commented upon in all the leading articles throughout the year. By saving your copies and keeping them in date order you will have an invaluable reference library for consultation in your study of the Bible. Organized companies should preserve copies in the library of their local Theocratic ministry course school.

