





Making the Most of Life Today

LIFE without the painful effects of sickness, old age, and death​—that wonderful future can be yours! Even so, life today is still filled with harsh realities and problems. What can help you to make the most of life today? The Bible offers guidance that can lead you to a happy and satisfying life now. Consider some of life’s challenges and how the Bible can help.



FINDING CONTENTMENT

The Bible’s advice: “Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things.”​—Hebrews 13:5.
The world today bombards us with countless must-have products and services. Yet, the Bible says that we can be “content with the present things.” How?
Avoid “the love of money.” People sacrifice health, family, friendships, morals, even their dignity​—all for “the love of money.” (1 Timothy 6:10) What a high price to pay! In the end, a lover of wealth “will never be satisfied.”​—Ecclesiastes 5:10.
Value people, not things. Granted, material things have their place. But things cannot love or appreciate us; only people can do that. Having “a true friend” contributes to our contentment in life.​—Proverbs 17:17.
WE CAN MAKE THE MOST OF LIFE TODAY BY FOLLOWING THE BIBLE’S GUIDANCE




COPING WITH POOR HEALTH

The Bible’s advice: “A joyful heart is good medicine.”​—Proverbs 17:22.
Like “good medicine,” joy can help us to cope with poor health. But how can we find joy when we suffer from poor health?
Be appreciative. If we dwell on our afflictions, “all the days” will appear bad. (Proverbs 15:15) Instead, “show yourselves thankful,” says the Bible. (Colossians 3:15) Learn to appreciate the good things in life, however small. A beautiful sunset, a gentle breeze, the smile of a loved one​—these things can enrich our life.
Do things for others. Even if our health is not good, “there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” (Acts 20:35) When others appreciate our efforts, we feel a warm glow of satisfaction, and this takes our mind off our problems. We can make our life better by helping others to make their life better.



STRENGTHENING MARRIAGE

The Bible’s advice: “Make sure of the more important things.”​—Philippians 1:10.
Couples who spend little time together risk drifting apart. Husbands and wives are thus wise to give priority to their marriage​—one of the more important things in life.
Do things together. Instead of pursuing personal interests alone, why not plan on doing things together? “Two are better than one,” says the Bible. (Ecclesiastes 4:9) Together, you can cook a meal, exercise, relax over a beverage, or take up a hobby.
Express your love. The Bible encourages a husband and a wife to love and respect each other. (Ephesians 5:28, 33) A warm smile, a loving embrace, or a small gift can do much to strengthen a marriage. Of course, spouses should reserve expressions of sexual intimacy only for each other.​—Hebrews 13:4.



“AT LAST, I FOUND PURPOSE IN LIFE!”
—Told by Ryoko Miyamoto, Japan.
Life was hard. My husband abused alcohol and could not keep a job. He abandoned his responsibilities as father to our four children. No matter how hard I worked, there seemed to be no light at the end of the tunnel. I wondered, ‘Was this fate, or was this punishment for sins I had committed in a previous life?’
Then, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses came to my door. With a warm smile, she spoke enthusiastically about God’s Kingdom and everlasting life. She offered me a Bible study. I soon learned that God exists and that he is wise, just, and loving. I also learned about the condition of the dead and that my sufferings were not due to fate.
Above all, I came to appreciate that a truly satisfying life is built on a relationship with God. Knowing Bible truth has brought me much encouragement, freedom, and refreshment. At last, I found purpose in life!


