Jehovah’s Witnesses Around the World​—The Bahamas
THE Commonwealth of the Bahamas​—an archipelago of 3,000 islands and islets—​lies like a coral necklace across 550 miles [900 km] of turquoise sea between Florida and Cuba. Among its 267,000 inhabitants is a growing chorus of Kingdom proclaimers. Their song of praise calls to mind Isaiah 42:10-12: “Sing to Jehovah a new song, his praise from the extremity of the earth, you men that are going down to the sea and to that which fills it, you islands and you inhabiting them. . . . From the top of the mountains let people cry aloud. Let them attribute to Jehovah glory, and in the islands let them tell forth even his praise.”
New Faith Challenged
In July 1992, a regular pioneer (a full-time Kingdom preacher) placed with a business acquaintance the Bible study aid You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. After the man read the book, he told himself, ‘This religion is something I must look into.’ On the following two Sundays, he attended meetings at two different Kingdom Halls of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Next, a Bible study was started with him. However, only six weeks into his Bible lessons, a challenge arose that would test his fledgling faith​—birthday celebrations.
The businessman’s family was very much involved in such celebrations, but his love for God’s Word incited him to continue with his Bible lessons. As his knowledge of Scriptural truth increased, so did his understanding of birthday celebrations and worldly holidays and Jehovah’s view of them.
When this man’s wife organized a social gathering for Father’s Day, he politely refused to attend. She felt, though, that he did not love her anymore and was putting his religion ahead of her and the family. He kindly explained that applying what he was learning from the Bible was helping to transform him into a better husband and father. Eventually, she grew in appreciation for his love of Scriptural truth and agreed to study the Bible. Now he conducts a Bible study with his family. And what joy he had at the “Divine Teaching” District Convention this past year! His wife and daughter were present and saw him get baptized.
Immigrants Hear the New Song
Thousands of Haitian immigrants are blending into Bahamian society. They too need to hear the new song of Kingdom truth. The Witnesses living in the Bahamas are grateful that two Haitian-American couples have arrived. These individuals have helped to strengthen the newly formed Haitian groups on the islands of Grand Bahama and Abaco.
As a further aid to Haitians interested in the Kingdom message, the first Creole district convention ever held in the Bahamas took place from July 31 to August 1, 1993. Attendance reached 214, with three newly dedicated ones being baptized. Many Haitians who learned the truth in the Bahamas have since returned to their home island or have relocated elsewhere to add their voices to those of the local Witnesses in singing praise to Jehovah.
[Box on page 8]
COUNTRY PROFILE
1993 Service Yeara
PEAK NUMBER WITNESSING: 1,294
RATIO: 1 Witness to 197
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE: 3,794
AVERAGE PIONEER PUBLISHERS: 186
AVERAGE BIBLE STUDIES: 1,715
NUMBER BAPTIZED: 79
NUMBER OF CONGREGATIONS: 22
BRANCH OFFICE: NASSAU
[Footnotes]
For additional information, see the 1994 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture on page 9]
The first Kingdom Hall, with the branch office and missionary home
[Picture on page 9]
Witnesses zealously declare the good news
[Picture on page 9]
Milton G. Henschel and Nathan H. Knorr with missionaries in Nassau some 45 years ago
[Picture on page 9]
The new branch office, dedicated February 8, 1992

