Do You Remember?
Have you found the last several issues of The Watchtower to be of practical value? See if the following questions will call to mind some of the points discussed.
□ What are five lines of evidence you could use to prove that the Bible is from God?
Internal harmony; scientific accuracy; candor; preservation and prophecy.​—12/15, pages 4-7.
□ What important secret is mentioned in the apostle Paul’s letter to the Philippians?
This is the secret of dependency on God and serving him happily whether you have much or little materially. This brings a very satisfying life now and will contribute to the gaining of everlasting life. (Philippians 4:12, 13)​—12/15, page 30.
□ What today is the greatest issue facing all mankind?
It is the issue of man-rule or of God-rule by means of His Kingdom in the hands of Christ Jesus. There is no room for neutrality. All are obliged to be either for the Kingdom of God or against it. (Matthew 25:31, 32)​—1/1, pages 8, 9.
□ How can Christians benefit from Paul’s letter to Philemon?
In urging Philemon to accept his slave Onesimus back as a brother, Paul demonstrated his own counsel to show humility, love and concern for others. Christian overseers should likewise be careful to practice what they preach.​—1/1, page 26.
□ Why should a Christian take a serious look at the kind of music he enjoys?
Much of today’s music exalts immorality, rebellion, drugs and, at times, spiritism. Some classical music extols false worship and may even convey a composer’s philosophy. Being exposed to such music can present a real threat to a Christian’s morality and personality.​—1/15, pages 4-7.
□ How can imperfect humans overcome the bad habit of obscene speech?
Avoiding the use of obscene speech begins with learning to control the emotions and actions that lead to it. (Ephesians 4:31) Filling the mind with right thoughts from the Bible builds up right desires of the heart and this, in turn, will be reflected in good speech. (Matthew 12:34)​—2/1, page 7.
□ What valuable lesson does David’s experience with Bath-sheba and Uriah contain for us today?
It helps us to understand that imperfect people often do bad things because they entertain wrong desires. We can show that we have learned from this by our avoiding situations, as well as activities and entertainments, that work up “sexual appetite.” (Colossians 3:5; 1 Thessalonians 4:3-5)​—2/15, pages 8, 9.
□ Why is modesty a fine ornament for young and old?
Modesty is the course of wisdom for all to follow. (Proverbs 11:2) It keeps us from presuming too much and from promising more than we can deliver. It will also keep us from arousing in others a spirit of competition or rivalry. Modesty promotes peace of mind and contentment, which are essential to true happiness.​—3/1, page 11.
□ Why is God’s name, Jehovah, missing from most modern translations of the Bible?
Superstition that developed among tradition-bound Jews caused them to avoid pronouncing God’s personal name, Jehovah. This has contributed to worldwide ignorance regarding the divine name. Added to this has been Christendom’s tendency to focus attention on the person of Jesus Christ, thus relegating Jehovah to second place in their triune godhead.​—3/15, pages 5, 6.
□ In what different ways is the Greek word porneia used in the Bible?
Sometimes porneia is used in a limited sense, as applying to sex relations between unmarried (single) persons. (1 Corinthians 6:9) But it is also used in a broad sense, such as at Matthew 5:32 and Mt 19:9 where it evidently refers to a wide range of unlawful or illicit sex relations outside marriage.​—3/15, pages 29-31.
□ What three principles will help us to have a right view of welfare benefits?
Rely on Jehovah while accepting from the state those necessary benefits to which we may lawfully be entitled. Avoid the love of money. (Hebrews 13:5) In everything we do, consider the effect on God’s name. (1 Corinthians 10:31)​—4/1, page 11.
□ What is the antidote for sin and apostasy?
In his first letter the apostle John tells us that love is the key. God’s love expressed through his Son is the antidote for sin’s effects, and this knowledge should make us realize that “we are ourselves under obligation to love one another.” (1 John 4:8-11) True love for God and our neighbor will help us to resist all inroads of sin and apostasy.​—4/1, page 19.

