How Family Members Cooperate for a Full Share​—In Bible Study
1 The truth adds real meaning and purpose to family life, but success in serving Jehovah does not come automatically. It takes time and effort to build a spiritually strong household. There is a great need for family members to work closely together in this endeavor. This first article in a three-part series will focus on how families can cooperate in developing good study habits.
2 By Reading the Bible Every Day: Proverbs 24:5 states that “a man of knowledge is reinforcing power.” The knowledge gained from regularly reading God’s Word gives a person the inner strength needed to resist Satan’s assaults on his spirituality. (Ps. 1:1, 2) Do you read the Bible together daily as a family? The Theocratic Ministry School Schedule outlines a “Supplemental Bible-Reading Schedule” for each week of the year. Following it requires as little as ten minutes of a family’s time each day. Select a convenient time, such as at breakfast, after the evening meal, or before bedtime, to read the Bible and consider the day’s text from Examining the Scriptures. Make this a part of your family’s everyday routine.
3 By Studying Together Each Week: The family Bible study should be the highlight of a family’s week. Each member ought to support it by eagerly participating in the study. The family head will want to consider the family’s needs when selecting the study material and the day, time, and length of the study. Give the family study priority in the week’s schedule. Do not allow matters of lesser importance to interfere.​—Phil. 1:10, 11.
4 A father who often received business calls at his home would disconnect the telephone during the family study. If clients came to the house, they were invited to join in the study or wait until it was concluded. The father was determined that nothing would interfere with the family study. This made a profound impression on his children, and as for his business, it did well.
5 How pleasing it is when family members cooperate in spiritual activities! Faithfulness in our efforts to have a full share in family Bible study will bring Jehovah’s blessing.​—Ps. 1:3.

