Our Grand Creator Cares About Us!
1 In his endeavor to reason with disobedient Israel, Jehovah asked: “Have you not come to know or have you not heard? Jehovah, the Creator of the extremities of the earth, is a God to time indefinite.” (Isa. 40:28) We know our Grand Creator, and we see his loving care for us. However, millions of people doubt his existence or have a concept of him that does not correspond to what is found in the Bible. How can we help them?
2 The new book Is There a Creator Who Cares About You? is designed to help such people. It calls on thinking people to reason on the facts. The absorbing material and persuasive arguments in this book should captivate those who read it.
3 Become Familiar With the Creator Book: Have in mind a basic outline of its contents. Chapters 2 to 5 consider how the universe, life, and man came into existence and what is behind it all. Chapters 6 to 9 explore the Bible and its Author and, in particular, whether the Genesis record of creation is trustworthy. Chapter 10 gives a satisfying answer to one of the most perplexing questions that man asks: “If the Creator cares, why so much suffering?”
4 Try to Reason With Those Who Doubt: Pages 78-9 in the Creator book present a line of reasoning that you can use to help others reach the right conclusion about God. Ask them: “Did the universe have a beginning?” Most will agree that it did. If so, ask: “Was that beginning without any cause or was it caused?” Most recognize that it was caused. This leads to the final question: “Was the beginning of the universe caused by some thing eternal or by some One eternal?” This approach can lead many to see that there must be a Creator.
5 The Creator book is just what many people need. Share it with your relatives, workmates, schoolmates, and other acquaintances. Carry it with you in the ministry so that you can place it with those you meet who have doubts about God’s existence. The more familiar we get with this book, the stronger our love for our Creator will become, moving us to continue walking in accord with his lofty standards.​—Eph. 5:1; Rev. 4:11.

