“Put On the New Personality”
1 Christians appreciate knowing the truth! We have learned how to live in order to avoid the course of those in the world. Being “alienated from the life that belongs to God,” they “are in darkness mentally.” (Eph. 4:18) We have been taught to make our minds over from worldly thinking by stripping off the old personality and putting on the new.​—Eph. 4:22-24.
2 The old personality leads to a continuous downward course of moral degradation, resulting in defilement and death. Therefore, we call upon those who will listen to the Kingdom message to put away all wrath, anger, badness, abusive speech, and obscene talk. Those desiring God’s favor must put away the old personality decisively and completely​—in the way they would strip off a dirty garment.​—Col. 3:8, 9.
3 A New Force Actuating the Mind: Putting on the new personality involves being made new in the force actuating our minds. (Eph. 4:23) How does one make that force, or mental disposition, new so as to be inclined in the right direction? This is done by regularly and diligently studying God’s Word and meditating on what it means. Then, a new pattern of thinking develops, and the person sees things from the viewpoint of God and Christ. One’s life is transformed as he clothes himself with an array of Christlike qualities, including compassion, kindness, lowliness of mind, mildness, long-suffering, and love.​—Col. 3:10, 12-14.
4 By putting on the new personality, we set ourselves apart from the world. Our way of life makes us different. We speak truth and use wholesome speech to build others up. We control our anger, bitterness, screaming, abusiveness, and all badness and replace these with righteous, godly qualities. We go beyond what is usually required of us in being forgiving. All of this is done readily from the heart.​—Eph. 4:25-32.
5 Never take off the new personality. We cannot serve Jehovah acceptably without it. Allow it to help draw people to the truth, and allow it to glorify Jehovah, the Creator of our wonderful new personality.​—Eph. 4:24.

