Announcements
TELL THE PEOPLE “UNTIL CITIES BE WASTE WITHOUT INHABITANT”
When the Almighty Creator, Jehovah, commissioned his servant Isaiah to “Go, and tell this people, . . . Until cities be waste without inhabitant”, Jehovah did not force Isaiah to obey. (Isa. 6:9, 11, AS) No, Isaiah volunteered gladly; obediently he responded and offered himself. Today, as in Israel, when a like condition exists in Christendom that calls’ for a similar message, there are persons who willingly follow Jehovah’s commands, and these give the warning message from God’s Word. Whatever may be the response, their kindly purpose is to announce the kingdom of salvation and to give advance warning of the evil to follow a rejection of that kingdom. Why not associate with an organization so engaged, abandon doomed Christendom and turn to Jehovah? In view of the divine command, there is no need to hesitate or wait. The time is limited. So take the wise and profitable course, engage in this telling work, with Jehovah’s witnesses and offer the Watchtower magazine on a subscription basis of $1 per year. Share in this world-wide work starting in the month of January. Then report your activity to the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses, or send it in to us.
1952 YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
Now released are the 1952 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Calendar. Both serve a very practical and helpful purpose in the home of every sincere, God-loving family that wants to serve Him more acceptably. The Yearbook presents for consideration a Bible text, with appropriate explanatory comment that will supply food for thought, for every day in the year. Besides, the Yearbook gives extensive space to an absorbing report detailing the thrilling experiences of Jehovah’s witnesses in their teaching and preaching activities throughout the earth during the past year. The calendar keeps before the eye stimulating Bible texts and themes, in addition to a striking portrayal of the yeartext in beautiful colors. The contribution accepted for the Yearbook is 50c, and the calendars are 25c each, or five or more copies of the calendar to one address at the rate of 20c each. Send for your copies now and enjoy their use to the full.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 3: The Unity of God’s Visible Organization.
Week of February 10: Organizing for the Ministry.

