Furthering Reconciliation with Perfect Government
NEVER before has this earth seen so much strife, confusion and dishonesty within and between nations as today. What is the remedy? What is needed is a perfect world government with the power to enforce its perfect decrees.a
As Christian witnesses of Jehovah we know that God alone is the provider of such a world government for man. It is the kingdom for which men have been praying for nineteen centuries. Jehovah will see to it that men of good will toward him someday will be able to enjoy to the full such a government. His Word leaves no question about that. In fact, Jesus’ very prayer is a guarantee that God’s kingdom rule will hold sway over this earth. All who would enjoy its benefits must become its loyal subjects.—Matt. 6:9, 10.
Fulfillment of Bible prophecy shows that God’s kingdom has been ruling in the midst of its enemies since 1914. Shortly now, within this generation Jesus assures us, God’s kingdom will make an end of all opposition, both invisible and visible, and establish a righteous rule upon earth. It is therefore extremely urgent that all men of good will toward God be informed about His perfect government so that they can become reconciled to it before it is too late, before that perfect government destroys all enemies of God at Armageddon.
Whose privilege and responsibility is it to tell all about this perfect government and reconciliation with it? All those who already have been reconciled with it, as we read: “We are therefore ambassadors substituting for Christ, as though God were making entreaty through us. As substitutes for Christ we beg: ‘Become reconciled to God.’”—2 Cor. 5:20.
What good news we bear in this ministry of reconciliation! Here is a perfect government that will do everything perfectly: It will bring in perfect peace upon earth, perfect weather, perfect food, and an abundance of it. Its mental and physical health programs will give to mankind perfect bodies, perfect minds and even perfect dispositions! And, above all, everyone will be united in the perfect religion, worshiping the one true God Jehovah and loving his neighbor as himself. Then, too, instead of men dying, they will be coming back from the grave.—Isa. 11:9; John 5:28, 29; Rev. 21:4.
Surely, in view of such a message and in view of the urgency of the time we are living in, everyone that knows that these things are true will do all he can to further reconciliation with that perfect government. All should ask themselves, Am I truly doing all I can, buying out the opportune time, both for regular field ministry and incidental preaching? What about the quality of my preaching? Am I truly a teacher? During March let all of us make the most of all our opportunities to further reconciliation with God’s perfect government.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, April 15, 1959.

