Government by God
A GOVERNMENT by God is no strange thing to this earth. In Eden man was ruled by God. Centuries later the Israelites enjoyed God-rule. Jehovah gave them the Ten Commandments and many other regulations, which are recorded in the Bible. He established a system of worship for them. He appointed kings over them and established the dynasty of David. He clothed and fed them. He fought their wars and blessed their peace. He made them a holy nation. Jehovah was their government, as they proclaimed: “Jehovah is our Judge, Jehovah is our Statute-giver, Jehovah is our King; he himself will save us.”—Isa. 33:22.
That unique government by God was typical. It pointed forward to the everlasting government by God that should rule this earth. That is why Jesus Christ taught men to pray: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will come to pass, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matt. 6:9, 10) The time for the establishment of that everlasting government in the heavens, according to Bible prophecy, was the year 1914.
So let it be known that the true Christians on earth are living under the real heavenly kingdom of God right now! Jesus Christ, the “Lord of lords and king of kings,” is the head of that newborn heavenly government. (Rev. 17:14) The princely rule rests on his shoulders. He is the Prince of Peace. “To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end,” Isaiah’s prophecy says. All kingdoms of earth in opposition to that heavenly government now ruling will come to their end at Armageddon, the war of the great day of God Almighty.—Isa. 9:7; Rev. 16:16; Dan. 2:44.
Is the kingdom of God a real government? Yes! It has its King Jesus Christ and 144,000 associate kings. On earth it has subjects who submit to its rule and power. In fact, the New World society does that very thing. It recognizes God as rightful ruler. It abides by that fact in its organizational structure and operations, and it holds fast to God’s Word as furnishing mankind with a working constitution and righteous laws. The heavenly Kingdom government by God has close to a million earthly representatives, who submit to it by carrying out its laws. These representatives advocate the Kingdom government throughout the world as mankind’s only hope, as Jesus said would be done, at Matthew 24:14.—Rev. 14:1-3; 20:4.
Therefore, government by God is a reality in our day! No one need wait for it. Creatures of earth need only to ally themselves with it through faith, live by its principles, declare it to others and trust that it will accomplish God’s purpose.

