VOL. XIII. DECEMBER 1, 1892. NO. 23. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

PREPARING TO GIVE LIFE TO THE IMAGE. 



"The heavens shall be rolled together as a 
scroll" is a symbolical prophecy now nearing 
fulfilment. As has already been shown, the 
"heavens" in the symbolism of the Bible 
represent ecclesiastical powers— the nominal 
church— and the rolling together of these represents 
the concentration, federation or union 
now being so prominently discussed. 

"Rolled together as a scroll" is also a suggestive 
symbol. All who are familiar with a 
scroll of parchment, and its way of rolling together, 
know that it rolls from its two ends 
toward a common centre, yet that each side of 
the scroll has its own centre— two rolls, one 
scroll— a concentration to one centre but in 
two grand divisions. 

The preparation for just this sort of a union 
and concentration of nominal "Christendom" 
is very apparent, and the evidences that it is 
imminent are everywhere and are multiplying. 
The Protestants are preparing to form one side 
or roll, and the Roman Catholics to constitute 
the other. The various denominations of Protestants, 
although uniting in the call for union, 
are doctrinally as radically opposed to each 
other as ever— Presbyterians holding that only 
the elect will be saved from eternal torment; 
Baptists claiming that only such as have been 



immersed are members of the true Church which 
alone will be saved; Episcopalians claiming 
that they only constitute the true Church; and 
other Protestant denominations making more 
or less similar claims. 

The secular press abounds with intimations 
which clearly show the general drift in the direction 
named: Conferences and Councils endorse 
it; individuals talk it in and out of the 
pulpits; and the secular as well as the religious 
press commends it. Few but ourselves see that 
what outwardly has an appearance of good will 
prove to be antagonistic to the truth— as a 
similar centralization of religious power proved 
to be injurious to the truth and its servants 
during "the dark ages"— and our judgment 
is what it is, not from greater human wisdom 
than others, but because of wisdom from above 
—through God's Word. 

In MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., Chapter iv., 
we show that the beginning of Protestant centralization 
took shape in 1846, in the formation 
of the Evangelical Alliance, a fact that is noted 
in the Book of Revelation as the making of an 
image of the (Papal) Beast. This Image is a 
partial federation of Protestants, but as yet it 
lacks all vitality; and the present agitation for 
vital union, when accomplished, will correspond 
to the vivifying or giving of life to the Image. 
(Rev. 13:15.) So soon as the vitalizing takes 
place, that Protestant system, a veritable likeness 
to the Papal, will similarly to it command 
the people in the name of God to obey its behests, 
and threaten them with both temporal 
and spiritual punishments for any resistance. 
An agreement between the original Papal Beast 
(system) and the Protestant Image (system) is 
clearly indicated by the statement that all must 

R1474 : page 356 

worship [reverence and obey] either the Beast 
or the Image. (Rev. 13:15-17.) This harmony 
and yet distinctness between the Beast and the 
Image is likewise indicated in the scroll with 
its two parts— yet joined and of one material. 

The Protestant movement for union or rather 
federation has already received quite an impetus 
from the formation of the "Young People's 
Society of Christian Endeavor." This unites 
under one name young Protestants of every denomination; 
but so far from opposing or even 
ignoring sectarianism, it fosters it by obligating 
each Christian Endeavorer, to belong to some human 
institution, and exacting of him the promise 
to attend preaching at his own church every 



Sunday, so far as practicable, and to co-operate 
with its pastor and its rules. 

The success of the young folks' movement 
has naturally led to the starting of similar 
union movements amongst senior Christians. 
One of these, recently started, and which thus 
far is making rapid progress, is styled the 
"Brotherhood of Christian Unity." As an 
evidence of this drift of public sentiment we 
note the fact that The Review of Reviews, in its 
issue of last February, published four distinct 
papers on this subject under the general head, 
"The Laymen's Movement." (1) "The Brotherhood 
of Christian Unity:" An explanation 
of the movement by its founder, T.F. Seward. 
(2) "Denominationalism on the Frontier:" An 
effort to show that denominationalism on the 
frontier is a serious drawback. (3) "Religious 
Co-operation in Maine:" An article by 
the President of Bowdoin College, to show that 
denominationalism is wholly unsuited to small 
towns and villages, and should be regarded as 
a city luxury. (4) "The Next Step Toward a 
Civic Church:" A report of an English movement 
and an address by W. T. Steed. The 
address urges the necessity of a Civil-Church 
organization to deal with all questions of morality. 
In it, under the caption "A Christianity 
that includes the Jews," we read: "I am glad 
to see on the platform the Rabbi of the Jews. 
I sincerely hope that he will not consider, 
when I use the word Christian, that I use it in 
such a sectarian sense as to exclude him [a Jew] 
from the field." 

The same magazine in its issue for October 
has no less than eight articles on the same general 
line, headed, "Religious Co-operation- 
Local, National and International," as follows: 
(1) "Practical Co-operation in Church work:" 
A review of the good prospects of lay co-operation 
in Christian work. (2) "New Methods 
Wanted in Home Missions:" A plea for the 
abandonment of denominationalism in frontier 
mission work. (3) "A Christian Brotherhood 
Sunday:" A request that on October 30th Christian 
ministers, everywhere, would preach a discourse 
setting forth the advisability of a Christian 
Unity Brotherhood. (4) "The Municipal 
Idea of the Church:" Urging Christian Unity. 
(5) "Progress of the Civic Centre Movement 
in England:" Showing that the movement 
begun in New Castle has spread to ten other 
cities and towns. (6) "The Reunion Conference 
at Gindelwald" (Switzerland). The report 
declares, "The whole tone of the discussions 
was most encouraging to those who hope 



that it may yet be possible for the Established 

[English] Church and the Presbyterians, Congregationalists, 

Methodists and Baptists to find 

a basis for fusion into a truly National Church." 

(7) "The Meaning of National Christianity:" 

In this paper the point is well made that 

none of the governments of the world are Christian 

governments. Then the question comes 

"How then does the State become Christian?" 

and the answer given is that it is by the passing 

and enforcing of Christian laws. (8) "The 

First Parliament of Religions:" An account 

of the Conference of all the religions of the 

world to be held at Chicago, in connection with 

the Columbian Exposition. 

This general movement for union is an encouraging 
sign of progress to many— all glad 
to get away from the narrowness of their own 
creeds, without openly repudiating them. If 
it were a desire for union upon a Bible basis— an 
effort to lay aside prejudices and names and to 
seek the one interpretation with which every 
portion of Scripture would harmonize, we too 
would hail it as the peaceful ushering in of the 
Millennial Day. But, alas! it is the cry of 
Peace! peace! when there is no peace. It is 
the cry of Union! union! when the only true 

R1474: page 357 

basis of Christian Union is omitted— Jesus! 

But this is not the case, says one. This proposal 
is for a Brotherhood of Christian unity. 
Oh, yes ! we know it is to be called Christian; 
but it is to include Antichrist's followers of 
every shade. As one writer cited above declares, 
such a use of the name Christian includes 
the Jews who crucified Christ as a blasphemer 
and impostor, and who still so regard 
him. It is to embrace Romanists whose false 
doctrines, yet unchanged, led their progenitors 
to persecute and "wear out the saints of the 
Most High." Yes! it prostitutes a most sacred 
name to uses of human ambition for such a 
colossal union as God's Word never authorized 
—a union of the works of the devil under the 
name of him who was manifested that he might 
destroy the devil. Surely the proposed union 
—vitalizing the Protestant image and bringing 
it into accord with the Papal (beast) system— is 
a master-stroke of Satan and one of the "strong 
delusions" of this time foretold by the Apostle. 
-2Thes. 2:11. 

But, as we said, all of these proposed unions 
ignore Christ's work as our Savior. Not one of 
them recognizes any need of a Savior. They 



are propositions of unions in disregard of the 
facts that all men are sinners and that the great 
sacrifice for sins was necessary. And the declaration 
of these facts is the gospel; and only 
such as accept of these declared facts by faith 
receive the forgiveness of sins or have a share 
in the benefits secured by the precious blood, or 
have a right to wear the holy name "Christian." 

Let us see: here is the pledge of the Brotherhood 
of Christian Unity. It reads as follows, 
the italicizing being ours:— 

"I hereby agree to accept the creed promulgated 
by the Founder of Christianity— love to 
God and love to man— as the rule of my life. 
I also agree to recognize as fellow-Christians, 
and members of the Brotherhood of Christian 
Unity, all who accept this creed and Jesus 
Christ as their leader. 

R1475 : page 357 

"I join the Brotherhood with the hope that 
such a voluntary association and fellowship 
with Christians of every faith will deepen my 
spiritual life and bring me into more helpful 
relations with my fellow-men. 

"Promising to accept Jesus Christ as my 
leader means that I intend to study his character 
with a desire to be imbued with his 
spirit, to imitate his example, and to be guided 
by his precepts." 

Surely this pledge binds all who take it to 
ignore faith in the cross, the real Scriptural 
condition of union, when it binds them to recognize 
those who ignore the atonement. It is 
made thus broad purposely to take into this 
fellowship those who deny our Lord's pre-human 
life and glory and those who deny justification 
by his blood. It is a union which ignores 
the foundation of Christian faith— the 
ransom; that ignores the fact that Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures. 

The projected and now assured World's Congress 
of Religions at Chicago next year might 
also be regarded as a favorable sign for our 
times, but for the same reasons above mentioned. 
Its leading spirits are working up a 
union and fraternity at the expense of the keystone 
of God's plan of salvation, Christ the 
Redeemer. Among numerous quotations from 
ministers, college presidents and prominent 
people generally, we did not notice one reference 
to the Savior of sinners. On the contrary:— 
One thinks that the Congress will lead 
to a "mutually good understanding among 
those of every name who believe in the Fatherhood 



of God and the brotherhood of man." 
[Nothing is said of those who are afar off from 
God, strangers and aliens through wicked works 
—nor of those to whom our Lord said, Ye are 
in no sense even Abraham's seed: "Ye are of 
your father the devil."] Another said: "Such 
a reunion would never have been possible until 
the present day; and it now marks a distinct 
epoch in the evolution of the race." Of course; 
—when man's fall, and the redemption and restitution 
from it, are ignored or lost sight of, 
the other extreme is grasped;— man's ape origin 
is implied, and present progress is considered to 
be a natural evolution. 

Another, commenting on the Congress, sums 
up the movement in words which confirm our 
criticisms above, saying:— 

"A religion which can claim at once the 
faith of Christians, Jews, Mohammedans and 
Confucians— granting the existence of such a 
faith— should be considered as doing away with 
doctrines in virtue of which these various religious 

R1475 : page 358 

groups not only contradict each other, 

but too often outlaw one another. I will add 

that this common religion, the only universal 

religion, is, by this very reason of its universality, 

the most conformed to the exigencies of 

human brotherhood; and it would not be difficult 

to show that it is also the least opposed 

to the pretensions of science, which tends to 

assure it an immense advantage in our epoch 

and social environment." 



R1475 : page 358 

"THOU PREPAREST A TABLE BEFORE ME. 

-PSALM 23:5.- 



When the Lord prepares a table we may be 
sure of several things: first, that it will be clean; 
secondly, that it will be good; thirdly, that it 
will be orderly, bountiful and beautiful. And 
wherever we find the truth thus carefully set 
before the household of faith— whether by the 
press, the pen or the pulpit— there we may be 
sure the spirit of the Lord has been at work, 
directing and superintending the matter. The 
Prophet Isaiah (Chapter 28:8), referring to the 



tables of popular theology now spread before 
the masses of nominal Christians, graphically 
described their present condition when he said, 
"For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, 
so that there is no place clean." For centuries 
past they have been feeding on the miserable 
husks of human tradition, until now a reaction 
has set in and they are vomiting forth the 
abominable stuff, and their tables are full of 
filthiness. 

Then again there are many more tables being 
spread with new traditions and human 
speculations, to which those are promptly invited 
who turn away in disgust from the old, 
polluted tables. In all of this the great adversary 
of the Church is diligently and faithfully at 
work with all his accustomed craft and cunning, 
using with great effect both the press and the 
platform, the two most potent agencies for 
reaching the people. 

It is an increasingly popular idea among religious 
journalists that such a journal should be 
a medium merely for the expression of all shades 
of human opinion upon all matters of divine 
revelation, and that each individual should abstract 
from them all what he conceives to be 
true, and reject the rest. But this is precisely 
what the readers, and often the editors, too, of 
such journals are unable to do, and the general 
confusion is only increased unto greater blindness 
and denser darkness, and thus the purpose 
of the adversary is accomplished. 

There is a deep responsibility to God which 
every man assumes, whether he realizes it or 
not, when he becomes a public teacher. "Whosoever 
shall break one of these least commandments, 
and shall teach men so, he shall be called 
the least in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever 
shall do and teach them, the same shall 
be called great in the kingdom of heaven."— 
Matt. 5:19. 

No table is fit for the household of faith to be 
summoned to that has not been spread by careful 
hands, fully submitted and obedient to the 
great Head of the house, whose directions are 
found in his Word. God says (Hab. 2:2) to 
some to whom he has granted a measure of ability 
to serve the household, and who (verse 1) are 
watching (studying his Word) to know what 
he would have them communicate— "Write the 
vision [what you have seen of divine truth] and 
make it plain upon tablets." That is, set it out 
in an orderly, systematic manner, "that he may 
run that readeth it"— that he may run for the 
prize. Observe that it is not every man that 
is called to make the truth plain, but that 



some of the class specified are called to do 

so for the benefit of all the rest. In the Scriptures 

there are many surface truths which all 

may see and appreciate, but the systematic 

ordering of the divine plan, much of which was 

purposely hidden and obscurely expressed, and 

the bringing out of its wonderful details, was 

left for an appointed time. And when the appointed 

time has come and the faithful watcher 

is led to see the systematic harmony of divine 

truth— not to guess at it, or to surmise about it, 

but to see it, so plainly that he can clearly, 

logically and Scripturally demonstrate it to 

others— then it becomes the privilege of such a 

R1475 : page 359 

one to make plain to others what the Lord has 
made plain to him. And such a one may consider 
his ability in this direction (together with 
a possible opportunity and a strong love for the 
saints, which longs to bless them with a fuller 
knowledge of God and to exhort and stimulate 
them to greater faithfulness) as the Lord's call 
to him to make it plain. 

But such should remember that the commission 
is to "make it plain," not to make it obscure. 
And if a man has no truth to make 
plain, but is only seeking for truth, he makes 
a great mistake in launching out his crude and 
inharmonious ideas for the confusion of other 
minds. Such a one should maintain the proper 
attitude of a disciple, a learner, until he does 
see clearly and is thus fitted to become a 
teacher of others. And if he is a faithful 
student, studying to show himself a workman 
approved unto God, ere long he may enjoy the 
privilege of declaring the truth to others 
through some medium, and be greatly blessed 
in so doing. 

Let none of the consecrated be in haste to 
rush into print with crude, undefined ideas, 
and thus become stumbling-blocks in the way 
of many others. Be content to spread the truth 
you have received, and proved to your thorough 
satisfaction, before some other hungry saints; 
but keep the table clean: don't make up for 
your deficiency of knowledge by spreading out 
a host of idle speculations. Better is a pure 
morsel from a clean table than great abundance 
under other conditions. By and by to this 
morsel another morsel will be added, and in due 
time the wealth of divine bounty will be realized. 



R1476 : page 359 

WHAT A DISTURBANCE MAY DO. 



"A disturbance or alarm in a hospital or asylum 
might prove fatal to some of the inmates. 
An elderly gentleman in a benevolent institution 
amused himself awhile by beating a drum 
before sunrise. The authorities finally requested 
this "lovely brother" to remove his instrument 
to a respectful distance. This illustrates 
the reason why earnest pastors grow serious 
when a disturbance arises in the church. The 
church is like a hospital where are gathered sin-sick 
persons who in a spiritual sense are fevered, 
leprous, paralytic, wounded and half dead. A 
disturbance, like the present cruel distraction 
which emanates from some of our Theological 
Seminaries, may destroy some souls who are 
now passing through a crisis. Will Prof. Briggs 
please walk softly and remove his drum?" 

—Rev. C. E. Edwards, 

in Presbyterian Banner. 

The above is a remarkable statement, whose 
force consists chiefly in the fact that the writer is a 
Presbyterian minister who ought to know of its 
truth; and its publication by the Presbyterian 
Banner shows that the editor of that journal, 
feeling the pulse of the patients, agrees with the 
diagnosis. 

Let us examine the patient (Presbyterianism) 
carefully, and no doubt we shall find that its 
ailment more or less affects other systems called 
by men churches, and let us then thank God 
that the Church, the one Church, which is the 
body of Christ, has no such symptoms. 

"The [Presbyterian] church is like a hospital 
where are gathered sin-sick persons who in 
a spiritual sense are fevered, leprous, paralytic, 
wounded and half dead." In what a dreadful 
condition it is! We knew it was bad enough, 
but did not suppose that its own Doctors of 
Divinity appreciated the case so fully as this 
diagnosis would indicate. We are not even 
yet prepared to conclude that the diagnosis fits 
every individual member of Presbyterianism, 
though, alas ! it undoubtedly well describes the 
spiritual state of the vast majority. 

In view of the facts, can we wonder that 
Presbyterians fear any commotion or discussion 
of Biblical, scientific or other questions? Is 
it not their sympathy for the afflicted and weak 
among them that causes this alarm? And what 
are the Presbyterian Doctors doing for the sin-sick 



denomination which places itself under 

their care? Are they busily engaged in preparing 

and administering remedies to cure 

these dreadful troubles? No! the only prescriptions 

compounded are anaesthetics to produce 

slumber! The cry is Peace, Peace! Let 

us have quiet! Stop beating any drum which 

R1476 : page 360 

might arouse the people to thought! Suggest 
and answer as few questions as possible. If 
any one blows a trumpet in Zion or cries aloud 
that the patients are being drugged and stupefied 
to death instead of being cured with the 
balm of Gilead— the truth— hound him down; 
crush him; destroy his voice and influence if 
he does not understand that the Presbyterian 
church is a hospital. Under present methods 
it will always be a hospital; or perhaps more 
properly it may be termed a "Home for Incurable;" 
for none are encouraged to hope for a 
realization of full forgiveness of sins, and some 
of the oldest of its Doctors disclaim a cure for 
even themselves, and still cry out, "Lord, have 
mercy upon us miserable sinners!" 

But how different is the condition of the true 
Church of Christ, whose names are written in 
heaven! It is not a hospital full of wounded, 
sin-sick, leprous and half-dead people. On 
the contrary, it is a band of cured ones, healed 
ones, dead indeed to the world, but alive toward 
God. They were indeed as others, sin-bitten 
and dying, but, having looked unto the 
crucified one, they were healed, justified freely 
from all things, "made whiter than snow;" 
and thus made ready, they were invited to become 
the companions and representatives of 
the Great Physician, and to be co-workers with 
him in curing the sin-sick world. 

We are glad to believe that the Presbyterian 
church contains some few of the members of 
the one true Church; but the sin-sick, palsied, 
leprous and half-dead are only so many yet in 
their sins, who, instead of finding the Great 
Physician and receiving the balm of Gilead, 
and obtaining a cure, have been the subjects 
of professional malpractice. They were put 
to bed (Isa. 28:20) and to sleep in the Presbyterian 
church after the manner usual in all 
other denominations. 

If Dr. Briggs and some others in the great 
Hospital Presbyterian will blow their trumpets 
and beat their drums effectually, they will certainly 
do somebody good; for even though 
they give very discordant and uncertain sounds, 



they may at least awake the sleepers. And 
though the confusion may annoy the patients, 
and especially the Doctors, the results cannot 
fail to benefit the truth-hungry among them. 

Let us who have it hold up the light! Sound 
the trumpet of truth! "Cry aloud; spare not: 
lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my 
people their transgressions."— Isa. 58:1. 



R1476 : page 360 

CONSEQUENTS OF DIVINE JUDGMENTS. 



As it is with the antecedents of Divine Judgment 
so it is with the process, and as it is with 
the process so it is with the consequents. If 
the antecedents of divine judgment are kept 
in view an adequate idea of the process may 
be obtained; but it is impossible to obtain an 
adequate idea of any part of divine judgment 
if its antecedent part is not kept in view. 
The first stage of divine judgment made it 
clear that "the first man" was then unfit for 
endless life, and the consequents thereof keep 
that lesson before the human mind from generation 
to generation. God does not judge 
man by some permission granted, request made, 
or wish expressed; nor does he judge him by 
some impulse of the human heart, conviction 
of the human mind, or dictate of the human 
conscience: he judges him by a definite law 
enforced by an adequate penalty. The penalty 
for sin is the sum of the consequents of divine 
judgment; and the consequents of divine 
judgment are the sum of the sentence which 
was pronounced upon man. In considering 
them it is safest to observe the order in which 
they are recorded. 

THE SENTENCE. 



"Unto the woman he [the Lord God] said, 
I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; 
in sorrow shalt thou bring forth children; 
and thy desire shall be subject [margin] 
to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee." 
-Gen. 3:16. 

The sentence is one of sorrow all around, 
only sorrow, and that of the bitterest kind. 
Even the multiplication of her children, which 



naturally to the mother would have been the 
multiplication of her joy, becomes to her the 

R1476 : page 361 

multiplication of her sorrow. There is no place 
left for individual equality or individual freedom; 
the wife is placed in subordination and 
in subjection to her husband. The position 
might become incentive to treatment of the 
most cruel and brutal nature; and as a matter 
of fact it has become so very extensively. 
The duration of the sorrow is the duration of 
the life: it is sorrow even unto death. Under 
this sentence "the whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until now" (Rom. 8:22); 
and no part of creation is subjected to 
intenser pain than is woman, who is its tenderest 
and fairest part. "A woman in travail" 
has been a symbol of agony throughout all 
ages. It would be difficult to exaggerate her 
manifold and harrowing sufferings, and all attempts 
to belittle them either distort or ignore 
the dire facts of the case. 

"And unto Adam he [the Lord God] said, 
Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of 
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree of which I 
commanded thee, saying, 'Thou shalt not eat 
of it': cursed is the ground for thy sake; in 
sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy 
life: thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth 
unto thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the 
field; in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat 
bread till thou return unto the ground: for out 
of it thou wast taken: for dust thou art, and 
unto dust shalt thou return."— Gen. 3:17-19. 

In this sentence pointed reference is made 
to the fact that Jehovah made man of the dust 
of the ground, and to the prohibition which 
he distinctly placed before him at his creation. 
(Gen. 2:7,17.) This sentence is a curse from 
beginning to end. The curse pronounced is 
the curse of the law of the first life. Cursedness 
is the anthithesis of blessedness. So long 
as man conformed to the Divine Law he was 
blessed, and as soon as he refused to conform 
to that law he was cursed. The curse is formulated 
in the sentence, and it is a formidable 
one. Instead of the spontaneous production 
of either the luxuries or the necessaries of life, 
strenuous and protracted efforts become indispensable; 
instead of joy dominating those efforts, 
they become dominated by sorrow; and 
instead of the sorrow being either trivial or brief 
it becomes profound and co-extensive with the 
life. In addition to "the herb of the field" 



being obtainable only by strenuous and protracted 
labor, there were to be "thorns and 
thistles" obtainable without any labor at all. 
The latter naturally choke the former, which 
increases and intensifies the toil, so that man's 
food is not obtainable without "sweat" being 
wrung from his face; and this hard, grinding, 
crushing toil continues until he is brought down 
to "the dust" again. All that man eats, all 
that man drinks, all that he wears and all that 
he breathes spring out of the ground, or are 

R1477 : page 361 

affected by it; so that in the curse pronounced 
upon the ground man is cursed in his entirety. 
Cursed in person and in environment, always 
cursed, and the curse is so heavy that sooner 
or later it reduces man into his original elements. 
It is sometimes quite complacently 
stated that "no curse" was passed upon man. 
In the face of this sentence such statements are 
most extraordinary. In its culmination this 
curse is the concentration of all curses. 

THE EXECUTION. 



"And all the days that Adam lived were 
nine hundred and thirty years: and he died." 
-Gen. 5:5. 

The execution of the sentence which was 
passed upon Adam is thus recorded in the oldest 
Registrar of Births and Deaths that is known 
to us. The death of Adam is recorded in conjunction 
with that of seven of his descendants, 
whose lives are all now considered to have 
been of extraordinary length. The shortest of 
the eight lives was 777, and the longest was 969 
years, but in each case the record ends with 
these unvarying and significant words— "and 
he died." The record of Adam's death is in 
perfect keeping with the sentence which was 
passed upon him, and also with the sanction 
of the law of life which was given to him. 
When Jehovah said to Adam: "Of the tree of 
the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not 
eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof 
thou shalt surely die" or (as it is in the 
margin) "dying thou shalt die" (Gen. 2:17), 
that was not equivalent to saying: Dying thou 
shalt die in twenty-four hours. And when Jehovah 

R1476 : page 362 



said to Adam: "Dust thou art, and unto 

dust shall thou return" (Gen. 3:19), that 

was not equivalent to saying, Unto dust shalt 

thou return in twenty-four hours. A "day" 

may be of twenty-four hours, or of one thousand 

years, or of any intermediate duration. In 

neither the law given nor the sentence pronounced 

has anything definite been found 

touching the element of time. It appears to 

have been purposely left indefinite, and that 

no doubt for adequate reasons. Throughout 

the whole Bible the term "day" is very largely 

used to express an indefinite period of time. 

"The day of temptation," "the day of visitation," 

"the day of prosperity," "the day 

of adversity," "the day of Egypt," "the day 

of Jerusalem," etc., may be taken as examples 

of this usage. The sin of Adam forfeited his 

life, and therefore his death was certain. 

Whether Adam died instantaneously or not for 

one thousand years could not affect either the 

nature of the penalty or the certainty of its infliction; 

but it could affect, and it did affect, 

many other things. In human jurisprudence 

mistakes are often made and criminals often 

escape, but in divine jurisprudence no mistake 

is ever made nor does any criminal ever escape. 

Ultimately these three small but significant 

words— "and he died"— were recorded respecting 

Adam, and his death had been inevitable 

from the moment in which he sinned. 

There are some points which require special 
emphasis here:— 

(1) In the Law, the Sentence, and the Execution 
of the Sentence, the death mentioned is 
the death of the man. The record of man's 
formation stands thus: "The Lord God formed 
man of the dust of the ground, and breathed 
into his nostrils the breath of life; and man 
became a living soul." (Gen. 2:7.) This is the 
earliest record that there is of man, and throughout 
the Bible his component parts are spoken 
of in accordance with it. In the Law it is not 
said, thy body shall surely die, nor thy spirit shall 
surely die, nor thy soul shall surely die; but it 
is said, "Thou shalt surely die." In the sentence 
it is not said, unto dust shall thy body 
return, nor unto dust shall thy spirit return, 
nor unto dust shall thy soul return; but it is 
said, "Unto dust shalt thou return. And in 
the record of Adam's death it is not said, his 
body died, nor his spirit died, nor his soul died; 
but it is said, "he died." It is not this, that, 
or the other part of the man that is spoken of, 
but the man from first to last. The annihilation 
of this, that, or the other part of the man 



is not under consideration here. That may be 
possible or it may be impossible, but it has 
nothing whatever to do with the present subject. 
The subject under consideration here is 
the death pronounced in the sentence, and that 
is the death of the man. 

(2) In the Law, the Sentence, and the Execution 
of the Sentence, the death mentioned 

is the first death. In the Law Jehovah did not 
say unto Adam, Thou shalt surely twice die; 
but he did say, "Thou shalt surely die." In 
the Sentence Jehovah did not say unto Adam, 
Unto dust shalt thou twice return; but he did 
say, "Unto dust shalt thou return." And in 
the record of Adam's death it is not said, he 
twice died; but it is said, "he died." Had 
two deaths been intended two deaths would 
have been stated. The one statement could 
have been made as easily as the other. The fact 
that two deaths are not once mentioned here 
makes it quite clear that two deaths were never 
intended to be inflicted, as far as the first stage 
of divine judgment is concerned. 

In England the law is that a murderer shall 
be put to death; the judge in passing sentence 
on the convicted murderer generally says that 
he shall hang by the neck until he is dead; 
and after the execution the coroner's jury generally 
brings in a verdict that he died according 
to the sentence pronounced. After that, were 
any sheriff to conceive that the convict had to 
die twice, and to attempt to execute him the 
second time, what would be the result? Instead 
of being any longer fit for his office, rational 
men would consider him fit for a lunatic 
asylum. Were he able to carry out his intention 
that would not mitigate his folly; and the 
fact that he could not do so would merely enhance 
it. The dogma of two deaths to one life 
as the penalty of sin is unmitigated folly. A 
more fiendish dogma can be found, but a more 
foolish one it is scarcely possible to find. 

R1477 : page 363 

(3) In the Law, the Sentence, and the Execution 
of the Sentence, the death mentioned 

is hereditary death. When God said to Adam, 

"Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the 

earth" (Gen. 1:28), he spoke of the extension 

of hereditary life. When Adam sinned he forfeited 

life. That life was poisoned in its head 

before it was extended at all. It was impregnated 

with the seed of death, and became a 

dying life, before it left Adam. Adam could 

not extend what he no longer had for himself 



—untainted life. He extended what he had— 
tainted life— life which inevitably ends in death; 
and that (tainted) life has been extended from 
sire to son, from generation to generation, and 
from age to age ever since. In addition to 
observation and experience there is inspired 
testimony clear and distinct on this point: "By 
one man sin entered into the world, and death 
by sin; and so death passed upon all men, in 
whom [margin] all have sinned." "By one 
man's offence death reigned by one." "The 
creation was made subject to vanity, not willingly." 
"In Adam all die." (Rom. 5:12,17; 
8:20; 1 Cor. 15:22.) Individual sin, except 
in the first man, has nothing to do with hereditary 
death. It extends to all mankind, not 
merely to the hoary-headed sinners, but to the 
new-born and unborn babes as well. 

(4) In the Law, the Sentence, and the Execution 
of the sentence, the death mentioned 
is not endless torment. Such is the perversity 
of human nature that it is still necessary to reiterate 
this. Torment is a consequent of human 
transgression, and also a consequent of divine 
judgment, but not endless torment. Transgression 
and torment are inseparable, but neither 
is endless. In the Law Jehovah said, "Thou 
shalt surely die;" but he did not say, Thou shalt 
surely be always tormented. In the Sentence 
Jehovah said, "Unto dust shalt thou return;" 
but he did not say, Unto endless torment shalt 
thou return. And in the record of Adam's 
death it is said, "he died;" but it is not said, 
he entered into endless torment. As it was in 
the law given to Adam, the sentence passed 
upon him, and the execution of that sentence, 
so it is throughout the whole Bible: there is no 
countenance whatever given to the hideous 
dogma that endless torment is either the penalty 
of human transgression or the consequent 
of divine judgment. 

Where death is the "capital punishment," 
were any sheriff to attempt to substitute torment 
for death he would be met by a howl of execration 
throughout the length and breadth of the 
land. The tormentor himself would very speedily 
become the tormented. Were endless torment 
possible its inflictor would of all be the 
most deserving of it. Infidels have uttered 
many blasphemies against God, but of all blasphemies 
that which represents God as inflicting 
endless torment is the most infamous. It 
may truly be said that endless torment is the 
sum of all fiendishness; and to represent it as 
either the penalty of human sin or the consequent 
of divine judgment is the sum of all 



blasphemy against the character of God. 
"THE SECOND DEATH." 



"These things saith the first and the last, 
which was dead and is alive." "Be thou faithful 
unto death, and I will give thee a crown of 
life." "He that overcometh shall not be hurt 
of the second death." "Blessed and holy is he 
that hath part in the first resurrection; on such 
the second death hath no power." "And I saw 
the dead, small and great, stand before God; 
and the books were opened: and another book 
was opened, which is the book of life; and the 
dead were judged out of those things which were 
written in the books, according to their works. 
And the sea gave up the dead which were in 
it; and death and hades (R.V.) delivered up 
the dead which were in them; and they were 
judged every man according to their works. 
And death and hades were cast into the 
lake of fire. This is the second death. And 
whosoever was not found written in the book 

R1478 : page 363 

of life was cast into the lake of fire." "I am 
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. 
I will give unto him who is athirst of the water 
of life freely. He that overcometh shall inherit 
all things, and I will be his God, and he 
shall be my son. But the fearful, and unbelieving, 
and the abominable, and sorcerers, and 
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in 

R1478 : page 364 

the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: 
which is the second death."— Rev. 2:7-11; 
20:6,12-15; 21:6-8. 

The first death is recorded in the first part 
of the Bible, and the present phrase— "the 
second death"— is never once met with until 
the last part of the Bible is reached, thousands 
of years afterwards. This fact is highly suggestive. 
Before there was any second death 
there was the second sin (that is, the second 
"sin unto death"); before there was any second 
sin there was the second judgment (that is, 
the second judgment initiated); and before 
there was any second judgment there was the 
second life (that is, the second life in its initial 
stage). To deprecate the use of any of these 
phrases— the second life, the second judgment, 



or the second sin— would be to deprecate the 
use of their cognate phrase— "the second 
death." 

The recipient of the first life was tried and 
proved unfaithful. The recipients of the second 
life are being tried and they may individually 
prove either faithful or unfaithful. Their 
life is untainted when received, their knowledge 
is ultimately complete, their environment 
is appropriate, and their opportunity is ultimately 
adequate. He who proves faithful does 
so in accordance with his own will, and he 
who proves unfaithful does the same. To both 
is the promise made: "Be thou faithful unto 
death, and I will give thee a crown of life." 
On the faithful "the second death hath no 
power," they "shall not be hurt of the second 
death," their names will not be "blotted out 
of the book of life," their rank in resurrection 
is "the first," they are "heirs of God, and 
joint-heirs with Christ." "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with me in my throne, 
even as I also overcame and am set down with 
my Father in his throne."— Rev. 3:21. 

On the other hand, the opposite of all this 
is true of the unfaithful. The second death 
has power over them, they shall be hurt of the 
second death, their names shall be blotted out 
of the book of life, and they shall have their 
part in the lake which burneth with fire and 
brimstone. Receiving a "crown" and sitting 
on a "throne" are symbols of the regal, judicial 
and sacerdotal authority and power of the 
faithful, and "the lake which burneth with fire 
and brimstone" is a symbol of the instrumentality 
which effects the doom of the unfaithful. 
The sum of the consequents of divine judgment, 
so far as the faithful are concerned, is 
endless life, and the sum of the consequents of 
divine judgment, so far as the unfaithful are 
concerned, is endless death. 

It is very easy for any Universalist to say: 
"These reprobates of men will have to undergo 
the horrors of the second death, but will rise 
again, for there shall be a resurrection of the 
dead, both of the just and unjust."— Acts 24:15. 

But how does he know that any man will rise 
again from the second death? No inspired 
man has yet said so, and the testimony of an 
uninspired man in such a case goes for nothing. 
If there is any inspired testimony on this 
point why is it not presented? Any child may 
quote as above, but the Apostle Paul does not 
even mention the second death in that passage, 
far less does he give in it any testimony in favor 
of a resurrection from the second death. 



"A resurrection of the dead" is one thing, and 
a resurrection of the twice dead is quite another 
thing. Before there can be a resurrection from 
a second death there must be a second death, 
before there can be a second death there must 
be a second life, and before there can be a 
second life there must be a resurrection from 
the first death. It is the resurrection from the 
first death which the Apostle there affirms, and 
therefore his affirmation does not favor one jot 
any Universalist's conclusion. As it is with 
Paul's noble testimony there, so it is with all 
other inspired testimonies: they have to be 
wrested from their original and legitimate uses 
before they can be made to favor, even in appearance, 
the groundless dogma of a resurrection 
from the second death. 

"If we sin wilfully after that we have received 
the [full] knowledge of the truth, there 
remaineth no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain 
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery 
indignation, which shall devour the 
adversaries." JOSEPH MOFFITT. 



"Let us fear lest any of us come short' 



page 365 

A STUDY IN THE GOSPEL OF LUKE. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1478 : page 365 

THE BIRTH OF CHRIST. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XIIL, DEC. 25, LUKE 2:8-20. 

Golden Text— "Behold, I bring you good tidings of 
great joy."— Luke 2:10. 

The story of this lesson is one so familiar as 



to require no special comment, and yet in its 
simple details lies the hope of the whole world. 
Four thousand years previous the birth of this 
child was promised, and all the way along during 
those forty centuries some faithful souls continued 
to trust in the promises and to look for 
the salvation to be brought about through him. 
We may surely take for granted that the humble 
shepherds to whom the message of the 
Lord's advent first came were men who thus 
hoped in the promise of God; for to such, and 
to such only, the Lord discloses his purposes. 

These men were quietly tending their flocks 
by night when suddenly the angel of the Lord 
came upon them, and the glory of the Lord 
shone around about them; and they were sore 
afraid. (Verse 9.) But their fear was soon 
overcome by the message of the angel, contained 
in our golden text, but which, strange 
to say, our lesson committee has only partially 
quoted, leaving out one of the grandest features 
of the message— viz., that it was to be to 
all people. 

The message reads, "Fear not; for, behold, 
I bring you good tidings, of GREAT JOY, which 
shall be to ALL PEOPLE." It will be observed 
that the blessedness of these tidings is 
cumulative: first it is "good tidings;" then 
it is "great joy;" and then the crowning feature 
of it is that it is "to all people"— not only 
to you shepherds who are this night looking 
for the hope of Israel, but for all your friends 
and relations and neighbors far and near; and 
to all their friends and relatives and neighbors, 
both to those who now live and to those who 
shall live, as well as to all those who slumber in 
death. 

Blessed tidings! Hearken to the gladsome 
sound: "For unto you is born this day in the 
city of David a Savior, which is Christ the 
Lord." (Verse 11.) Then he was to be a savior 
to all people: so the Scriptures clearly affirm, 
saying that, by the grace of God, he tasted 
death for every man, and that he gave himself 
a ransom for all, to be testified in due time- 
to all. (Heb. 2:9; 1 Tim. 2:6.) The testimony, 
however, is quite as necessary to the salvation of 
the sinner as the fact that Christ gave himself a 
ransom for all. The favor of salvation will not 
be forced upon any; but the testimony that it 
has been provided for every man, on condition 
of his acceptance of the favor upon God's 
terms, is to be given to every man, for his acceptance 
or rejection. And though millions 
of the race for whom Christ died have gone 
down to the grave without such testimony, still 



the fact remains that the testimony shall be 
given in due time— which due time, to all such, 
must be after their awakening from death. 

And to this agree the words of the Lord: 
"The hour is coming in which all that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of 
man and shall come forth; they that have done 
good [who during the present life have come 
into judgment and who have passed their trial 
successfully], unto the resurrection of life [the 
full reward of the faithful. Such will be the 
overcoming Church]: and they that have done 
evil unto the resurrection of judgment." (John 5:25-29.) 
That is, the latter class will come 
forth from the grave to have the truth testified 
to them then, for their acceptance or rejection; 
and their final judgment of worthiness or unworthiness 
of life will be based upon their 
course under trial after the truth has been testified 
to them— in the Millennial age. Thus the 
angel of the Lord preached the good tidings of 
the restitution of all things to the shepherds on 
the plain of Bethlehem. 

VERSE 12. Then they told where and how 
they should find this bud of promise, so that 
when they would see him they might feel doubly 
assured that this was he. 

VERSES 13,14. "Then suddenly there was 
with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host 
praising God, saying, "Glory to God in the 
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward 
men." This shows how the angels of God are 
interested in the affairs of men, and how they 
sympathize with us and rejoice over our prosperity. 
And this reminds us of other statements 
to the effect that there is joy in heaven 
among the angels over one sinner that repenteth 
(Luke 15:7); and again that they are 
earnest students of the plan for human salvation; 
and that they are all ministering spirits 
sent forth to minister to them who shall be 
heirs of salvation. (1 Pet. 1:12; Heb. 1:14.) 

R1478 : page 366 

Thus we see them to be creatures of God full of 
loving benevolence even toward a fallen race, 
and esteeming it a privilege to serve the heirs 

R1479 : page 366 

of this salvation, although they know, as they 
studiously look into God's plan, that some of 
this fallen race are by and by to be highly exalted, 
even above the angels who never sinned. 
Thus we see their humble recognition of the 



right of the Creator to do what he will with 

his own, and their cheerful and joyful acquiescence 

in his perfect will, which they know to 

be determined by his unerring wisdom and his 

fathomless love. Oh! what universal joy will 

prevail when the whole family of God in heaven 

and in earth is brought into fullest harmony 

under the headship of Jehovah's Anointed. 

VERSES 15,18 show the teachable attitude of 
the shepherds: they recognized the angels and 
their message as from the Lord, and, their fears 
being allayed, their hopes revived and their 
faith increased, and they felt that they must go 
at once and see this which had come to pass. 
And when they had so determined, a strange 
star (evidently a meteor, as it could not have 
been a fixed star) appeared, moving in the direction 
which the angel had told them to go; 
and they followed the star until they reached 
Bethlehem, when it stood still over the place 
where the young child was. And when they 
saw him they worshiped him and presented to 
him gold and frankincense and myrrh, recognizing 
in him the long-promised Messiah. 
And being warned of God in a dream, they disregarded 
the request of Herod to inform him 
of the whereabouts of the new-born king, and 
so departed into their own country another way. 
But as they went they published abroad the 
good tidings which the angels had brought to 
them, and how they had actually seen him of 
whom the prophets testified. 

VERSE 19. "But Mary [mother-like] kept 
all these things and pondered them in her 
heart," doubtless calling to mind also the 
message of the angel to her. (Luke 1:28-35.) 
Again and again we seem to hear her say, "My 
soul doth magnify the Lord;... for he hath 
regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: 
...he that is mighty hath done to me great 
things, and holy is his name."— Luke 1:46-49. 

VERSE 20. The shepherds returned to their 
flocks, fully assured of the wonderful truth that 
the promised seed of the woman who was to 
bruise the serpent's head had really come. 
And they rejoiced and glorified God for all the 
things that they had heard and seen, as they 
were told unto them. 



R1479 : page 366 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



page 366 

Illinois. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Sister Cox and I 

are both well, and are having very good success. 
I am delighted with this place, and think 
we will do much better in country towns than 
in large cities, as the people are more plain 
and seem to do more thinking. Before noon 
of the first day I went out, I sold a DAWN in 
every house except two, and have been doing 
well ever since. All praise be to the Lord for 
using me in this way. 

I have not the words to express the comfort 
and peace I enjoy, when carrying the good 
news to others. Surely we are the Lord's 
favored people, and are living in a grand time. 
I have also been doing quite well among the 
Germans. In some houses I can sell both the 
German and the English DAWN. 

Yours in the Master's service, 

MRS. L. P. BEELER. 



R1479 : page 366 

Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your kind letter 
received— for which I thank you, as words of 
comfort and sympathy are especially welcome 
to me in my helpless condition. I am glad to 
tell you that though I am stricken, yet I am not 
cast down; for I realize that underneath me 
are the everlasting arms, and I am holden up 
and sustained. I have entirely lost my voice, 
so that I cannot sing a note. I used to pass 
away a deal of time singing the sweet Hymns 
of Millennial Dawn; but if I cannot sing here, 
I shall soon sing the song of Moses and the 
Lamb, and tell Redemption's story in a nobler, 
sweeter strain. I am kept in sweet peace, believing 
it will not be long before my Father 
calls me home, and I shall be with him whom, 
not having seen, I love. 

I cannot in my present condition pledge myself 
to send any stated sum to the Tract Fund 
at any particular time, but I would have you 
know that to me it is more blessed to give than 
to receive. I am so glad to know my beloved 
brethren and sisters remember me at the throne 
of grace. Ever yours in the blessed gospel hope, 
C. CHIPPERFIELD. 



New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been meeting 
with fair success, I think, considering the 
heavy rains to contend with— eighty orders in 
five days. Nothing in the world does me so 
much good as to meet some who are interested 

R1479 : page 367 

in these precious truths; and I know you will 
be glad to hear that the Lord has of late given 
me that privilege. One gentleman recently 
said, "You could not bring me any books that 
I would appreciate more than these, and I 
know I will believe every word of them, as I 
feel it is God's due time for us to know of the 
coming Kingdom." 

I have read the 45th Psalm many times in 
the light of the suggestions offered in your letter, 
and I think the attitude of the Church is 
beautifully pictured there. To think of being 
called out of our [earthly] father's house [the 
world], and of being on the way to the King's 
palace! Blessed, indeed, will be those who 
have the privilege of entering, and how thankful 
I am that the Lord has granted me the light, 
and the grace to walk in it. 

Yours in his love and service, 

JENNIE CLARK. 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Lord sends 
me much of blessing. Just in the last days of 
my stay in Buffalo he led me to three more 
who are feeding upon the blessed Bible truths 
to which DAWN has led their thoughts. I do 
want to tell you a little about them. 

One has for years been one of my most loved 
friends, a prominent temperance and mission 
worker. Early last fall I tried to get her to 
read the DAWNS, but she said she had no 
time to read anything but her Bible. Later I 
went to her again, and urged her very strongly 
to read the DAWNS; but she had just become 
deeply interested in another special mission 
work, and again declared that she had no time. 
I have been in the habit of visiting her frequently, 
but felt this summer that my time must 
be spent with those who had time to hear the 
truth. So I did not go to see her again until 
a few days before I left the city, and then went 
only to bid her good-bye. Imagine, then, how 
glad I was when she met me at the door and 



exclaimed, "Oh! those blessed, blessed books. 
I never was so blessed in all my life as I have 
been in reading them." It seems that in our 
talk, early in the summer, I had mentioned the 
fact that through reading them many infidels 
had been brought to a belief in Christ. Her 
work a little later bringing her in contact with 
an infidel whose arguments she could not meet, 
she bethought herself of the DAWNS, and borrowed 
from a neighbor the first and second 
volumes to lend to this infidel. In glancing 
through them she caught, here and there, a 
thought that held her, and she did not lend 
them, but read them herself. 

From one of the other two, Brother Rogers 
last year took an order for DAWN, Vol.; but 
before he came to deliver it, her pastor had 
told her it was a dangerous book to have in the 
house; and when Brother R. came she refused 
to take the book. A day or two afterward her 
married daughter came in and handed her another 
copy of Vol. I., saying, "Here, Ma, is 
a book I bought of an agent. I don't like it, 
but I guess you will." The thought struck her 
that she should read the book, since it came to 
her in spite of her first refusal to have it. Since 
she has read it, her own words are, "It was 
food such as I had never before received from 
either pastor or teacher." She then lent it to 
a friend who found it equally good. 

Both are confined at home pretty closely, so 
they could not attend our meetings; but a day 
or two before leaving the city I took my large 
chart down, and spent a very delightful three 
hours and a half in explaining it to them, and 
answering their questions. Found them, I believe, 
ripe for the truth, and rejoicing in each 
little bit that is made clear. Both will study 
the truth carefully, and walk in the light they 
receive. 

The cold weather seems to be nigh upon us. 
I must sew next week, and then labor in harvest 
work every minute that I am able. I 
wish I might be able to do as well as sister 
McPhail, but I suppose I must be always content 
to do a little. Perhaps were I permitted 
to be a really efficient worker, I should get to 
thinking of myself more highly than I ought 
to think. The Lord knows me better than I 
know myself, and will doubtless grant me all 
the success I am able to bear. 

Much love to Sister Russell and to all the 
dear ones at Allegheny. Yours in the Master's 
service, MRS. M. R. PECK. 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I take the first 
opportunity of fulfilling my promise, and herewith 
enclose Money Order for Young's Concordance, 
and the surplus for anything you 
please. Our little band will all send together 
in a month or so subscriptions to TOWER and 
Tract Fund. 

You will be pleased to learn of our spiritual 

welfare. Brother W has just returned home 

after a week's stay with us. We have the meetings 
in our home, and he was much impressed 
by the quiet work which is being done. I feel 
assured that the Lord sent him, and in so doing 
has blessed us all; and I trust he may be 
stimulated to further work in his neighborhood. 
He has thrown light upon the difference of 
colporteur work here and in the United States, 
having spent some years there himself. Colporteurs 
are looked upon with suspicion here, 
being either connected with Evangelical Associations 

R1479 : page 368 

or hawkers of encyclopaedias and larger 
works. Whereas in America much of the book 
selling is done in this manner, in England all 
has to be done through booksellers. Still I 

R1480 : page 368 

think we might be doing more than we are, although 
much is being done in a quiet way. 

[The fact is that America is overrun by book 
agents, and the people often feel very much 
annoyed by them. It would seem, therefore, 
that if there is but little done in England 
in that line, that field would be all the better 
for our Colporteurs. The people would give 
them a heartier welcome than here, where two 
or three sometimes call in one day. And we 
heard recently that nearly four thousand copies 
of a high-priced American book, containing 
much unpopular error, were sold not long since 
in Dublin, Ireland. The sale of this book at 
a high price gives us great confidence that at 
its low price thousand of DAWNS could be sold 
there. 

We find that many, even here, do not make 
a success of the Colporteur work until they 
have received some personal instruction from 
some experienced and successful worker. There 
is a particular "knack" required that all do 
not possess naturally, but which can be acquired 



by intelligent perseverance. When the way 
opens, we hope to send some experienced 
Brother from here to Great Britain in order to 
start the work there. --EDITOR.] 

I was much blessed by the letter from the 
good "three score and ten" brother. Yes, I 
am sure there is no soul hungering and thirsting 
after the Kingdom of God, that will not be 
filled sooner or later. 

The TOWERS are very precious; but I think I 
must be selfish, for I often wish that, with the 
exception of the encouraging letters from brethren, 
all discussion could be avoided. I know 
words of warning are necessary to the weak 
ones and children, but I feel sure that none of 
the Lord's little ones will be led astray by false 
teachers. And Oh! I do so love the spirit that 
has prevailed all along in the TOWER, and I 
dread anything that does not extend the same 
charity to others that we ourselves so much 
need. I seem so to revel in the beautiful pastures 
that I can only pity those who prefer to 
feed on husks. 

[We are quite in sympathy with the general 
drift of this sentiment, and the readers of the 
TOWER are witnesses that its warnings are not 
personalities nor on trifles, but respecting the 
fundamentals of the Gospel and based upon the 
plainest teachings of the Scriptures. The denouncing 
of the scribes and pharisees as hypocrites 
and the cleansing of the typical Temple 
were not the most pleasing parts of our Lord's 
work at the First Advent, but they were necessary; 
and so here the warnings are not the 
pleasantest part of our duty, but they are a part 
of it, nevertheless— "Reprove, rebuke, exhort." 
(2 Tim. 4:2; Tit. 2:14,15.) Experience has 
proved that some of the Lord's people are in need 
of words of warning in order that they be not 
deceived. Facts are more than theory. God 
does not promise to keep his little ones free 
from temptation. The Lord is seeking for his 
Bride such as love him supremely, and he permits 
Satan to promulgate seductive doctrines 
and to be successful in deceiving all but this 
special class. The Apostle recognizes this in 
his warning— "Keep yourselves in the love of 
God." (Jude 21.) Each one, in order to be 
kept, must be fully consecrated and must abide 
on the Rock. 

That some of the consecrated can be and are 
being deceived is shown by a recent experience 
which will be related in our next issue. This one, 
and others of whom we know, have been saved 



from error by words of warning and reproof, and 

brought back into the way. The Ninety-First 

Psalm intimates that human instrumentalities 

are used in bearing up those in danger of stumbling, 

as well as in the upbuilding of those who 

have remained faithful.— "He shall give his 

angels [messengers] a charge [a warning] concerning 

thee, ...lest thou dash thy foot 

against a stone." This is part of the ministry 

of the saints. Otherwise there would be no 

meaning to the words of the Apostle James (5:20): 

"He which converteth a sinner [wanderer] 

from the error of his way shall save a 

soul from death. "-EDITOR.] 

Most loving greetings to yourself and Sister 
Russell from all here. A. P. RILEY. 



page 368 



New York City. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been working 
in Mount Vernon during the past week: 
sold 160 DAWNS-making about 800 sold there 
in a little less than a month's time. Many of 
them, I trust, are in good hands, and will bring 
forth fruit to the Master's praise. 

I expect to deliver in Mount Vernon tomorrow 
and part of Tuesday, and desire to 
spend the remainder of the week in the interests 
of the meetings— calling on some of those 
to whom I sold the books last winter, giving 
out notices, etc. I have hopes that the meetings 
on the 27th will be quite well attended 
and that you will have large, intelligent and 
appreciative audiences. 

The package of Tracts has been received. 
They will, I think, come in very good. 

Truly yours, S. D. ROGERS. 



page 370 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 

It has been decided that hereafter only one 
tract subscription shall be included in a TOWER 
subscription, but that all who are thus subscribers 
to ZION'S WATCH TOWER and The 
Old Theology Quarterly may order as many 
tracts free as they can use judiciously— except 
those in booklet form, leatherette bound, viz., 
Nos. 8, 11 and 16. 

So, then, order all that you can use judiciously 
of the following:— 

No. 1. Do the Scriptures Teach that Eternal 
Torment is the Wages of Sin? 

No. 2. Calamities— Why God Permits Them. 

No. 3. Protestants, Awake! How Priestcraft 
now Operates. 

No. 4. Dr. Talmage's View of the Millennium 
—with comments. 

No. 5. Bible Study and Students' Helps. 

No. 6. The Hope of the Groaning Creation. 

No. 7. The Wonderful Story. 

No. 9. Swedish translation of No. 1. 

No. 10. A Broad Basis for Christian Union. 

No. 12. The Divine Plan. 

No. 13. Norwegian translation of No. 1. 

No. 14. A Dark Cloud and its Silver Lining. 
Arp's Comments on MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



No. 15. Thy Word is Truth. A Reply to 
Robert Ingersoll. 

OUR THREE BOOKLETS. 

"THE WONDERFUL STORY."-Poem, 156 verses. 

—The Gospel in verse.— Fifteen outline illustrations. 

—Leatherette binding.— Choice 

for children; interesting also to the matured. 

"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF THE BETTER SACRIFICES." 

— 104 pages.— Leatherette binding. 

—Just the thing for matured Christians— 

"Meat in due season." 
"THY Word IS TRUTH. "-An answer to Robert 

Ingersoll's Charges against Christianity.— 

Just the thing for Infidels and for skeptically 

inclined Christians. 

These booklets sell at the hands of Colporteurs, 
the three for fifty cents, delivered. We 
supply them to TOWER readers at ten cents 
each; and to them or other Colporteurs at 
seventy-five cents per dozen— post-paid. To 
obtain the Colporteur rates, order not less than 
a half-dozen of any one kind of the booklets. 
We have them put up in packs of six and twelve 
—each kind separately. 

THE WATCH TOWER FOR 1893. 

So far as possible we prefer to have subscriptions 
date from January each year; but where 
this is not convenient we are pleased to have 
it otherwise. Those who cannot pay now, but 
who expect to do so later, and who desire that 
their papers continue uninterruptedly, will 
please drop a card saying so. Each can see just 
how his account stands by examining the date 
on the address label of his last paper. These 
we will correct every month hereafter. 

Those who from age, accident or other misfortune 
are unable to afford to subscribe are 
still welcome to receive the WATCH TOWER free 
as "The Lord's Poor," if they describe themselves 
and make the request yearly. (Such are 
marked with a sign— thus: +— on the address 
label.) This offer is not meant for those whose 
inability to pay arises from the spending of a 
larger sum for tobacco, etc.; but all who are 
really of the class described are as welcome to 
the TOWER regularly as though they paid for it. 

But it is not too much to ask such to renew 
their request each year on a postal card. If 
you have once described your case and are 
marked (thus: +) on your label you need not 
explain again; for we understand that your circumstances 
are still the same. Such may simply 



say, "Please renew my subscription as 
heretofore," and we shall understand them. 
But others not so marked (+) should explain, for 
we have not understood them heretofore. 
Again, let us request that all the "Lord's 
Poor" renewals come in promptly before January 
'93. Those who asked the TOWER free 
during other months get it only until December 
'92 unless they now, in December, ask its 
renewal. "Ask and ye shall receive" is God's 
method— which we adopt. 



R1480 : page 371 
