VOL. XIX. MARCH 1, 1898. No. 5. 



CONTENTS. 



The Coming Anniversary Supper 67 

Ye do Shew Forth the Lord's Death 69 

"Till He Come" 70 

Who May Partake? 71 

Only the Baptized 72 

How to Partake 73 

The Celebration at Allegheny 74 

Strong Delusion 74 

The Wheat and the Tares 77 

Interesting Letters 80 

page 66 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2270 : page 67 

THE COMING ANNIVERSARY SUPPER. 



COMMEMORATIVE OF OUR LORD AND HIS DEATH FOR OUR SINS. 



THE Supper which our Lord instituted as a remembrancer 

of his great sacrifice for our sins, 

and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 

world, is striking in its appropriateness and its simplicity. 

The world's great men have always sought 

very different means of perpetuating their memories. 



In whatever way they would remind their followers of 
their merits and their greatness, it surely has not been 
by a reminder and commemoration of their death— 
especially if, as in our Lord's case, it was a death of 
ignominy and shame, a death as a malefactor and criminal. 
Another, more probably, would have left instructions 
for medals to be struck commemorating some 
of his mighty works; such, for instance, as the 
awakening of Lazarus, or the stilling of the tempest on 
the sea, or the triumphal entry into Jerusalem, while 
the multitude strewed the way with palm branches, 
and cried, Hosanna to the King, the heir of David! — 

But our Lord chose as his remembrancer that which 
represented what was, in his and in God's estimation, 
his mightiest work— his sin-offering on our behalf; and 
that which his real followers, and they alone, would 
appreciate more than any other feature of his mission. 
True, his followers would have appreciated something 
commemorative of his wonderful words or works, but 
the worldly also could have appreciated those things. 
But not so the value of his death as our ransom-sacrifice, 
the basis of our reconciliation and atonement, which 
has never yet been fully apprehended by any but the 
consecrated little flock— the elect. And it was for these 
that the remembrancer was arranged and instituted. 
And tho a Judas was present, he was given a sop and 
went out from the others before the supper was ended; 
thus no doubt representing that in the close of this age, 
before the little flock will have finished their part of 
having fellowship with their Lord in his suffering, the 
sop of truth will have become so strong as to drive 
forth from the company and communion of the faithful 
all who do not rightly appreciate and value the ransom 
accomplished by the Lamb of God for the taking away 
of the sins of the world.— 1 John 2:19. 

The date of the Paschal Supper at which the Jews 
ate a lamb, commemorative of their deliverance from 
Egyptian bondage and of the sparing of their first-born 
at that time, was of course calculated by the Jewish 
method of reckoning time; viz., lunar time. (Exod. 12:2-14.) 
Instead of dividing the months as we do, 
they allowed the new moon to mark the beginning of 
a new month; and the difference between the sun time 
(solar time) and moon time (lunar time) was equalized 
every year by always beginning the new year with 
the appearing of the new moon about the Spring 
equinox. In celebrating their religious festivals the 
Jews still maintain this method of reckoning. And 
since our Lord, the apostles and the early church followed 
this same rule for determining the date for the 
annual celebration of our Lord's Last Supper, we also 
follow it. 

The first moon after the vernal equinox counts 
March 23d in Hebrew almanacs— probably Jerusalem 
obs. At 6 P.M. on that day begins the first day of 
the Jewish month Nisan, the first month of the Jewish 



sacred year. Beginning with the 1st of Nisan the 
Hebrews counted, and on the tenth day the Paschal 
lamb was chosen or selected from the flock. On the 

R2270 : page 68 

fourteenth day (the full of the moon*) "between 
evenings" (at any time between 6 P.M. of the 13th 
and 6 P.M. of the 14th of Nisan) the lamb was to be 
killed and eaten. On the fifteenth day their Passover 
Feast began, lasting seven days, the first and the seventh 
days being observed as specially holy, as 
Sabbath days or "high" days. (Exod. 12:16.) On 
the sixteenth day the omer of the first-fruits of the 
barley harvest was offered to the Lord, and fifty days 
after (Pentecost Day) they offered before the Lord two 
wave loaves.— Lev. 23:17. 

These things done by the Jews every year were, 
as we have already seen, types of greater and grander 
occurrences. The choosing of the lamb on the tenth 
day typified how, if Israel would be blessed and recognized 
as first-born in the antitypical Passover, they 
must accept Jesus then, five days before that Passover 
Feast, and four days before his crucifixion. And 
it evidently was on that very date that our Lord offered 
himself finally to that nation— when, as their King, he 
rode into the city on the colt. (Compare John 12:1,12.) 
They, however, neglected to receive the Lamb 
of God, at once were rejected, and ceased from being 
the typical first-born. 

The 14th day (which this year will begin at 6 
o'clock on the evening of Tuesday, April 5th, and last 
until 6 P.M. of the 6th) was the day in which the 
Paschal lamb was to be killed and eaten; and the 
Hebrew counting of time (doubtless divinely arranged 
for this very purpose) permitted the eating of the 



*As the Sun is a symbol of Christ's Kingdom, so the Moon 
symbolized Israel as a nation. (Rev. 12:1.) The 12 and sometimes 
13 lunations symbolize the tribes of that nation. The 
moon was at its full at the time of Christ's crucifixion. There 
it immediately began to wane and waned for as long as it had 
previously increased. So Christ's death was the turning point 
between the two equal parts of Israel's history. See M. DAWN, 
VOL. II., p. 218. 

As those Jews who were unclean, and hence could not keep 
the Passover properly in its proper season, were permitted to do 
so on the 14th of the second month (at the full of the next 
moon— Num. 9:8-13), the lesson taught seems to be that all 
prevented (by ignorance) from accepting Messiah as their Redeemer, 
when offered to them, will have an opportunity of doing 
so when, in the times of restitution of all things, their nation 
(moon) shall again be full of blessings in the latter harvest. 



R2271 : page 68 

"Last Supper" upon the same day that the Lord was 
crucified. The Passover supper of lamb and herbs 
and unleavened bread (fulfilling the Law, which was 
not ended until the cross) was eaten shortly after 6 P.M. 
Then followed the institution of the Memorial 
Supper of bread and wine, representative of the body 
and blood of the antitypical lamb. This thereafter, as 
often as the occasion returned (yearly), was to be observed 
by his followers instead of the eating of the 
literal lamb— as the commemoration of the antitypical 
lamb and the greater passing over of the antitypical 
first-born which his blood effects. 

The waving of the barley sheaf of first-fruits on 
the 16th of Nisan ("the morrow after the Sabbath" 
or Passover of the 15th-Lev. 23:5,6,11,15,16) 
typified the resurrection of Christ our Lord, as "the 
first fruits of them that slept."*— 1 Cor. 15:20. 

The two wave loaves offered on the fiftieth day, Pentecost, 
represented the presenting of the Church before 
God and its acceptance through the merit of the great 
High Priest, indicated by the anointing of the holy 
spirit at Pentecost. The Church really is but "one 
loaf" (1 Cor. 10:17), the two loaves representing the 
same thing as the two goats presented on the Day of 
Atonement. It indicated that, altho all presented 
were acceptable to God through Christ Jesus, he yet 
knew that all presented would not come up to the condition 
of faithfulness to the end. The two loaves represented, 
therefore, the two classes of the consecrated 
—the overcoming little flock and the "great company" 
of the consecrated servants of God who do not make 
the high calling theirs, by overcoming the world as 
they might and should do. 

The method of calculating the date for Good Friday 
and Easter Sunday in vogue among Episcopalians 
and Roman Catholics differs from the foregoing in this: 
They celebrate as Easter Sunday the first Sunday following 
the first full moon after the Spring equinox, 
and the preceding Friday is recognized as Good Friday. 
This method of counting was instituted by the 
Council of Nice, A.D. 325, as instead of the Jewish 
method which we recognize. But the name "Passover" 
continued to be used (not Eastern- Sunday)— 
for a long time; it was after Papacy had become established 
in political influence, and the ignorant pagans 
began to flock to the system which enjoyed the favor 



*Here is the strongest possible confirmation of the correctness 
of the position taken in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IL-that 
our Lord was not three full 24-hour days in the tomb, but only 
parts of the three days and nights; that he was crucified on the 
day corresponding to our Friday afternoon, and arose on what 



corresponded to our Sunday morning. The showing of this type 

that the Paschal lamb was to be killed sometime during the 14th 

of Nisan, and the wave offering of the sheaf of first-fruits was 

to occur on the 16th, should settle the matter for all. It agrees 

with the repeated statement (1 Cor. 15:4; Luke 24:46) that our 

Lord rose on "the third day, according to the Scriptures." This 

Scripture concerning the first-fruits is the only one which we 

recall as in any way pointing out the time of our Lord's resurrection. 

Then, too, the fact that history, as represented in the 

traditions and customs, points out Good Friday and Easter Sunday 

as celebrations of our Lord's death and resurrection, should 

have some weight on so trivial a matter, unless some motive or 

reason for misstating the dates can be assigned. The only 

Scripture seeming to oppose all these facts is the declaration that 

our Lord would be three days and three nights in the earth; 

and the only explanation that can be offered to this is, that the 

expression is used in a general and not in a specific manner, the 

nights being mentioned to preclude the idea of any cessation of 

death until the third day. Thus understood, the expression 

would signify that during portions of three days and nights our 

Lord would be in the tomb. At all events the evidence is overwhelming 

that he died on the 14th of Nisan and rose on the 

16th— the third day after. 

+The use of the word Easter in Acts 12:4 is a mistranslation; 
it should be rendered Passover.— See Revised Version. 

R2271 : page 69 

of the government, that the name "Easter" was substituted 

for "Passover," because about the same time 

as the Passover the pagans had been in the habit of 

celebrating the festival of their goddess Easter (German 

Ostera)— Estera, goddess of the East. This was 

one of the many methods adopted by an ambitious 

"clergy" for gaining numbers and influence. 

Sometimes the two methods of counting, Jewish 
and Roman Catholic, indicate the same days, but not 
often; and occasionally their results are nearly a moon 
or month apart. 

The Jews will celebrate as a "feast" the Passover 
week, beginning April 7th (at 6 o'clock P.M. April 
6th), the 15th of Nisan. We in the Memorial Supper 
do not celebrate the feast-week but the day previous, 
the 14th of Nisan, beginning on the evening of the 
13th (April 5th, '98) which is the anniversary of the 
proper date for killing and eating the Paschal lamb— 
the anniversary of the death of our Lord Jesus; the 
true Lamb of God, because of whose sacrifice we the 
"Church of the first-born" are passed over from death 
unto life— already by faith or reckonedly, by and by 
actually in "the first resurrection." The antitype of 
the Passover Feast week is found in the rejoicing of 
heart of all the first born of true Israel— the seven days 
signifying the perfection or completeness of the joy 
and the salvation. 

We have given the details as to the counting as a 



general answer to many questions on this subject, and 

not because of any weighty importance or bondage 

attaching to the exact anniversary day. We recognize 

no such bondage upon those made free by Christ. For 

tho desirous of observing the Memorial Supper properly, 

upon its proper anniversary, as intended by our Lord 

when he said, "This do ye [every time you celebrate 

this yearly memorial] in remembrance [lit., for commemoration] 

of me," we esteem it more as a privilege 

than as a duty; and if we should err in the matter of 

selecting the day, through ignorance or misunderstanding, 

we believe the Lord would accept our good intentions, 

and forgive the error and grant his blessing. 

Indeed, we believe that the Lord owns and accepts the 

good intentions of many of his children who, because 

of erroneous teachings and human traditions, select 

various other times and seasons for celebrating this 

memorial of his death, instead of its anniversary which 

he designated. Similarly we would sympathize with 

the patriotic intentions of the man who should "celebrate" 

the independence of the United States three, 

four, or fifty times a year, forgetful of the date, or ignorant 

of the fact that the Fourth of July is the anniversary 

of the event, and was appointed as the appropriate 

date for celebrating it. 

This like other truths long buried under the rubbish 
of the dark ages, God is now making clear to his 
people. And all who are truly his people are anxious 
for the truth and the right upon this, as upon all other 
subjects revealed in God's Word. 

YE DO SHEW FORTH THE LORD'S DEATH. 



"For I received from the Lord, what I also delivered 
to you— That the Lord on the night in which he 
was delivered up took a loaf, and having given thanks, 
broke it and said, This is that body of mine, which 
is broken on your behalf; this do ye in my remembrance.' 
In like manner also, the cup, after the supper, 
saying, 'This cup is the new covenant in my blood; 
this do ye, as often as ye may drink, for my remembrance.' 
For as often as you may eat this bread or 
drink this cup you declare the death of the Lord till he 
come."-l Cor. 11:24-26. 

There is no necessity for discussing with honest 
minds what is and what is not meant by the expression 
—the Lord's death. Some, in an anxiety to get away 
from the doctrine of the ransom, or, rather, in their 
anxiety to get away from the logical deductions associated 
with the doctrine of the ransom, are claiming, 
regardless of all Scripture to the contrary, that our 
Lord Jesus had two deaths, one when he came into 
the world, and the other at Calvary; and that the 
death of the "man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 



ransom for all," at Calvary, was of small importance 

as compared with the other. They seem willingly ignorant 

of the fact that the Scriptures declare, "In that 

he died, he died unto sin once;" and that that one 

death, and the only one ever referred to by our Lord 

or his apostles, was the death at Calvary. 

The apostles declare that he spoke of the death 
which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. This one 
and only death of our Redeemer is what is symbolized 
by this Remembrancer,— his body, his flesh broken for 
us, and of its merits and life all who would have life 
everlasting must partake. "Let no man deceive you 
by any means," on this important question. 

But as water baptism is not the important baptism, 
but only the symbol representing the real, so 
partaking of the emblematic bread and wine is only 
the symbol of the more important feast— our appropriation 
of the merit of Christ, which secures to us eternal 
life through his broken body and shed blood. Thus 
by faith accepting his finished sacrifice, and by similar 
faith, as instructed by him, appropriating to ourselves 
all the merits and perfections and rights which the 
man Christ Jesus possessed and laid down in death for 
us, we really feed our hearts upon the bread of everlasting 
life, the bread which God sent to us from 
heaven. This is the true bread of which if men will 
eat they will never die— the flesh which he gave for 

R2271 : page 70 

the life of the world, that all the dead and dying race 
may have life. This is, primarily, what the literal 
bread symbolizes and signifies to all who partake of it 
rightly and intelligently. It is a memorial of the ransom 
of Adam and his family from the bondage of sin 
and death. 

Another thought: the bread was unleavened. 
Leaven is corruption, an element of decay, hence a type 
of sin, and the decay and death which sin works in 
mankind. So, then, this symbol declares that our Lord 
Jesus was free from sin, a lamb without spot or blemish, 
"holy, harmless, undefiled." Had he been of 

R2272 : page 70 

Adamic stock, had he received his life in the usual 
way from any earthly father, he, too, would have been 
leavened with Adamic sin, as are all other men; but 
his life came unblemished from a higher, heavenly 
nature, changed to earthly conditions; hence he is 
called "the bread from heaven." (John 6:41.) Let 
us then appreciate the pure, unleavened, undefiled 
bread which God has provided, and so let us eat of 
him— by eating and digesting the truth, and especially 
his truth— appropriating to ourselves, by faith, his 
righteousness; and let us recognize him as both the 



way and the life. 

The Apostle, by divine revelation, communicates 
to us a further meaning in this remembrancer. He 
shows that not only did the loaf represent our Lord 
Jesus, individually, but that after we have thus partaken 
of him (after we have been justified by appropriating 
his righteousness), we, by consecration, become 
associated with him as part of the one broken loaf- 
food for the world. (1 Cor. 10:16.) This suggests 
the thought of our privilege as justified believers to 
share now in the sufferings and death of Christ, the 
condition upon which we may become joint-heirs with 
him of future glories, and associates in the great work 
of blessing and giving life to all the families of the earth. 

This same thought is expressed by the Apostle 
repeatedly and under various figures, but none of them 
more forceful than this, that the Church, as a whole, 
is the "one loaf" now being broken. It is a striking 
illustration of our union and fellowship with our Head. 

We quote: "Because there is one loaf, we, the 
many [persons] are one body; for we all partake of 
the one loaf." "The loaf which we break, is it not 
the participation of the body of the anointed one?"— 
1 Cor. 10:16,17.-Diaglott. 

The "fruit of the vine" represents the sacrificed 
life given by our Lord. "This is my blood [symbol 
of life given up in death] of the new covenant, shed 
for many, FOR THE REMISSION of sins." "Drink ye 
all of it. "-Matt. 26:27,28. 

It was by the giving up of his life as a ransom for 
the life of the Adamic race, which sin had forfeited, 
that a right to LIFE may come to men through faith 
and obedience under the New Covenant. (Rom. 5:18,19.) 
The shed blood was the "ransom [price] for 
ALL," which was paid for all by our Redeemer himself; 
but his act of handing the cup to the disciples, 
and asking them to drink of it, was an invitation to 
them to become partakers of his sufferings, or, as Paul 
expresses it, to "fill up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) It was the offer to 
us that if we, after being justified by faith, voluntarily 
partake of the sufferings of Christ, by espousing his 
cause, it will be reckoned to us as tho we had part in 
his sacrifice. "The cup of blessing, for which we bless 
God, is it not a participation of the blood [shed blood 
-death] of the Anointed one?" (1 Cor. 10:16- 
Diaglott.) Would that we all might realize the value 
of the "cup," and could bless God for an opportunity 
of sharing with Christ his "cup" of sufferings and 
shame: all such may be assured that they will be glorified 
together with him.— Rom. 8:17. 

Our Lord also attached this significance to the 
"cup," indicating that it signified our participation in 
his dishonor, our share in his sacrifice— the death of 
our humanity. For instance, when asked by two of 
his disciples for a promise of future glory in his throne, 



he answered them: "Ye know not what ye ask; are 
ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of?" On 
their hearty avowal he answered, "Ye shall indeed 
drink of my cup." The juice of the grape not only 
speaks of the crushing of the grape till blood comes 
forth, but it also speaks of an after refreshment; and 
so we who now share the "sufferings of Christ" shall 
shortly share also his glories, honors and immortality— 
when we drink the new wine with him in the Kingdom. 

"TILL HE COME." 



"Till he come." What is the full significance of 
this expression? 

Since our Lord who instituted the Memorial Supper 
placed no limit upon its observance, this expression by 
the Apostle is not to be understood as limiting the 
length of time in which it will be appropriate to commemorate 
the death of our Lord Jesus, our ransom 
sacrifice, and our consecration with him to sacrifice. 
Rather, he is showing that it was not to be considered 
a limited arrangement, for a few years, but was to be 
continually observed until the Lord's second coming. 
Looking down to and speaking of the second coming 
of our Lord, the Apostle includes in his expression the 
gathering and exaltation with Christ of his Church or 
Kingdom to rule and bless the world. This is even 
yet a common and proper way of speaking of matters 
so closely identified and so dependent one upon the 
other. The Christ, Head and body, is coming to rule 

R2272 : page 71 

the world in power and great glory. The presence of 
the Lord or Head is necessary first; then commences 
the change of the sleeping members of his body, the 
sifting of the living members, and their gradual gathering 
together unto him. 

Even tho the Kingdom may be considered as begun 
from the time the King began the exercise of his 
great power (Rev. 11:17) in 1878, it will not be "set 
up," in the full sense of the word, until the last member 
of the Kingdom has been changed or glorified— 
until the breaking of the "loaf," the Church, Head 
and body, is completed. While one member suffers 
the body suffers; while one member is unglorified the 
Kingdom is not fully come into power and dominion. 

It is the coming of Christ as including the full exaltation 
of his Church or Kingdom that the Apostle 
evidently meant when he said, "As often as you may 
eat this [Passover] bread and drink this cup, you declare 
the death of the Lord [as your hope and confidence] 
till he come. The same thought of the Kingdom 
glory being the end of the symbol may be gathered 



from our Lord's own words on the occasion of the 
institution of the memorial— "I will not drink henceforth 
of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I 
drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom."— 
Matt. 26:29. 

And surely if it were ever proper and expedient 
for those who believe that our Lord's death was the 
ransom-price for sinners to confess it— to show it forth 
as the basis of all their hopes— it is now, when this 
foundation doctrine of God's Word is being traduced 
and misrepresented. 

Let all who hold fast the confidence of faith in his 
precious blood [his sacrificed life] as the propitiation 
[satisfaction] for our sins, and not for ours only, but 
also for the sins of the whole world, be more zealous 
and fervent than ever before in confessing this great 
truth; "for even Christ our Passover [sacrifice] is slain; 
therefore, let us keep the feast." None of the nominal 
first-born shall be passed over, and become members 
of the Church of the first-born in glory, except those 
who, during this night, abide under the blood, and 
partake of the merits of the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world,— just as in the type.— 
Exod. 12:7,8,13. 

WHO MAY PARTAKE? 



The Lord's Supper is not for the world, nor for 
merely nominal believers, but only for those who, 
(1) accepting of Christ as their Redeemer and sin-bearer, 
are (2) consecrated to him and his service. 
But it is not for us— nor for any man or set of men— 
to decide who may and who may not partake. It is our 
duty to point out from the Word of the Lord what are 
the proper qualifications for participation in the "cup" 
and in the "loaf," and then to say as did the Apostle, 
Let every man examine himself, and then, if he think 
proper, let him partake.— 1 Cor. 11:28. 

Now that God's people are emerging from the 
errors of the dark ages, when this Memorial can be 
more clearly understood, the judging or examining of 
one's self can be more thorough than ever before. Let 
each ask himself;— 

(1) Do I believe the Scripture teaching that I, 

as a member of the human family, was under that condemnation 
to death which passed upon all because of 
original sin? 

(2) Do I believe that my only hope of escape 
from that condemnation of sin and death was through 
the ransom-sacrifice of the man Christ Jesus, my Lord? 

(3) Do I believe he gave himself— his flesh and 
blood, his humanity— as my ransom-price, pouring out 

his soul unto death, making his soul a sin-offering (Isa. 53:10,12) 
on this behalf? 



(4) Do I see that the consecration to death, made 
at Jordan when he was baptized, was fulfilled by his 
sacrifice of himself for mankind, which beginning 
there, was finished on the cross when he died? 

(5) Do I see that the rights under the Law, 

which he secured by obedience to it (the right of lasting 
life and the dominion of earth), were what he 
through that same sacrifice bequeathed to the fallen, 
dying race— to as many as shall accept the blessings 
under the conditions of the New Covenant? 

(6) Do I see that his flesh and blood, thus sacrificed, 
stood for, represented, those blessings and favors 
which they purchased for us? 

(7) Do I see that the partaking of the bread and 

wine symbols of his flesh and blood signifies my acceptance 
of those favors and blessings which the flesh 
and blood of my Lord bought for me and for all? 

R2273 : page 71 

(8) And if I do thus heartily accept of the ransom 
thus memorialized, do I consecrate my entire being— 
my flesh and blood, justified through that ransom 
—to the Lord, to be broken with him, to suffer with 
him, to be dead with him? 

If we can answer these questions affirmatively we 
clearly or fully discern the Lord's body, give credit to 
his meritorious sacrifice and may eat— should eat— 
"Eat ye all of it." 

Those, however, that deny that a ransom for sin 
and sinners was required and given, who feel that they 
need not to partake of Christ's merit, who deny that 
the merit of one can be imputed to another, who have 
cast off the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness, 
who feel "happier" and "freer" in the filthy rags of 
their own righteousness, and who now consider the 
precious blood wherewith they were once sanctified a 

R2273 : page 72 

not-holy or an ordinary thing— such we advise to stay 
away from memorializing that in which they no longer 
believe; for they would merely be adding hypocrisy to 
unbelief. For such to partake, is to add condemnation 
to themselves and their no-ransom theories. 

But, better still, let us advise all who have merely 
been entrapped into this error, by the sophistries promulgated 
through various channels by the great Adversary, 
to reject all vain human philosophies and to 
receive again the simple Word of God, the truths 
therein set forth;— that all are fallen, and that the only 
way open for our reconciliation and restitution consistent 
with the divine law and sentence was the giving of 
the full and exact corresponding price or ransom for our 
sins;— that in no other way could he be just and yet justify 
sinners. Let them recognize the fact that our Lord 



Jesus, as the Lamb of God, bore the full penalty for our 
sins in his own body on the tree— that he gave full 
ransom for all. 

The philosophy is very plain, but if such cannot 
grasp it, at least let such grasp the fact that God declares 
it to be so, and let them return unto the Lord 
and he will abundantly pardon. Let them ask for the 
guidance of the spirit and the anointing of the eyes, 
that they may be able to comprehend, with all saints, 
this, the foundation of all the grace of our God in 
Christ. Thus in true acceptance of the broken body 
and the shed blood— realizing that the sacrifice was 
for their sins and that the blood shed [life given] seals 
the New Covenant for all— let them commemorate the 
greatest event of history, the shedding of the precious 
blood, the sacrifice of the precious life of God's dear 
Son for our sins. Nevertheless we know from God's 
Word that these words or any words will not succeed 
in turning back to the way, the truth and the life those 
who have wilfully and knowingly gone out from under 
the blood of sprinkling. There will be no pass-over 
for them. "It is impossible to renew them again unto 
repentance." (Heb. 6:4-10 and 10:26-30.) We 
well know that even these words of loving admonition 
and these faithful references to the words of inspiration 
will be attributed to hatred, malice, envy and every 
wicked feeling on our part, instead of to the real motive— 
a desire to serve the Lord and the truth, and 
any brethren or sisters unwittingly stumbling. 

Many in the past have partaken of the emblems 
of the Lord's body and blood without fully appreciating 
the philosophy of the ransom, who nevertheless did 
so with reverent appreciation of the fact that the death 
of our Redeemer had purged us from our guilt and relieved 
us from its penalty. Such discerned the real 
significance of the Memorial, though, because of gross 
errors associated with the truth, they did not discern 
its simple philosophy as many of us may now do. 

ONLY THE BAPTIZED. 



But some Baptist brother will perhaps remark— 
You have forgotten to mention baptism as a necessary 
qualification to partaking of the Memorial Supper. 

No, we have not forgotten baptism. We agree 
with you that the baptism is necessary— that the 
Memorial Supper is only for the Church; and that baptism 
is necessary before one can belong to the Church. 
But we differ with you as to what the Church is. We 
hold that the Baptist church is not the Church. Like 
all other churches organized and governed by fallen 
men, the Baptist church contains "tares" as well as 
"wheat;" but the Church contains wheat only. Surely 
no one will claim for any sect of Christendom that his 



sect contains all the "wheat" and no "tares." But 
the Church, "whose names are written in heaven," 
includes all the "wheat" and has not a "tare" on its 
roll. This is the one Church which our Lord established, 
and of which all the elect must become members— 
the Church Passed-over— "The Church of the 
First-born ones, whose names are written in heaven." 
-Heb. 12:23. 

Nor can we admit your claim with reference to 
baptism. The Scriptural view is still more exclusive 
than yours. You have in the membership of the Baptist 
church some who would be far from acceptable as 
members of the "Church of the First-borns." They 
passed your test of water-baptism, but they have not 
passed the test of the greater baptism which is required 
of all members of the Church whose names are written 
in heaven. The real baptism is a baptism into Christ's 
body— the Church— by a baptism or immersion into 
Christ's death, and a resurrection therefrom in his likeness. 
Water immersion is a beautiful symbol of the 
real immersion of the human will into the will of 
Christ, a beautiful illustration of a full sacrifice even 
unto death; but it is only an illustration or symbol- 
just as the bread and wine of the Supper are not the 
real life-giving elements of our Lord's sacrifice of 
which we are to eat, but merely their symbols. 

We agree, therefore, that none but the Church, 
the immersed, should partake of the Supper; but we 
recognize as really immersed all whose wills are dead 
and buried in the will of Christ, and who, as new 
creatures in him, are risen to walk in newness of life, 
while waiting for the consummation of their course in 
literal death and their awakening as actual new beings 
in the first resurrection. All such, whoever and 
wherever they may be, are the real members of Christ's 
body, the Church, whether they have performed the 
enjoined water symbol or not. Of course, when such 
consecrated ones, dead to their own wills and alive only 
to the will of Christ, come to see that our Lord's commands 

R2273 : page 73 

include the symbol of water immersion or burial, 

as well as the burial of their wills, they will be glad to 

follow and to obey their Head and Lord in all things 

—especially when as infants they were not "believers" 

and that a drop of water could not in any degree symbolize 

burial and resurrection. Such as see the value 

and beauty of this injunction of God's Word should, 

if possible, be buried in water also (as our Lord and 

his apostles showed us) before partaking of the Memorial 

Supper. See TOWER for June 15th, 93,-article 

headed "Baptism and its Import." 

Of course, we cannot hope that only true "wheat" 
will present themselves at the Lord's table; we expect 
that some "tares" will come also, as Judas was present 



at the first gathering. But since we cannot judge 

the heart nor separate the "wheat" from the "tares," 

we fulfil the whole duty when we "declare the whole 

counsel of God" as revealed in his Word on this subject, 

and should leave the decision as to whether or 

not he partake to each individual who professes faith 

in the atoning blood and consecration to the Redeemer. 

HOW TO PARTAKE. 



If there are in your neighborhood others of God's 
consecrated people besides yourself, you should know 
it. Your faithful love for them and for the truth 
should have led you to seek them out to bless them 
with the truth shortly after you yourself received it. 
If there are such with whom you can have communion 
and fellowship invite them to join you in the Memorial; 
but not if you know them to be deniers of the ransom, 
lest you assist in bringing additional condemnation 
upon them. 

Meet with few or many, as circumstances will permit, 
but better far with a few who can enter with you 
into the spirit of the Memorial, than with a throng 
devoid of that spirit of fellowship and union in Christ. 

Provide for the occasion, if possible, unleavened 
bread (or crackers), such as the Lord used, and such 
as Hebrews now use; because the pure, sweet, unleavened 
bread best symbolizes the sinless flesh of the 
Lamb of God, who knew no sin [of which leaven is a 
symbol], who was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate 
from the race of sinners. Provide some drink from 
"the fruit of the vine," as the Lord directed. Undoubtedly 
he and the disciples used light wines, and 
we regard wine as unquestionably the more appropriate 
symbol; but since our Lord did not stipulate wine, but 
merely the "fruit of the vine," we can conceive of no 
objection that can be urged against the strained juice 
of boiled raisins, which are dried grapes. And surely 
this would be "the fruit of the vine" as really as wine 
is. We do not urge this raisin-liquor upon any who 
feel a conscientious desire to use wine; we merely remind 
all that our circumstances, climate, habits, etc., 
differ greatly from those of the early Church, and we 
very much doubt if our Lord would have us symbolize 
his blood with many of the intoxicating wines of our 
day— especially in view of the fact that some of the 
saints may have an inherited weakness of the flesh, 
which one taste might reenkindle into a great temptation. 
"Let each judge not to cast a stumbling-block 
before his brother." If wine is conscientiously preferred, 
choose a light wine, or mix a little wine with 
the raisin-juice. 

The memorial service should be very simple— it is 
chiefly a season of communion. Have a table in the 



midst of the assembly for the bread and wine. After 

R2274 : page 73 

the singing of a hymn one of the brethren should, in 

a few chosen words, express the object of the service 

and read a few verses from the Scriptures on the subject; 

another might then give thanks for the bread of 

life, the broken body of our Lord; after which the unleavened 

bread (or soda biscuit if more convenient) 

should be passed to all the communicants. An opportunity 

for remarks on the bread of life might here be 

given. Then a prayer of thanks for the cup, and for 

the precious blood symbolized in it, should be offered, 

and the cup of "fruit of the vine" passed. Here an 

opportunity might be given for remarks on the precious 

blood. But avoid discussions at this meeting. However 

appropriate to contend earnestly for the faith on 

other occasions, this is not such an occasion. This is 

a meeting for fellowship and communion with the 

Lord, our Redeemer and present King. If any seem 

contentious, let him have his say, and let the others 

refrain from discussion, that the holy moments of 

special communion with himself, which the Master 

appointed for our blessing, be not marred. 

Those who celebrate the Memorial with guileless, 
earnest hearts receive a great and refreshing blessing, 
and for this it is well to have seasons of quiet in the 
midst of the service, when no one will be speaking 
audibly and when the hearts of all can come very close 
to the Master in communion— in realization of his love, 
past and present, in renewing the pledge made to be 
his faithful followers even unto death, in considering 
how that pledge has been kept or violated during the 
year preceding, and in resolving afresh to run with 
patience the race for the prize of joint-heirship with 
our Lord, to which we are invited. 

A beautifully appropriate hymn for closing the 
Memorial is No. 276 in our hymn-book. And it will 
surely add to our joy to realize that some of like precious 
faith in all parts of the world are celebrating the 
same great sacrifice, thinking of the same gracious 
Lord, being comforted and encouraged by the same 
exceeding great and precious promises, resolving by 

R2274 : page 74 

the grace of the same gracious King to do greater service 
and to make greater sacrifices in his service and 
in the service of his people thenceforth, and closing 
with the same song of praise and worship. 
"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 
Thus before the cross we'll spend; 
Life and health and peace possessing 
From the sinner's risen Friend." 
Of the first Supper it is written: "They sang a 



hymn and went out." Let us do the same. Let each 
go to his home with his heart full. We suggest the 
omission on this occasion of the usual, general and 
proper after-meeting greetings, and all commonplace 
remarks and thoughts, thus we may prolong our communion 
and fellowship with the Master. Keep within 
sight of him throughout the next day. Hear the 
clamor of the people against the guileless one; see them 
incited by the clergy of Jerusalem; see him before 
Herod and his soldiers; see him arrayed in robes of 
mock -royalty and crowned with thorns, then buffeted 
and spat upon. 

See him crucified as a criminal, and taunted with 
the very gracious deeds which he had performed— "He 
saved others, himself he cannot save." Remember 
that he could have saved himself; that he could have 
asked for, and would have received, "more than twelve 
legions of angels" to deliver and protect him; that 
he could have destroyed his enemies and villifiers, instead 
of dying for them; and that our hope of a resurrection 
and everlasting life depended upon his willing 
offering of himself as our ransom-price. Considering 
his love for us and for all it will surely strengthen us 
as his followers to endure more and more hardness as 
good soldiers of the cross. Aye, let us consider him 
who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, 
lest we become weary and faint in our minds under 
the light afflictions now permitted for our trial and 
discipline, which, if faithfully endured, will work 
out for each a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory. 

THE CELEBRATION AT ALLEGHENY. 



As usual the Church at this place will celebrate 
Christ our Passover slain for us. The service will be 
in Bible House Chapel, No. 56 Arch street, at 7.30 P.M.. 
on Tuesday, April 5th. We no longer hold general 
Bible Study Conventions in connection with this 
Memorial; for it is at a usually inclement season. 
And, furthermore, we found that as only the few 
could attend from other places, their coming detracted 
from the interest in the home celebrations. Our advice, 
therefore, is that each little gathering seek to 
make these occasions of special interest at home. 
Nevertheless we shall be most glad to welcome all who 
may find it convenient to attend the Allegheny meeting. 



R2274 : page 74 

STRONG DELUSION. 



"For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that 
they should believe a lie, that they all might be condemned [as 
unfit for the honors of the high calling] who believed 
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 
-2Thess. 2:11,12. 

A DELUSION is an error which, when viewed 

from certain standpoints of observation, has 

the appearance of truth. A delusion is more or less 

dangerous according to the importance of the truth 

which it misrepresents, beclouds or falsifies; and, if followed, 

it leads accordingly to more or less disastrous 

consequences. If a merchant be deluded and misled 

by an apparent boom in his line of industry, the result 

to him may be financial disaster. If a man or woman 

be deluded by false ideas of life or by false appearances 

of character when choosing a partner for life, the result 

may be long years of domestic misery. And, likewise, 

eternal interests may be, and are, continually affected 

by the delusions of error on religious subjects. 

When a man is deluded, he verily thinks he is 
right. He claims to be honest in his convictions, and 
he is so. "There is a way that seemeth right unto a 
man; but the end thereof [where the subject of delusion 
is of vital interest] are the ways of death." (Prov. 16:25.) 
The world to-day is full of delusions, and of 
deluded people who verily think they are right, and 
who expect in due time to realize their delusive hopes. 
There are political delusions, financial delusions and 
religious delusions of every shade and hue; and thousands 
and millions of people are following them, and 
devoting all their time and energy to them, only to 
realize in the end a whirlwind of confusion, disaster 
and the utter wreck of all their hopes. 

The questions then arise, Who can escape these 
delusions so common among men? The fact is that 
no member of the fallen race is, of himself, proof 
against them. We are all, in consequence of the fall, 
both physically and mentally impaired; our experience 
is brief and varied, and our knowledge is necessarily 
very limited. 

Tho we see that financial delusions are continually 
misleading men and blighting their hopes of temporal 
advantage; and tho we see that political delusions are 
forming various factions among men and leading them 
to strive for the realization of numerous delusive hopes, 
which, in the end, will bring only anarchy and a time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation; 

R2274 : page 75 

yet those which chiefly concern the children of God 
are the religious delusions, or those capable of affecting 
their eternal interests. The saints have little to 



fear from financial delusions or disasters, since they 
are generally the poor of this world who have little to 
lose, but whose bread and water are sure (Isa. 33:16), 
and whose treasures are not laid up here, but in heaven. 
Nor are they specially concerned with the political delusions 
which we are told shall ere long lead to the 
great political disaster, which is even now imminent. 
These are important to the world, whose only concern 
is their temporal interests. But the questions with us 
are, How shall we escape the religious delusions so 
prevalent everywhere? and what proof have we that 
we are not now under such hallucinations? 

These are important questions which no child of 
God can afford lightly to set aside. But note the words 
of the Apostle above quoted, which seem to imply that 
God is desirous that some should be snared, and to the 
very intent that they might be condemned— "God will 
send [permit to come upon] them strong delusion, 
that they should believe a lie, that they all might be 
condemned." 

Who are these whom God thus desires to be snared 
and condemned? Paul answers, They are those who 
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 
They are not those who never heard the 
truth, but those who, having once heard and understood 
it, turned from it, rejected it and had pleasure in 
unrighteousness— not necessarily in gross unrighteousness, 
such as crime, but in some measure of unrighteousness; 
often a desire for a little more liberty of self-will 
instead of close conformity to the divine will, and 
consequently a preference for the error which would 
grant such liberty and silence the promptings of conscience 
and the voice of truth. Such prefer the error 

R2275 : page 75 

to the truth. Those who receive not the truth in the 
love of it are not worthy of it, and they, therefore, 
must go away from it into the outer darkness that envelops 
the world. To these error comes in its most deceitful 
forms, and they quickly fall a prey to the delusion. 

With the Psalmist, therefore, we may well inquire, 
"Who," then "shall be able to stand?"— "Who shall 
ascend into the hill [kingdom] of the Lord? or who 
shall stand in his holy place?" Now mark the answer: 
"He that hath clean hands and a pure heart; 
who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn 
deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the 
Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation." 
(Psa. 24:3-5.) Here is the class among whom 
the delusions of error can make no headway. These 
have a standpoint of observation from which every 
error appears in its true colors, and every truth in its 
proper light. 

Mark the peculiar features of this class: They 
have "clean hands:" Their work for the Lord may be 



very imperfect; they may tell the story of his love and 
grace in a very halting, awkward manner; they may 
minister to the temporal or spiritual necessities of the 
saints, or others, from a very frugal and plain store of 
their own; but their work will be clean; their story will 
be free from self-emulation and human glorying, and 
their works will be free from both ostentation and 
parade. What they do will be done with simplicity 
and meekness, as unto the Lord, and not for the praise 
of men. 

They have "pure hearts:" Under divine inspection, 
their motives are seen to be pure. Their whole 
purpose and endeavor is to glorify God and to bless 
their fellow-men, especially the household of faith. 
They have not lifted up their soul unto vanity: They 
have no vain worldly ambitions, either secretly or 
openly cherished and ministered to behind the outward 
profession of entire consecration to God— no ambition 
to be great, or good, or wise in the eyes of men, nor to 
grasp the fleeting earthly treasures once consecrated to 
God. Nor have they "sworn deceitfully:" They have 
not made a covenant with God of entire consecration 
to his service, with a secret determination to keep back 
part of the price: nor have they since making the covenant 
repudiated its obligations. 

The whole course of this class is one of sincerity 
and truth. Their character is that of meekness and 
faith; they love righteousness and desire to be molded 
and fashioned after the principles of righteousness; and 
they correspondingly hate wickedness and every evil 
way. With a realization of their own short-comings 
from the standard of perfection, they put no confidence 
in the flesh, but humbly and implicitly submit their 
will and judgment to the will and plan of God. So 
they have no schemes or plans of their own, but are 
fully devoted to the accomplishment of God's plan, in 
God's own way and time, having full faith in his sure 
word of prophecy and promise. 

Those who have such a spirit come reverently to 
the Word of God to learn God's will and way, and with 
a desire to walk accordingly; and here they receive the 
divinely-provided armor of God which will protect all 
who carefully put it on from all the fiery darts of the 
enemy. Without this complete armor, no child of God 
is safe in this evil day. "Wherefore," says the Apostle, 
"take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye 
may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having 
done all, to stand."— Eph. 6:13. 

The evil day here referred to is this Day of the 
Lord, in which we are now living, wherein every man's 
work shall be tried, so as by fire. These are the "perilous 
times" of which the Apostle forewarned the 

R2275 : page 76 

Church— times peculiarly perilous to Christian faith, 



because of the many subtle and delusive forms of error 

now springing up to intercept the progress of the truth. 

But God's provision for his saints is equal to the emergency 

of the perilous hour. Never before this "evil 

day" was it possible for the saints to put on the whole 

armor of God; and never before was it needed. For 

some years past the Lord has been handing us this armor, 

piece by piece, and has been telling us to put it 

on and wear it that we might become accustomed to 

it and feel at ease and at home in it, because the time 

is shortly coming when it will be impossible to stand 

without it. 

Some— a few— have been heeding the counsel. 
Carefully they have buckled on every part of the armor 
as fast as they received it, and in consequence, today 
they stand completely clothed with the truth. 
Their loins are girt about with it; their feet are shod 
with it; and it covers their head (their intellectual faculties) 
as a helmet of salvation (salvation from the 
snares and delusions of error). Then they have on the 
breastplate of righteousness— a righteous character, 
which the truth has developed in them; and in their 
hands they bear the sword of the spirit, which is the 
Word of God, which they are now able to handle with 
ease and vigor in defense of the doctrines of Christ; 
while their ample shield of faith is an able defense 
against all the fiery darts of the enemy, so that the flying 
arrows do not even jar the armor or for a moment 
stun the inner man. 

Praise God for such an armor! Brother, have you 
put it on? Do not rest satisfied with the idea that you 
can get along as well as your fathers did with only a 
part of it. The time is coming, yea, and now is, when 
you must have it complete, or you will surely fall. The 
portions of the armor presented to the saints of the past 
were sufficient for their day and trial; but a greater 
trial of faith in this "evil day" necessitates a more 
complete defense. 

Do not say to the Lord, "Well, I have the breastplate 
and the shield; no, thank you, I think I shall not 
need the helmet;" or, "I think I can get along without 
the sword." I tell you, you will need them all; 
make haste and put them on without delay. Some of 
you should have had them on long ago, and should be 
able to help others don them now. Many are already 
falling, and sadly many are feeling their lack of the 
helmet. Some with mere curiosity-interest have spent 
much valuable time in looking at the various parts of 
the armor as presented to them for the past few years, 
instead of earnestly buckling them on and proving 
them: and they have become so used to merely looking 
at the beautiful pieces of the armor that they expect 
the process of bringing forward new pieces to continue 
forever. Let such wake up to the fact that the armor 
is already complete, and that no more can be added to 
it, because anything more would be a superfluity. The 



Lord has graciously shown us its entire outline, as well 
as the manner in which the various parts of it work 
together. Look at your hand: it has four fingers and 
a thumb. You do not say, Well, perhaps another 
thumb or finger will appear by and by. You know 
there will be no such thing. That hand is complete 
and another member added to it would be superfluous. 

Just so those who have come to view the full completeness 
of God's plan, as now unfolded to us, know 
that nothing more could be added to it. It is gloriously 
complete and worthy indeed of its great Author. 
But, while the outlining, the general harmony and the 
working together of the various parts are all clear to 
us now, we yet have room for profound thought and 
study of it, and probably will still have even after we 
are glorified. Some make a great mistake in continually 
putting on and taking off various proffered armors. 
There is but one armor that will be of any use or protection 
to us, and that is that which is stamped with 
the scarlet stamp of the precious blood of Christ. Every 
piece of this divine armor is so stamped, and it all fits 
together. If you think to change your helmet of salvation 
for some other helmet, you will very soon want 
another breastplate to match it. And you will want 
another sword; for this sword will not match with any 
other helmet. And this shield of faith will not match 
with any other armor. Do not allow your head to 
grow too big for the helmet which the Lord has provided, 
and then go around hunting a new helmet to fit 
your swelled head and wrong ideas. If the helmet supplied 
in God's Word will not fit you, do not fancy the 
increase is real wisdom, and try to stretch the old one or 
to get a new helmet; but freely apply the liniment of 
humility and reduce it till the helmet does fit. 

Put on the whole armor of God. And make sure 
that you accept no spurious brand. Every piece of the 
genuine is stamped with a cross and the words— To be 
worn only by the redeemed. Put on piece by piece, 
quickly; buckle it on securely; and, having done all, 
STAND. The position thus suggested implies an attack: 
the attack will surely come, and indeed has already 
come to many. Are you ready now to do good service 
as a valiant soldier of the cross of Christ? Stand! do 
not run away; stand your ground and battle for the 
truth. 

As we have already observed, it is as truly a part 
of God's purpose to let some fall in this evil day, as it 
is to enable others to stand. He therefore permits the 
strong delusion to take possession of all who have 
pleasure in unrighteousness, and who therefore do not 
believe the truth. Such are unworthy of the truth, 

R2275 : page 77 

and soon or later every such one must fall. All such 
are condemned as unworthy of membership in Christ, 



the vine; and as the time for the exaltation of the 

Church draws nearer and nearer, the testing may be expected 

to increase until all the unworthy ones are weeded 

out. "He will gather out of his Kingdom all things 

that offend [those who put off the wedding garment of 

Christ's imputed righteousness, etc.], and them which 

R2276 : page 77 

do iniquity [those who practice sin, who are not fully in 
sympathy with the principles and ways of righteousness 
as laid down in the Lord's Word]." And "then 
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom 
of their Father." 

If, then, we would escape the delusions of this evil 
day, let us see to it that we are in deed and in truth 
lovers of righteousness; let us receive the truth in 
meekness, hold it with humility and thankfulness, and 
serve it with energy and zeal. 



R2276 : page 77 

THE WHEAT AND THE TARES. 

MAR. 13.--MATT. 13:24-30,36-43. 

"He that soweth the good seed is the Son of Man."— Matt. 13:37. 

COMMENTATORS in general notice that the 

cluster of our Lord's parables, one of which 

is dealt with here, all relate to "the Kingdom of Heaven." 

Yet strangely enough they almost all ignore 

this Kingdom feature in interpreting these parables. 

Of this one, for instance, it is customary to say that 

God began sowing the good seed, the "wheat," in the 

Garden of Eden; and that there also shortly after Satan 

sowed the "tares." Their difficulty seems to be a 

failure to apply rules of order and logic— they fail to 

rightly divide the Word of truth. Certain false principles 

of theory and interpretation are at the bottom of 

their difficulty. It is essential that we empty ourselves 

of the many false doctrines "received through the traditions 

of the elders" and from the dark ages, if we 

would hear (understand) the Word of the Lord— if we 

would be taught of him. 

The gospel of the Kingdom was not preached in 
Eden. It was implied but not clearly stated in the 
promise made to Abraham, "In thy seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." This Kingdom was 
hoped for and expected by Israel, because they were 
the natural seed of Abraham. The Kingdom which 
began in Israel with the reign of Saul, succeeded by 
David and Solomon, and reached its climax in the latter 
and thenceforth deteriorated, never was the Kingdom 



of God in the full sense of the promise to Abraham. 
At the very most it was a typical Kingdom of 
God, in the hands of a typical people of God— Israel 
after the flesh. The Israelites themselves recognized 
this fact and waited for Messiah the great King, to 
come and establish his Kingdom and to rule the world. 
Consequently there could be no proper application of 
these Kingdom of Heaven parables, in any manner or 
degree, previous to that event. 

On the contrary, when our Lord began his ministry, 
the message sent forth was, "The Kingdom of 
Heaven is at hand"— "is come nigh unto you." The 
commission to the disciples was to proclaim Jesus the 
King and to announce that he was ready to establish 
his Kingdom. Yet his ministry with that nation 
closed a few days before his crucifixion, when he, weeping, 
uttered the solemn denouncement, "O Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them 
that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered 
thy children together, as a hen doth gather her 
brood under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, 
your house is left unto you desolate." (Luke 13:34.) 
The literal seed of Abraham having thus failed to accept 
the Kingdom (as God foreknew and foretold 
through the prophets), the next step was to find another 
nation more worthy than the Jews. 

But no other nation could be found suitable to 
God's purpose, and hence a new nation was to be 
formed: and this has been the work of the Gospel age, 
to call out "a holy nation, a peculiar people" from 
every nation, kindred, people and tongue, to constitute 
this Kingdom of Heaven. The "Israelites indeed," 
but a small remnant of the Jewish nation, were attracted 
by the truth and were the first accepted members of 
the "holy nation," at Pentecost. They in turn as ambassadors 
for God, were sent with the King's good 
tidings of the coming blessed Kingdom to us Gentiles, 
—to gather from all nations, kindreds, peoples and 
tongues a sufficient number to complete the "holy nation," 
"worthy" to be the Kingdom of Heaven and as 
such to bless the world.— Rev. 5:9,10. 

It is this "holy nation" in its preparatory and embryotic 
condition that is referred to in the parables of 
the Kingdom of Heaven. These parables of the Kingdom, 
therefore, gave prophetically the Church's experiences 
from various standpoints,— from the time the 
work of selecting began, to the time when that work 
will be completed: when the full number of the elect 
"little flock" will have been called, found faithful under 
the tests and disciplines and polishings of the great 
Master. Then as a whole it shall be glorified, and 
shine forth a glorious Kingdom, full of the excellency 
and power of God and in every way fully qualified to 
fulfil the original promise to Abraham, by blessing all 
the families of the earth with the true light, and drawing 
them all (through a knowledge of the truth) to the 



great Life-giver, that whosoever will may take of the 
water of life freely. 

R2276 : page 78 

Our Lord tells us why he uttered his teachings in 
parables;— that it was because the truths he taught 
were intended only for the Kingdom class, not for the 
average hearer; and his words are very plain to this 
effect: "To you [my believing and obedient disciples] 
it is given [granted] to know the mystery of the Kingdom 
of God; but to all those who are without [outside 
—strangers to God and unconsecrated] all these things 
are spoken in parables: that seeing they might see and 
not understand, and hearing they might hear and not 
believe." In this instance our Lord, we are told, first 
dismissed the general multitude and then expounded 
the parable to his disciples privately. And this was 
his general custom— "Without a parable spake he not 
unto the [general] people."— See verses 10-16. 

Our Lord himself "soweth" this good seed of the 
Kingdom, which germinating constitutes his Church, 
spiritual Israel. This is shown in his exposition (vs. 37), 
"He that soweth the good seed is the Son of Man." 
The good seed itself, we are told, was the message respecting 
the Kingdom— "the word of the Kingdom." 
(Vs. 19.) This word, or message of the Kingdom was 
planted by our Lord and his servants the apostles, as 
it is written, "Which at the first began to be spoken 
by our Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that 
heard him, God also bearing witness both with signs 
and wonders."— Heb. 2:3,4. 

So long as our Lord lived, the Adversary, Satan, 
found no opportunity for sowing the seeds of error 
amongst the seeds of truth: our Lord declares, "While 
I was with them in the world I kept them in thy name: 
those that thou gavest me I have kept." (John 17:12.) 
And so long as the apostles lived the Church was similarly 
protected from the errors which the Adversary 
fain would sow: the apostles for this very purpose, we 
understand, were specially holden and guided of the 
Lord, so that whatever they bound on earth might be 
understood as having the full confirmation in heaven, 
and whatever things they loosed or abrogated or set 
aside on earth, might be understood as having the full 
heavenly sanction. And the Church did recognize 
this divine supervision and accepted the apostolic rulings 
as inspired and authoritative.— See 
Acts 15:24-29,31. 

"But while men slept"— after the apostles had 
fallen asleep in death, Satan, the great enemy, found 
little difficulty in sowing the seeds of error,— false doctrine. 
And as the true doctrine produced true children 
of the Kingdom only, so the false doctrines introduced 
produced false children of the Kingdom only. The 
wheat seed could not produce tares; the tare seed could 



not produce wheat. 

The difference between wheat and tares is very 
great. Wheat is the standard food of the world and is 
said to contain the elements of nutrition in the best 
proportions for man's use: how apt a symbol the Lord 
chose when he would represent the truth, the whole 
truth, and the children of the truth— the children of 
the Kingdom. The tare as a symbol is likewise very 
appropriate. It resembles the chess or cheat of America 
and the darnel of Europe. The tare seed is poisonous 
and acts as an emetic, causing vomiting; and it 
occasions the husbandman great annoyance, because it 
must be thoroughly separated from the wheat before 
the latter can be used. The statement here in the 
Greek implies that the tares were over-sown— intentionally, 
maliciously sown in the midst of the wheat, 
for the very purpose of damaging or totally spoiling 
the entire crop. Such malice would probably be understood 
very well by our Lord's hearers, even if they 
did not comprehend the import of the parable. Professor 
Shaff mentions a similar act of malice in Ireland, 
where an out-going tenant, in spite, on account of his 
ejection, sowed wild oats in the fields which ripened 
and seeded before the crops and caused great difficulty 
to the farmer. Wheat and tares, while growing, look 

R2277 : page 78 

exactly alike until they head out: then the difference 
is very apparent. The wheat heads, full of heavy 
wheat, bend over with the weight, while the tares are 
very erect and have the appearance, where they are 
thick, of being the superiors, the masters of the field. 
What a beautiful illustration of the modesty and meekness 
of the true and fruitful Christian, and of the proud 
boastfulness of those who are Christians in association 
and outward appearance only. 

As in the parable the servants inquired of the 
Master whether or not the seed sown had been good 
(pure, free from weed and tare seed), so to-day and all 
down through the Gospel age, the Lord's people have 
sometimes wondered how it comes that the Church is, 
and always has been from the first, infested with a 
class of people who have a form of godliness, but not 
its power and spirit. They have wondered whether or 
not the truths sown by the great Teacher could possibly 
produce such a varied crop as is seen in the church 
which nominally is his Church. The Lord answers 
our question, assuring us that the seed truths which he 
planted were pure, good, and that the tare seeds were 
planted by his enemy, Satan. And looking over the 
field, the world of mankind (the kosmos, not the ge, 
the earth, nor the aion, the age, tho both of these are 
often elsewhere improperly translated "world"), we 
can readily see its wheat-field,— the field wherein the 
truths and the errors respecting the Lord's coming 



Kingdom have been planted,— where these plantings 
have brought forth correspondingly, a true and a false 
Kingdom class. 

The kosmos, the world of mankind as a general 
field, was all more or less adapted to use as a wheat 
field; but it was not all planted with the good seed: the 
good seed was planted in Palestine, Asia-Minor and 
Europe, and from thence has spread to America and 
to some slight extent elsewhere. But, strictly speaking, 
Europe and North America are the wheatfield in 
which grows side by side, intermingling, and often 
with their roots tangled, the wheat, the children of the 
Kingdom, begotten of the truth, and the tares, children 
of the evil one, begotten of error; and the name of 
this wheat field in common parlance is "Christendom," 
—i.e., Christ's Kingdom; for the "tares" claim to be 
the true Kingdom class and that the "wheat" are 
fanatics. 

The fact that the wheat-field was not free from 
tares was not discovered by some of the faithful servants 
(and indeed was difficult to discern) until the 
fruit began to appear;— then the question was, How 
should the matter be dealt with? Any attempt to root 
out the tares— to separate between the children of God, 
the children of the truth, and the children of Satan, 
the children of error— any attempt at positive judgment 

R2277 : page 79 

along these lines was positively forbidden; the 
instruction being, "Let both grow together until the 
harvest." While therefore God's servants were not to 
attempt the separation, the true from the false, throughout 
the Gospel age, they nevertheless were to understand 
that the mixed condition would not be permanent 
—that a time of separation would surely come- 
in the harvest, in the closing time of the Gospel age. 

Apparently the tares have grown more thriftily 
than the wheat; no doubt indeed the intention of the 
Adversary was to utterly choke the true wheat, and 
hence he has sown the tares with extremely liberal 
hand, so that our Master informs us that out of the entire 
wheat-field, he looks only for a small harvest of 
good, fully ripe wheat— "Fear not, little flock, it is 
your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom." 
By reason of the choking influence of the tares, however, 
there will apparently be much of the true wheat 
not fully ripe for the harvest— not "overcomers," but 
merely "babes in Christ." 

It would be a great mistake to suppose that the 
"tares" of Christendom are merely the murderers, 
thieves, knaves, etc., morally corrupt: on the contrary, 
the "tares" are not on the low level of the field, but 
rise up out of the field (the world) as does the wheat, 
proclaiming that they are Christians by associating 
themselves in religious institutions, and with much 



profession holding their heads higher, and making their 

boasts louder than the true "wheat" class. They are 

generally moral people: this is implied in their association 

with the wheat class, they have "a form of godliness." 

Are we not told by the Lord that such people 

are "children of the wicked one?" Does not this seem 

rather harsh, considering that none of them sprang 

from the good seed of truth, but that they were all begotten 

of error— with which fact they themselves possibly 

had little to do? 

The general view of this matter is, we think, not 
only unkind, but unjust and unscriptural. To our understanding 
the whole world of mankind (excepting 
the true Christians), born in sin and shapen in iniquity, 
aliens and strangers from God, may be spoken of 
as "children of the wicked one," because they came 
into their condition of alienation from God more or less 
directly through Satan's instrumentality. And considering 
that merely nominal Christians were brought 
into Christian profession not by the truth but by falsehood, 
by Satan's misrepresentations and perversions of 
the truth, and that deluded by these errors many of 
them are what they are in all good conscience— we can 
think of them sympathetically; for they do not appreciate 
the hopes and aims and sentiments of the true 
"wheat" class, but think of these as deluded, fanatical, 
over-enthusiastic, visionary zealots. The "tares" 
consider themselves to be the real Church, the real 
crop, sown by the Master, and look with pity often 
upon the true "wheat" class, considering them abnormal 
growths of piety and superstition. The "tare" 
idea of religion is that it is for the restraint of vice, 
for the promotion of civilization and for the cultivation 
of social qualities in humanity. This is the Kingdom 
by which now and for centuries past the "tare" class 
has sought to rule the world— with sword and gun and 
prison, in concert with the preaching of good morals, 
to be preferred when they do not cost too much. The 
"tares" are far too respectable a class of people to have 
been planted by the great Enemy, for any other purpose 
than to act as a powerful antidote or offset to the 
influence of the truth and the true children of the 
Kingdom. Had he been able to keep the world in the 
darkness of heathen superstition, he never would have 
planted so respectable and orderly and moral a class as 
the "tares"— imitations of the "wheat:" but seeing 
the influence of the truth in the world, Satan sought 
heroically to counteract it along advanced lines. In this 
he is true to his Scriptural character— ready to wear 
garments of light, as represented in the sciences, etc., 
and to put upon his faithful the same. 

With this view of the "tares" we may look upon 
them with respect and realize that altho they can never 
hope to enter the Kingdom, and altho they must be 
destroyed as "tares" in the fiery times of the day of 
vengeance just at hand, yet this need not suggest their 



utter destruction in the second death as human beings, 
nor that they will have no hope of any blessing under 
the Kingdom, when it shall be established in power 
and great glory. On the contrary, the "fire" of this 
day of wrath (into which we are already entered) is as 
symbolic as the "tares" it will burn. It will destroy 
the "tares" as "tares"— as pretended children of the 
Kingdom, of which really they never were a part, 
but intruders, deceived. It will still leave them as 
members of Adam's race, bought with the precious 
blood, amenable to the conditions of the New Covenant, 
and to all the blessings of the Kingdom, as they 
shall flow to all the families of the earth, after the true 
"wheat" class have been separated and caused to 
"shine forth as the sun [with their Lord Jesus] in the 
Kingdom of their Father." 

To our understanding of the Scriptures,* we are 
already in the "harvest" time of this age. The great 
Chief-Reaper, the Lord Jesus, is now, through his messengers 
or servants, gathering the harvest of the Kingdom 
truths which he sowed 1800 years ago; and very 
soon the last of the ripe wheat will be gathered into 
the "garner" (the glorified state— the heavenly condition 
—"changed") and then, very quickly, the sons 
of God will be manifested and their great work of 
blessing the world will begin. (See Rom. 8:21,22.) 
This Sun of Righteousness, composed of Christ our 
Lord and all the faithful overcomers of this Gospel age 
glorified, shall "shine forth" as the prophet has declared, 
with healing in its beams— provisions of mercy 
and restitution for all mankind. 

The furnace of fire in which the tares will be destroyed 
(as "tares," and fully and freely confess that 
they and their institutions are not the Kingdom of 
God, that they have neither part nor lot in that matter, 
but were mistaken) is the great time of trouble, 
the day of vengeance; the day of the overthrow of 
Satan and his representatives; the day of Satan's binding 
that he shall deceive the nations no more; the day 
when the rod of divine vengeance shall smite and break 
the systems of earth as potter's vessels, preparing the 
world of mankind thereby, for the blessings and favors 
which divine grace has provided in Christ Jesus our 
Lord, who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified 
in due time. 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. II. and III. 



page 80 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Brother Arnold met 
with us, according to arrangements, to our joy. We 
found in him, we think, a loving Brother, possessed 
of the spirit of meekness. Notwithstanding the extreme 
cold weather, the meetings were well attended, 
and good interest was manifest all through. Those who 
bitterly opposed the truth could not stay away, even 
some who never ventured to show themselves in the 
house before, and I am satisfied the Lord will bless 
the brother's efforts. Many express their sorrow that 
the meetings closed so soon. 

I am very happy to inform you that never did a 
better feeling prevail among the brethren here, than at 
present; and some who a few months ago could not find 
words severe enough in the way of epithets against 
those who are of like faith in the truth can now be 
heard defending it. How true the word that God will 
make the wrath of man to praise him. 

Yours in the Lord, F. Z. GROFF. 



Tennessee. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed you will find 
Express Money Order for $1.00, the price of TOWER. 

I received in due time the fourth volume of the 
DAWN series, and read it eagerly, without stopping, 
only to eat and sleep a little. After carefully reading 
and rereading it I feel that it is just the message the 
world is needing and waiting for, and therefore is of 
the Lord's leading and under his direction. I congratulate 
you my dear Brother upon the successful accomplishment 
of so great a task. 

I have suffered much of late, and, in addition, the 
increasing infirmities of accumulating years render 
me less and less inclined to exertion of any kind, physical 
or mental. Under such conditions we naturally 
seek the easy chair and the chimney corner, and live 
more in the memories of the past than in the activities 
of the present, and put off until to-morrow things that 
should be done to-day; but even the old are not justified 
in indulging in sentimental reveries or natural inclinations 
amid the astounding developments of these 
last days. The hope that the Master has some work 
for me in the stirring scenes of the near future bears 
me up amid the depressing environment. 

Yours in Christian love, S. G. KERR, Sr., M.D. 



R2278 : page 80 

"THE DAY OF VENGEANCE." 



"This is the fourth volume of a series of books 
dealing largely with eschatology, the views enunciated 
in which caused no little controversy in this county a 
year or two ago. Indeed, a specific doctrine in VOL. I. 
formed the subject of a set theological debate between 
the Rev. Mr. Davidson, lately of Canisbay, and Mr. 
C. N. Houston, Wick, an able and eloquent expounder 
of the views. Basing his position chiefly on the assertion 
of Scripture that the Atonement was "a ransom 
for all," Mr. Russell shows how God's purposes in the 
ages towards mankind have been revealed, notably in 
the typical kingdom of Israel and his dealings with 
them, as so minutely recorded in Holy Writ. The 
main contention is that these purposes involve the election 
or selection during the Gospel age of a Church— 
the body of Christ— which, when completed, will reign 
with Christ as a spiritual kingdom, through whom all 
the families of the earth shall be blessed during the 
Millennial age, which is due shortly to be ushered in. 

"In the present volume [IV.] the author steadily 
and logically pursues his theme, proving from the 
Scriptures that the 'Day of Vengeance'— the dark day 
prior to Millennial dawn— is upon us, and that this is 
the meaning of the unrest which is so prevalent on 
every hand and in relation to every subject. Not content 
with giving his own views (or rather the Scripture 
testimony which he applies), the author has fortressed 
these immensely by quotations from scores of prominent 
men— Doctors of Divinity, Statesmen, Jurists, 
Financiers, Historians and Editors— many of whom, 
we presume, realized but imperfectly the import of 
their own words as they are here quoted to prove that 
the history of our day is the fulfilment of prophecies 
eighteen to thirty centuries old. 

"The volume certainly will be valued for its extensive 
collection of facts and figures, relating to almost 
every phase of social, political, financial and religious 
matters as they bear upon the present situation. 
Nor are these dryly stated; on the contrary, they are 
introduced in such a manner as to fascinate every 
reader who is at all interested in the consideration of 
the wonderful events of 'our day.' We must compliment 
the book for its fidelity to the Scriptures and to 
principles of righteousness, and for the even-handed 
justice with which it deals with some vexing problems. 
It is a book that will probably make some warm enemies, 
but it is sure to make a host of warm friends. 
Its enemies as well as its friends will read it with more 
than ordinary zest, and will want it always by them 
as a work of reference. Its influence will surely be 
far-reaching, for its counsels are wholly on the lines of 
law and order and peace, even though it points out 
from prophecy that very shortly peace will be removed 



from the earth. A lengthy chapter entitled 'Our 
Lord's Great Prophecy' is devoted to an exposition of 
Matt. 24, and the views given forth cannot fail to interest 
Bible students. A shorter chapter, the last, entitled 
'Jehovah's Footstool made Glorious' will be found 
most interesting to the same class. Zech. 14:4 is wholly 
unique, and will be found deeply absorbing to Christian 
thinkers and others. 

"The author, while holding to the Second Advent 
of Christ and the then establishment of his Kingdom, 
very evidently has more exalted idea of those events 
than is common to 'Pre-millennarians;' he views it, as 
we have already indicated, as a spiritual Kingdom, 
though none the less a veritable dominion which shortly 
will be the channel of divine blessings to men— tho 
introduced by a 'day of vengeance' and trouble which 
will figuratively break and wound the hearts of men, 
preparatory to their healing with the 'Balm of Gilead.' 
There is so much thought on new lines to be met with in 
the volume that the value and ability of the work will 
be readily admitted even by those who may be unable 
to fall in with its conclusions."— John O'Groat Journal, 
Wick, Scotland. 



page 81 