Earth Becomes a Paradise
HOW delightful it will be to live among peaceful people who have kind, pleasant dispositions! The application of God’s righteous principles will bring about this wonderful condition of peace everywhere. But as progress in righteousness is made, material blessings will also be realized by the earthly inhabitants of God’s new system.
There will be a literal fulfillment of the prophetic words of Isaiah 25:6: “And Jehovah of armies will certainly make for all the peoples, in this mountain, a banquet of well-oiled dishes.” None will ever again know the gnawing pain and weakness of starvation. But how will God provide this banquet?
When the Israelites were God’s chosen people, his blessing brought them great prosperity. Their lands produced fine crops of grain. Their orchards grew excellent fruits. Jehovah opened up to them his “good storehouse, the heavens, to give the rain on [their] land in its season.” (Deut. 28:12; see also De 28 verse 8.) Similar blessings will abound in fullest measure under the rule of Christ’s kingdom.—Ps. 67:6, 7.
The earthly subjects of the Kingdom will fulfill the command that Adam and Eve never carried out. They will “subdue” the earth, making the entire globe a paradise garden like the original garden of Eden. It was concerning such a prospect, and with the hope of resurrection in view, that Jesus said to the sympathetic evildoer who was executed with him: “Truly I tell you today, You will be with me in Paradise.”—Luke 23:39-43.
Then the whole earth will radiate happiness. It will be as if its meadows and mountains, its trees and flowers, its rivers and seas, are all rejoicing at Jehovah’s righteous rule. (Ps. 96:11-13; 98:7-9) The fresh air will no longer suffer contamination. Every river and stream will sparkle with fresh, pure water. There will be no more ruining of the land.
All earth—its forests, its fields, its mountains—will be one beautiful park, alive with colorful varieties of animals and birds. These, too, will be subject to the wise control of Jehovah’s Son. And in that “inhabited earth to come” he will bring them all into harmless subjection to mankind.—Heb. 2:5-8; Ps. 8:4-8.
FINAL TEST DETERMINES WORTHINESS FOR ETERNAL LIFE
God’s kingdom by Christ will rule for all eternity. However, by the close of the first thousand years it will have accomplished a particular purpose toward the earth. It will have removed every trace of unrighteousness. All humankind on earth will stand as perfect creatures before the throne of the Supreme Judge, Jehovah God. In every respect they will be equal to the first perfect humans in Eden. (1 Cor. 15:24) Will they be worthy to have God grant them the right to everlasting life?
First it will be proper that the Kingdom subjects be tested as to their devotion to God’s righteous rule. Jehovah will give them the opportunity to show their loyalty. How? By releasing Satan and his demons from their condition of restraint in the “abyss.” (Rev. 20:7) By this test each one in God’s earthly family may individually have the privilege of giving a personal answer to the challenge made to their heavenly Father by Satan.
Those who stay loyal to God will be judged worthy of everlasting life. Jehovah will give this right to them, writing their names in his “book of life.” Any who rebelliously turn against God will be destroyed in the “second death.” Then, Satan the Devil, along with his demons, will be destroyed forever. (Rev. 20:7-10, 15) Never, no, never, will the earth, or any other part of God’s vast universe, be disturbed again by sin and rebellion. Made into a paradise where righteousness prevails, the earth will serve for all time to come as a jewel of praise to Jehovah’s name.
Does God’s purpose for a righteous rule over a paradise earth deepen your respect for his righteousness? Does it increase your appreciation of his wisdom? Does it move you to express your love for him? If so, then you should do all you can now to serve him wholeheartedly. Share in telling others of Jehovah’s name and purpose. (Ps. 89:14-16; 1 John 4:19) Live now according to God’s righteous principles and so prepare for life eternal in the paradise earth under the Kingdom’s righteous rule.

