An Atheist Finds Answers
“THE articles published in your Watchtower and Awake! magazines are incredible! Your latest issues are irresistible! They answer very many questions and also give peace of mind.”
So stated a reader from south India. He was born a Hindu, but his father raised him as an atheist. He says: “I found no purpose in life. Darwin’s theory of evolution sounded absurd. For years questions have taunted me, such as Who is God? Why is this world corrupt? Where do we go after death? Are wicked spirits real?”
Having found the answers to his questions in The Watchtower and Awake! this reader subscribed to both magazines, sent gift subscriptions to his sister, and now passes on the magazines to people he meets. Being a photographer and an artist, he expressed appreciation for the magazines’ artwork, which “speaks for itself.” By reading these fine magazines, you can join the millions worldwide who have had their questions answered and have gained peace of mind.
If you would like more information about God and his purpose for us, we would be happy to send you free of charge the widely distributed brochure Does God Really Care About Us? Just fill in the accompanying coupon and mail it to the address shown there or to an appropriate address listed on page 5 of this magazine.
□ Send me a copy of the brochure Does God Really Care About Us?
□ Please contact me concerning a free home Bible study.
[Picture Credit Lines on page 32]
COVER, pages 2-9 and 32: Einstein: U.S. National Archives photo; Model-T Ford: From the Collections of Henry Ford Museum & Greenfield Village; Great Depression: Dorothea Lange, FSA Collection, Library of Congress; Nicholas II and family: From the book Liberty’s Victorious Conflict; League of Nations building: U.S. National Archives photo; Churchill: The Trustees of the Imperial War Museum (MH 26392); Battleship: U.S. Navy photo; Atomic bombs: USAF photo; Gandhi: Culver Pictures; Man on the moon: NASA photo; Pollution: Godo-Foto; Mao Tse-tung: Culver Pictures; African children: FAO photo/F. Botts; Statue of Lenin: Juraatis/Sipa Press; Space shuttle: NASA photo; Archduke Ferdinand: From the book The War of the Nations; Lenin: Musée d’Histoire Contemporaine-BDIC

