European Health and Safety
By Awake! correspondent in Britain
OVER 16,000 men and women work at the headquarters of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society and its 109 branch offices. Some of these volunteers care for printing, workshops, and machinery maintenance. But whatever their assignments are, they are committed to sound work practices, which safeguard life and health.
The high standard set by the Britain branch in its factory at London’s Mill Hill was acknowledged publicly in 1998, following the 1997 European Week for Safety and Health. A crystal bowl inscribed with the words “European Week for Safety and Health—Award Winner 1997” was presented to the Society. What led to their receiving this prestigious award?
In 1994 the Watch Tower Society submitted to the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) a detailed analysis of how to reduce the number of back injuries at work. At the conclusion of this campaign, the Society received an HSE certificate for its support. In 1996 the Society was asked to compile a short report on its health and safety activities. Subsequently, a certificate was presented to the “Watchtower Bible & Tract Society in recognition of their valued contribution” to health and safety.
The following year, 1997, the HSE invited Watch Tower to share in its European health and safety campaign. In due course the Society submitted a detailed treatise, with photographs, showing that by connecting individual power tools to the main dust extraction system, it is possible to reduce dust from a wood workshop by 90 percent and reduce wood particles by 100 percent, at a cost of less than £250 ($400).
As a result, the Society was among 30 award winners invited to meet representatives of the European Commission and the British government as well as the chairman of the Health and Safety Commission. When presenting the inscribed bowl, he commented: “Well done, Watch Tower!”
[Pictures on page 31]
Awards given to Watch Tower for its high health and safety standards

