
6 Look to God for Help

“When my husband walked out on me and the children, I petitioned God to support us. He answered my prayer. We have lacked nothing essential. He has both helped us and guided us.”—MAKI, JAPAN.





IN TODAY’S increasingly secular world, people in general give little thought to God. Yet, our Creator is interested in us and wants us to succeed in life. His feelings are well expressed at Isaiah 41:10: “Do not be afraid, for I am with you. . . . I will really help you.”
In the preceding article, we considered how God helps us by means of the wholesome values found in the Bible. (2 Timothy 3:16) But the Bible is much more than a guide. It reveals God’s wonderful personality and his love for us. Hence, as many Christian parents—single and married—have discovered, when we apply Bible teachings, we actually experience God’s goodness.
Robert, Austria: “Jehovah God is a better father or mother than any one of us. He knows what our children need, and he knows how to protect them. So I often pray to him with my daughter.”

Ayusa, Japan: “It brings me joy to see my son show his confidence in Jehovah’s support when he says, ‘Jehovah is with us, so everything will be all right.’”

Cristina, Italy: “When a problem seems beyond my ability to solve, I pray to Jehovah, leaving it in his hands. Instantly, I feel an inner peace, knowing that the problem will get sorted out in the best way.”

Laurentine, France: “I can confirm that Jehovah has blessed me as a single parent. He really does come to the rescue of the afflicted and the fatherless or motherless.”

Keiko, Japan: “God is impartial. He wants to show his tender care to all families, whether they have two parents or just one.”—Acts 10:34.

Reflecting God’s compassion and concern for us, Jesus Christ said: “Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you . . . , for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will find refreshment for your souls.” (Matthew 11:28-30) To be sure, Jesus and his heavenly Father, Jehovah God, want us to feel secure under their loving care. At Psalm 34:8, we read: “Taste and see that Jehovah is good.” Yes, God wants you to see for yourself that his advice works, that he has your best interests at heart. Will you accept his fatherly invitation?



I Was Moved by My Mom’s Example
No matter how busy or tired she was, she would stop whatever she was doing to come to my bedside to pray with me. Her prayers helped me to realize that I could actually become a friend of Jehovah God.—Amanda, U.S.A.



