R1171 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., JANUARY, 1890. NO. 2. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



"BIBLE HOUSE:" 

Arch Street, Allegheny, Pa., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

DOMESTIC,— Fifty cents a year in advance, by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered letter. 

FOREIGN,— Two shillings per year. Remit by 
Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TO POOR SAINTS. 

This paper will be sent free to the interested of 
the Lord's poor, who will send a card yearly requesting 
it. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come 
ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come 
ye, buy and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk 
without money and without price." And you who 
have it— "Wherefore do you spend money for that 
which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently— and eat ye 
that which is good, and let your soul delight itself 
in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2 . 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at 
the Post Office, Allegheny, Pa. 



ORDER as many sample copies of this 
issue of the TOWER as you desire and will 
use judiciously, or send us the addresses 
of such as you hope would be interested 
through it. 



ANY ONE, who is a subscriber to the 
Old Theology Quarterly Tracts, is welcome 
to send in addresses for sample copies 
of any one of the tracts he considers 
the most suitable for his friends. Send as 
many addresses as you please. Write them 
upon a separate piece of paper from that 
of your letter. 



R1171 :page 1 

REMOVAL TO BETTER QUARTERS. 

The increase of the work makes necessary 
a removal of our office to more commodious 
and better lighted quarters at the 
address given above. We praise the Lord 
for the increased opportunities for usefulness 
in his service, which this change 
seems to imply. Unite with us in rendering 
thanks, and in the prayer that from 
the new building 

"The light— the radiance from the cross, 
The depth of love revealing," 
may shine more and more until perfect 
day; and that 

"Still new beauties we may see 
And still increasing light." 



R1171 :page 1 

NO TOWER FOR DECEMBER, 1889. 

In view of our removal, and in view 
also of our need of our type in preparing 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., we concluded 
to omit a TOWER issue for December 
15th and to send this January issue a 
little earlier than the middle of the month, 
so as not to keep our readers too long in 
suspense. Instead of the December TOWER 
we sent to all readers samples of the 



"OLD THEOLOGY"-a tract-pamphlet issued 

quarterly at the small sum of 5 cents 

per year. Subscriptions for Old Theology 

may be sent in with your TOWER subscriptions. 

See terms for quantities, etc., on 

second page of sample tract No. 4. In ordering 

please state whether you wish your 

subscription to date back to the beginning, 

or to start with January 1890. 



R1171 :page 1 

YOU CAN ASSIST IN THIS. 



We want to know, at once, how many 
postoffice boxes there are in every postoffice 
in the United States and Canada. 
How many are there in your post office? 
With what number do they begin and 
with what number do they stop? Also, 
if possible, we would like to know how 
many are vacant and for rent, and what 
their numbers are. How many of our 
readers will serve us and the cause to this 
extent? It will cost you only a postal 
card and a little time. Or, if you are 
sending in your subscription for the TOWER, 
you can enclose the memoranda on 
a separate slip of paper. 

Each one who thus serves (if not already 
on the list) will be entered as a subscriber 
for Old Theology Tracts for 1 890 
FREE. 



R1171 :page 1 

GREETINGS FOR THE NEW YEAR. 

Beloved readers, it is with hearts full of 
thankfulness that we acknowledge the divine 
favors of the year just closed. The 
Twenty-Third Psalm voices our sentiments. 
The Lord has graciously continued 
his gentle leading of his sheep beside still 
waters and into the fresh green pastures 
of his truth. Our table he has supplied 
with viands of grace and knowledge, 
bountifully, even in the presence of our 
enemies, who sometimes have been those 
near and dear to us— enemies to the truth 
because of the blinding of the great adversary, 
Satan. And we know from your 



precious letters received during the year 
that this, our experience, has been yours. 

Now, in the dawn of a new year, we 
feel that we can apply to ourselves and to 
all God's consecrated ones the words of 
the last verse of this Psalm : "Surely goodness 
and mercy shall attend me all the 
days of my life; and I shall dwell forever 
in the house of the Lord." Let us, beloved, 
not only appreciate the bounties 
of our "table," but more and more feed 
upon the precious truth; and let us seek 
more and more to make use of the strength 
this food imparts, laboring in Christ's service, 
that we may become more and more 
"strong in the Lord and in the power of 
his might." 



R1171 :page 1 

CONSIDER THIS CAREFULLY. 



One of the most important questions 
with some who will receive this number 
of the TOWER is, whether or not they will 
receive the succeeding issues. To many 
it may be said to be the only channel of 
communication between them and the remainder 
of the household of faith; to very 
many it is the only channel through which 
the voice of the Chief Shepherd is heard. 
And yet, because not urged to subscribe, 
or because they neglect or put off attending 
to the matter, many every year are 
dropped from our lists; and often, may 
be a year or two after, write us that they 
are lean of soul and starved for lack of 
the food it bears from the Master to his 
friends and household each month. We 
are most firmly convinced that the TOWER 
is and has been a chosen vessel in the 
Lord's hands for dispensing "meat in due 
season," and we pray and labor that it 
may so continue to be used. For these 
reasons, and 

FOR THE FIRST TIME, 

we urge all to renew their subscriptions. 
We need scarcely tell you that we do not 
urge for the money's sake. Most of you 
know that such a paper as ours at 50 cents 
per year, without income from advertisements, 
could not pay its way and pay for 



editorial and office labor, postage, etc. But 
we never have accepted and hope never to 
need to accept money for our services; 
they are grateful, loving offerings to the 
Lord, and to his church which represents 
him. ( Col. 1:24 .) The truth already 
has done so much for us that we are paid, 
exceeding abundantly, more than we could 
ask or expect, in advance, for all the service 
we are able to render. And besides, 

R1172 :page 1 

we are as greatly blessed each month as 
any of you, as the message flows from our 
pen to you, and as from your letters we 
learn of the rich blessings that the water of 
life and love, the truth, brings to your 
hearts continually. Indeed, so greatly 
are our hearts blessed by the preparing of 
the food for the household that we should 
be greatly disappointed were the privilege 
of the service, or even the privilege of 
doing it gratis, taken from us to be given 
to some one more worthy the great honor 
and privilege of being a "servant of all." 

We explain the matter thus, fully, that 
you may rightly appreciate our motives 
in asking you to attend to the matter at 
once if you have any interest in the truths 
which the TOWER presents, that your interest 
may, by the watering of the Lord 
through our "broken vessel," increase 
greatly, to his praise and your profit and 
to our joy in you, through the Redeemer. 

Our desire would be that the WATCH 
TOWER subscription lists should contain 

THE NAMES OF ALL INTERESTED 
IN PRESENT TRUTH. 

We desire this for their good, and for 
their present and everlasting joy, and not 
from any selfish motive; and to bring 
about this desired result we have arranged 

1 st. The very low price of the paper— 
50 cents per year,— less than one cent a 
week and less than one-seventh of a cent 
per day; so that but slight sacrifice, if 
any, will be required to be made to obtain 
it by any who have any money whatever 
at their command. 

2nd. We have provided that the cloth-bound 
one dollar edition of DAWN may 
be had by subscribers at half price; or, 
to reverse this proposition, We will give 



the TOWER one year gratis to any who 
purchase the cloth DAWN at one dollar. 
And to introduce the TOWER we shall 
probably sell future volumes of DAWN 
only upon these terms. 

3d. We have provided— See Terms on 
first column— that any and all of God's 
children who by reason of age, or sickness, 
or accident, or by reason of inability 
to get employment, or who for any 
other reason are unable to pay the cost of 
the paper, may have it free, if they will 
write at the beginning of each year and 
state their desire for the paper, but their 
present inability to pay its cost— a postal 
card will do. But the card or letter must 
be from the person desiring the TOWER 
on these terms. 

We want to hear from every one of you 
at least once a year. It does you good to 
write to us, and it does us good to hear 
from you and to judge of your growth in 
grace, knowledge and love of the Truth. 
But you must not expect us to answer personally 
all your good letters. Accept, 
please, of the articles of the monthly 
TOWERS as our letters to you, and let your 
letters be your answers back to us— at least 
one letter each year, to let us know that 
our preaching is not in vain in your case. 

But let none suppose that all need to 
be urged to write us of their joy and love 
and growth, or to renew their subscriptions. 
Ah! no, thank God! Had it been 
so we, doubtless, should have become discouraged 
long ago. We receive every 
year thousands of letters which we prize 
more, far, than money or worldly honors; 
and more than any thing else except the 
blessings of the Master himself. Some 
of these from time to time we insert in 
the TOWER for your general joy, but some 
of the most precious are laid away carefully 
at home as precious mementos. 

Beloved, let us hear from you— at once! 



R1172 :page 1 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, ETC. 

We have not the time to give you the 
particulars of this branch of the work, or 
of the Tract Fund work, as we should like 
to do at the beginning of the new year. 



We have no high-salaried officers whose 
sole work it is to keep accounts and make 
reports. We, on the contrary, are going 
ahead doing with our might (with the resources 
at our command) what our hands 
find to do, (and that is a large work, we 
assure you, and we cannot nearly do it 
all,) and we leave to the Lord the bookkeeping, 
accounting and full reporting. 
Our Accountant is an all-wise and infallible 
one. He sees and notes the efforts 
made by every one of you in his service— 
the service of the truth. By and by- 
it will not be very long— he shall render 
his account of our several stewardships, 
when he shall render to every man according 
as his work shall be; for every man's 
works show his faith and his love, according 
to his ability. And where there is a 
will to serve the Lord, there is always 
some way of showing it. 

R1172 : page 2 

Briefly, we may say that while we have 
been somewhat disappointed that so many 
readers have failed to appreciate and use 
the Old Theology Quarterly as a method 
of service, yet a few others have more 
than made up for this, and have quite exceeded 
our hopes in their zeal and service 
—some subscribing for and using as many 
as three thousand copies of the tracts each 
quarter. A hasty examination shows that 
(stating it in the usual manner of stating 
tract circulation,) over five millions of 
pages of Old Theology Tracts went out 
of our office into general circulation during 
the past year. And from present indications 
we would not be surprised if the 
year 1890 would more than double the 
output of 1889, large as that has been. 



R1172 : page 2 

WHERE DOES THE MONEY COME FROM? 

This we know is a question often asked 
among our friends and enemies. Our 
terms on DAWNS, tracts, etc., to our readers 
and to colporteurs, made very public, 
convince all that we are not selling the 
truth for gain; and as the work keeps on 
and on, the wonder increases. Strangers 



surmise that many wealthy folks are interested 
in the work; but those intimately 
acquainted know better, that the Apostle's 
prediction is fully verified,— that 
among the interested are not many rich, 
not many great, not many whom the 
world esteems wise, but chiefly the poor 
of this world.— See 1 Cor. 1:26-29 and 
James 2:5 . 

We can only answer: The work is the 
Lord's and the workers are his, wherever 
they may be laboring in the harvest field. 
He is caring for and providing for his own 
work. As for ourselves, we do not live 
out of the work, nor accept any monetary 
compensation for our service for the Master 
and his cause, that our time and effort 
may be an offering of sweet savor unto 
the Lord, acceptable to him through 
Christ Jesus, our Redeemer. We mention 
this, not as a reproof to any whom God 
has differently situated, but that the friends 
may know how this part of the Lord's 
harvest work is conducted. 

While our personal accounts and affairs 
are kept separate from those of the general 
work— "The Tract Fund"— yet we thank 
God that we have nothing of our own; 
that we left all to follow him; that having 
given ourselves entirely to him, we were 
enabled to realize that, if we are wholly 
his, all that we have and are is his also. 
Hence, though our personal accounts are 
kept separate and distinct from the general 
Tract Fund account, yet both are governed 
and used under the same general principles, 
of which care and economy are parts, 
coupled, we trust, with heaven-directed 
judgment as to how best and most to reach 
and bless and set free the true sheep, by 
so dispensing the harvest message as to 
lead them out of error's bondage and 
sectarian slavery into the liberty of the 
truth, and to let all who have an ear hear 
the voice of the great Shepherd. 

Some have said to us (and many have 
written the same in substance): "If you 
ever get short and need a little help, be 
sure to call on me, and I shall be glad to 
assist." We thank all such, and realize 
their good intentions and appreciate them, 
but we never have asked and never will ask 
money for the Lord's cause. The nearest 
we ever came to asking money from 
any convinced us that such a course is 
wholly contrary to the Lord's will. That 



instance was in 1881, when over a million 
copies of "Food for Thinking Christians" 
were published and circulated. We then 
remembered a Brother, who was well-to-do, 
and who had repeatedly shown a deep 
interest in the cause, and who had said to 

us, "Brother R , whenever you see 

something good, something specially calculated 

to spread the light and needing 

money, something in which you intend to 

invest, let me know of it— count me in 

on all such enterprises;" and we merely 

laid the matter before him, explaining the 

plan and the amount of money that could 

be used, without making any direct request. 

The Brother gave liberally, yet 

apparently the offering brought him only 

a partial blessing. And, perhaps from 

fear that we would call further opportunities 

to his notice, and from a lack of 

full appreciation of our motives in the 

matter or of the light in which we regarded 

it (as a favor toward him to let him 

know of the opportunity), that Brother 

has gone backward and lost much of his 

former interest. How much the above 

circumstance had to do with his decline 

of interest we know not, but it doubly 

strengthened and guarded us on a point 

R1173 : page 2 

on which we were already well settled, 
namely, that no direct and personal appeals 
should be made to any in our Lord's 
name. All the gold and silver is his. 
He neither begged nor commissioned any 
to beg for him. 

As he increases the supply of the means, 
we will sow the seed of truth the more 
bountifully and liberally, and yet economically 
and judiciously as we know how; 
and if he withholds the funds, we will 
still be thankful and seek to make what is 
supplied go as far as possible, by practicing 
the more rigid economy; and if the 
supplies stop entirely, instead of asking 
man or even asking the Lord for more, 
we shall be content to stop the work entirely, 
believing that such a course would 
thus be indicated to be the Lord's will. 

Ah! it is a great mistake, dear friends, 
to hold on to a money-talent, or any other 
talent of which we may be possessed, and 
to say, When I see that my talents are 
needed, when I see that the Lord's work 



has been crippled and interrupted for lack 
of what I have,— then I will give and give 
liberally, if need be to the last dollar 
or the last breath. Such a love of the 
Lord, though far better than many have, 
is not of the sort our Master will accept 
and honor as worthy to be of his Bride. 
Such a spirit analyzed means, I am selfish, 
I love my plans and schemes in which I 
find use for every dollar. I do not appreciate 
the privilege of self-denial, but 
if God should speak from heaven and demand 
all, I would promptly give all, or 
if I found God's plan likely to fail utterly 
for the lack of what I could give, if it 
took the last dollar, I would rescue the 
Lord and his cause from failure. 

The proper course is, to realize that 
God is abundantly able to carry out all 
his plans without our aid at all; and that 
instead of our gifts of time and energy 
and money being necessary to help God 
along, he is favoring us amazingly, by 
granting us the privilege of co-working 
with him in using what little we may have. 
This is a privilege which all may enjoy. 
The poor widow and the poor laborer of 
ever so small income, as well as the more 
highly favored in this world's goods, 
should appreciate the privilege of bringing 
some present to the Lord— something 
that will testify their love, and show what 
is in their hearts to do, were they possessed 
of larger talents and opportunities. 
The two mites or two cents of the poor 
widow may cost as great self-denial as ten 
dollars would cost a mechanic or merchant, 
or as a thousand dollars would 
cost a wealthy man, or as a hundred thousand 
dollars would cost a millionaire. 
One may deny himself a yacht or a new 
residence, another may deny himself an 
extra carriage, or a trip to Europe, another 
may deny himself an extra suit of 
clothes or a usual "summer outing," and 
the widow may deny herself an extra table 
relish. It is self-denial in either case, 
and when done for the cause of our Redeemer, 
it is appreciated by him, not according 
to the amount but according to 
the self-denial, which gauges the love as 
truly in one case as in the other. 

Could each one fully realize his present 
privileges, the conduct of each would 
declare— 
"All for Jesus, all for Jesus, 



All my being's ransomed powers, 

All my thoughts and words and doings, 
All my days, and all my hours." 

The consecrated condition voiced by 
the Apostle is, "For me to live is Christ:" 
and wherever that sentiment is even partially 
shared by God's people to-day, 
there is such a desire to tell of his mighty 
love, that time, talent, voice, purse and 
every other thing are valued specially because 
they enable the adorer to show forth 
the glories of the Adored One who hath 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light. 

To such, the one-tenth of all increase, 
which the Law commanded the Jew to 
consecrate, and which some Christians 
observe, would seem an offering far too 
small to satisfy the demands of their love-inspired 
zeal. Such must and will do 
more— not of constraint or command, 
but to testify to the Redeemer their love 
and devotion. These will take pleasure 
in cutting short the time previously spent 
in the reading of light literature and daily 
news; they will be less careful and less 
energetic in pushing business so as to lay 
up treasure on earth for their children or 
others to quarrel over and be injured by; 
they will spend less time in foolishly endeavoring 
to shine on earth by "putting 
on style," in dress and home and road 
equipage. And they will not only thus 
save moments and hours, and dimes and 
dollars; but they will use them also, which 
some forget to do who are adepts at saving. 

How shall we spend our savings of time 
and money? becomes an important question. 
We answer, if you and all that you 
have are the Lord's, you are God's steward 
in this matter, and must consult his 
will and not your own nor another's will. 
In other words, you must act up to your 
own conscience and light in this matter, 
no matter who or how many offer you advice. 
You will be advised and urged to 
give time, influence and money to support 
great Babylon in some or in many 
forms— as to assist in employing a worldly, 
unbelieving choir to displease God by 
praising and chanting with their lips while 
their hearts are far from him. ("Unto 
the wicked God saith, What hast thou to 
do to declare my statutes, or that thou 
shouldst take my covenant in thy mouth? 
seeing that thou hatest instruction and 



casteth my words behind thee."— Psalm 50:16,17 .) 

Or perhaps you will be 

asked to contribute toward the support of 

a minister who, either ignorantly or stupidly 

or for money, devotes his time to 

misrepresenting the character and plan of 

our God, and thus blinding the very eyes 

that he should be opening with the eyesalve 

of truth. Or perhaps you will be urged 

to give money to assist the Foreign Missions 

in carrying the bad tidings abroad, 

or to help Home Missions to teach the 

Indians of the West and the Negroes of 

the South, directly or indirectly, the very 

errors from which, thank God, you have 

gotten free through the truth— to help 

put upon others the chains of error from 

which you have just gained freedom. 

Can you spend either time or money in 
those channels, conscientiously believing 
that thus spent it will most glorify God? 
If you have come to a knowledge of the 
truth, you certainly can do nothing of the 
sort. Better far to waste the time, and 
waste or destroy the money, than to use it 
thus to fetter others with error and to dishonor 
our God. 

If your giving and sacrificing are from 
the right motives, you will need to be just 
as conscientious as to how you spend your 
time, influence and means for God and 
truth, as you are to economize and save 
these from self and worldly things. The 
world and the devil are continually begging. 
Beware of those who beg in Christ's 
name. Be suspicious of them. Scrutinize 
their objects closely. God never begs. 
The most he ever asks you for is your 
heart— "My son, give me thy heart." 
When our hearts are fully his, we begin to 
urge him more and more to accept our little 
offerings. And as we become anxious to 
serve him and intelligently seek how we 
may best do so, he graciously gives us the 
privilege by letting us see where and 
how we may co-work with him in the 
spread of present truth. 



R1174 : page 3 

THE NEW YEAR. 

"Gone with our yesterdays; folded apart, 
Laid by with the treasures we hide in the heart, 



The year that hath left us, so silently shod, 
Has carried its records of earth unto God. 
How strange was its mingling of bitter and sweet, 
Its trials how heavy, its pleasures how fleet; 
How often its mercies surprised us, unsought; 
How frequent the gifts to our hands, which it 

brought; 
Alas! that we shadowed its glory with sin, 
Nor battled its beautiful trophies to win; 
And thanks unto Him, who gave pardon and rest, 
And wrought for His children whatever was best. 

"Cometh in winter the year that is new. 
Snow-fall, and frost-rime, and star-beam, and dew, 
Shine of the daisies, and blush of the clover, 
Rose cup and lily for bees to hang over, 
Stir of the wind in the waves of the wheat, 
Smile of the violet low at our feet, 
Fruitage of orchard, and cluster of vine, 
Seed-time and harvest, O man! will be thine, 
Once more in this year; for what hath been, 

shall be, 
While the rivers of time seek eternity's sea. 

"So, a Happy New Year, to the babe and the 

mother, 
To gentle wee sister, and rosy cheeked brother. 
A Happy New Year to the aged, who wait 
Till the Lord opens wide the Paradise gate. 
A Happy New Year unto those who have learned 
How rich are the guerdons which labor has earned. 
And a Happy New Year to the weary, who cling 
Through sorrow and pain, to the cross of the 

King. 

"Far down thy fair vista, blithe New Year, we see 
The sun gleam of the beautiful Sabbath to be; 
From far o'er the billows we hear the glad swells 
Amid people in darkness, of church-going bells. 
God speed the full time when idols shall fall, 
And the banner of Jesus wave white over all; 
When the nations shall walk in the light of the 

Lord, 
And Eden's lost verdure to earth be restored. 

"Dear Christ, by Thy passion, Thy grace and Thy 
power, 
Assist us, uplift us, in each clouded hour, 
And still by denial, bestowal, delay, 
Whatever is needful, oh, give us, we pray! 
The year that is far above rubies shall be 
The year of our lives that is closest to Thee. 
And precious and sacred our changes shall grow, 
If heaven-light o'er them in tenderness glow. 
Let the burdens of woe, and the conflicts of care, 
Alike be relieved by the breathings of prayer; 



And happy, or only resigned, let us raise 
Each morning and evening the songs of our 
praise." — Selected. 



R1174 : page 3 

THE NEW COVENANT. 

IT IS FOR GOD'S FRIENDS. 



God's law is that righteous arrangement 
which God's unerring wisdom has established 
for regulating the affairs of his 
creatures for their good and his pleasure. 
God's will is his law, which is as unchangeable 
as he is all-wise and unchangeable. 
God's law is, therefore, the only 
covenant or agreement he ever makes with 
his creatures. When man was created 
and placed under favorable conditions in 
Eden, OBEDIENCE (fullest acquiescence 
with the perfect will of his Creator) was 
made the condition of his continued enjoyment 
of life and all its attendant favors 
and blessings. This was not a covenant 
but a condition, because a covenant 
signifies a contract or agreement between 
two parties, and we know that Adam 
could not have been consulted about his 
own creation or asked to agree to any 
covenant regarding the continuance of 
his existence. While it would have been 
neither kind nor just to have so created 
Adam that life would have been an injury 
and a burden, or to have brought him 
into conditions wherein an eternity of 
misery might have been risked, it was 
both kind and just for God to do what he 
did do, viz., to create him perfect in the 
midst of Eden's perfections and to give 
him the privilege of perpetual life and 
blessing under his Creator's favor upon 
condition of his full and hearty obedience 
to his benefactor's wise, just, loving and 
necessary laws, plans and regulations. 
Otherwise his communion and fellowship 
with God, his pleasures in Eden and even 
life itself, were to be withdrawn from him, 
as one unworthy of them. And his as yet 
unborn race, in his loins and represented 
by him, were involved in that penalty 
with him, when he knowingly and willingly 
violated the condition of life. 

Since God and his law and regulations, 



which represent his character, are unchangeable, 

a careful scrutiny and study 

of this first transaction between God and 

man reveals clearly the fact that as God 

did not prepare Eden and its favors for 

his enemies, nor even for one who without 

enmity would refuse or neglect to 

comply with his perfect, righteous laws, 

so he need not be expected, either, to 
prepare the earth as the Paradise of God 
and to redeem and restore and grant everlasting 
life to any who, when fully informed, 
would have a disposition to oppose 
him or to infract or evade the least 
of his wise, benevolent and just laws and 
regulations. In a word, whatever favors 
God ever has, or shall extend are for his 
loyal friends; and none of them are for 
his enemies. 

But, while thus clearly noting that the 
enemies of God are the enemies of his 
righteous laws and regulations and the 
friends of God are those who do whatsoever 
he commands ( John 15:14 ); and 
while noticing also that his desire toward 
his friends is that they may have everlasting 
life in the enjoyment of his fellowship 
and favor, and his determination and decree 
toward his enemies is that they shall 
be cut off from life and from all his favors 
as mere cumberers of the ground; let us 
not make the too common mistake of supposing 
that the friends of righteousness- 
friends of God— can all be easily recognized 
now. By no means; under the 
present reign of Sin and evil the service 
of Sin brings at least a transient reward 
of pleasure or gratification, while the 
service of Truth and Righteousness brings 
at least a transient pain or reproach. 
Doubtless many now serve Sin because 
of its present gratification of inherited 
weaknesses, who really detest it and would 
rejoice in righteousness, if they were as 
favorably circumstanced as Adam was. 
Such, therefore, are not really the enemies 
of righteousness and of God. 

Many now stand with the open wilful 
enemies of righteousness and sit in the 
seat of the scornful, because of ignorance 
of God's plan and character; because 
blinded by Satan ( 2 Cor. 4:4 ; Psa. 1:1 ); 

R1175 : page 3 

and because their ideas of right and wrong 



are badly warped and twisted, through 

various false doctrines and theories. We 

might not always be able to tell which of 

our fellow-men are friends of righteousness 

and unwilling sinners, and which the 

willing ones— which under favorable circumstances 

would prove to be friends of 

righteousness, friends of God, and which 

would prove to be enemies of righteousness, 

enemies of God. But God, who 

reads the thoughts and intents of the 

heart, knoweth well. Yea, he foreknew 

that there would be such, before he created 

Adam; and in his wonderful plan, arranged 

before the foundation of the world, 

the Lamb slain had a place, and was his 

provision,— not for those whom he foresaw 

would, under full light and opportunity, 

be wilful sinners, enemies of himself 

and his righteous government, but for 

those whom he foresaw would, when 

they would have full opportunity, become 

his friends, because at heart always 

willing and preferring righteousness rather 

than sin. It was for such ultimate 

"friends" that God provided the sacrifice 

of his Son, the redemption which is in 

Christ Jesus, and not for those who shall 

ultimately prove themselves enemies. 

All mankind are enemies or opposers of 
God and righteousness, so far as their imperfect 
conduct or works are concerned, 
though all are not such at heart. Thus 
Christ died only for his friends (those 
at heart the friends of righteousness) while 
in fact those friends were all, more or less, 
opposing righteousness (unintentional enemies) 
by reason of the weaknesses and 
imperfections of their fallen state. Thus 
seen, two texts seemingly contradictory 
are in perfect accord: "While we were 
yet enemies we were reconciled to God by 
the death of his Son," and "Greater love 
hath no man than this, that a man lay 
down his life for his friends —ye are my 
friends" —whoever will render heart-obedience 
to God's perfect, righteous law.— 
Rom. 5:10 ; John 15:13 . 

MAN'S FREE WILL. 

Returning to Adam and his family, outcasts 
from Eden and from all that it represented 
of divine favor and communion 
and the conditionally-promised life everlasting, 
let us study for a moment their 



mental attitudes toward God. Were they 
friends or enemies? 

Legally they were all enemies —violators 
of God's just and good laws, condemned 
to death therefor by their good and just 
Creator. But if their wills, their hearts, 
be examined to see whether they were still 

wilfully and maliciously opposed to God 
and righteousness, determinedly wilful 
opposers, as Satan for instance, we find 
some of each sort— some who would rejoice 
in iniquity and feel and act maliciously 
toward the right, and others who 
would fain be back again in full fellowship 
and communion with God, desiring 
and delighting to do his will and sorrowful 
for the past. 

Everything connected with the narrative 
in Genesis tends to show that both Adam 
and Eve were deeply penitent and looked 
longingly to the Lord for the reconciliation 
and restoration to his favor hinted at 
in the statement that the seed of the woman 
should bruise the serpent's head- 
crush evil. Seemingly this hope was associated 
with the birth of each of Eve's 
sons. Their names seem to indicate this. 
The name of her first-born son, Cain, in 
the Hebrew much resembles in meaning 
the word Eureka —"I have found it"— 
or I have got the expected one. Abel, 
the name of the second son, indicates 
doubt or uncertainty; Cain in the meantime, 
no doubt, having manifested the evil 
disposition, afterward so clearly marked 
in his history. The godly character of 
Abel seems to have revived her hope, 
that of her offspring one should arise 
who would somehow vanquish Satan and 
evil, and bring back the fellowship and 
blessing of God; consequently when her 
third son was born Eve named him Instead 

(i.e., Seth), for she said, "God 
hath appointed me another seed INSTEAD 
of Abel whom Cain slew." ( Gen. 4:25 .) 
And, indeed, the hope that she might be 
the mother of the long promised "seed 
of the woman" seems to have filled the 
heart of Eve's daughters through the line 
of the family of godly Seth, all the way 
down to and including Mary, our Lord's 
mother.— Luke 1:41-55 . 

In Adam and Eve and their first three 
sons we have a clearly marked showing of 
the human will, and the fact that God 
does not give us our wills but that each 



individual is accountable for his own will; 
while God only influences our wills to 
the extent of setting before us certain information, 
upon which each one's will 
must decide or act for himself. (Thus 
God works or operates in us, the church, 
who have already willed to serve and 
obey him, by continued unfoldings of his 
Word and plan, so that we, already right-willed, 
may continue to will and continue 
to do his good pleasure, more and more. 
— Phil. 2:13 .) As increasing light shows 
the propriety of increasing zeal and sacrifice, 
it also shows with increasing clearness 
the grandeur of the things which 
God hath in reservation for them that love 
him —his "friends, who do whatsoever he 
commands." We need not question God's 
power; we know that he could have created 
man without a will; but he did not 
do so; he created him in this as well as 
in some other respects in his own likeness 
or image— with ability to will for himself. 
And we have never found a member of 
the human family fallen so low that he 
had no will of his own —except idiots, 
who are clearly not accountable. Even 
those who are fallen so low that they seem 
to have no power to control their conduct 
by their wills, still have the will. "To 
will is present with me, but how to perform 
I find not," not only represented 
the Jew's condition but that of all fallen 
men. A thief may have the organ of acquisitiveness 
large and the organ of conscientiousness 
small and may therefore by 
reason of this mental unbalance have a 
predisposition to steal. Yet he has, at 
least, some conception of the wrong he 
commits, and he steals with a certain 
amount of wilfulness or unwillingness. 
A will in the matter he must have, even 
though it be so weak (because unsupported 
by good elements of organization and because 
opposed by bad elements of organization) 
that he cannot carry out his will 
but is continually falling into sins which, 
when out of the heat of temptation, he 
may mourn over. Hence, we repeat, there 
is in every man a will. 

That God delights in the freedom of 
will in all his creatures is evident, also, 
from the fact that he has given this faculty 
to them all, even to the very smallest insects. 
Go to the ant— consider her ways, 
and see how much will power she evidences. 



Take a drop of water and examine 
with a microscope its living creatures; 
that even they have wills of their 
own, must be apparent to all. Much more 
man, made to be God's representative in 
the earth, and its king,— man has a will, 
and to it God appeals; and in harmony 
with its laws and liberties, which he gave 
it, God and his laws always operate. 

While Adam and Eve and their second 
son Abel, and their third son Seth, developed 
wills which desired righteousness 
and reconciliation with God, Cain, their 
first-born son, developed a will opposed to 
righteousness; proud and self-willed, he 
had no desire to submit his will to God's 
will, and did not aspire to the reconciliation 
promised to be provided; he, no 
doubt, regretted the loss of Eden and 
would have liked to be restored to it, but 
not upon God's conditions of absolute 
obedience to God's righteous will and arrangements. 
He would have loved the 
reward of obedience and righteousness, 
but was unwilling to accept the terms; 
he did not will to be God's friend upon 
the only conditions God offered, or ever 
will offer, his friendship and communion. 
He consequently opened his heart to unbounded 
ambition and selfishness which 
brought in envy, hatred and malice, 
and led him to murder his brother Abel, 
because his life and his offering, submitted 
more fully to the will of God, were more 
acceptable to God than his own. Not 

R1175 : page 4 

having submitted his own will to God's 
will and righteous plan, Cain hated his 
brother, and from envy deliberately 
planned and executed his murder. 

It cannot be claimed that Cain's will 
was weakened and depraved by heredity, 
for he was Adam's first-born. He had 
plenty of will- power, as much as his brother 
Abel, but he misdirected his will. He 
willingly copied Satan, while Abel was 
copying God. Yielding himself to evil, 
he allowed an evil or sinful will to be begotten 
in him and then nursed it into a 
murderous, devilish will or disposition, 
hating good and loving and doing evil. 
And so, as those who pattern and conform 
their wills to God's will are children of 
God, of Cain it is written that he, willingly 



copying Satan's disposition, became a 
son "of that wicked one."— 1 John 3:12 . 

Likewise, our Lord spoke to some of 
the malicious Pharisees, whose wills were 
set in opposition to the truth, who, instead 
of seeking God's will and way, were 
Satan-like, seeking their own exaltation 
and hating the right and the light, saying: 
"Ye are [children] of your father 
the devil." So the Apostle once spoke 
to a similar character, a wilful evil-doer, 
saying, "O full of all subtilty and all 
mischief, thou child of the devil; wilt 
thou not cease to pervert the right way of 
the Lord?" -Acts 13:10 . 

NO PROVISION FOR GOD'S ENEMIES. 

Notice now that God has never purposed 
or promised blessings upon wilful 
enemies. Eternal life and kingdom favors 
are not for such. Had all the race 
been such characters, no redemption and 
no restitution would have been provided. 
God foresaw, however, that many (the 
vast majority, we doubt not) would, after 
seeing clearly and in some degree experiencing 
both good and evil, right and 
wrong, and their respective consequences 
under God's law, be glad to recognize 
and serve God and the right —with all 
their heart, mind, soul and strength; 

R1176 : page 4 

and to observe the same law in their dealings 

with their fellow-creatures— loving 

their neighbors as themselves. It was because 

God foresaw these would-be friends 

in the Adamic race that for such he provided 

redemption and reconciliation 

through the blood of the crucified one. 

"Greater love hath no man than this, 

that a man lay down his life for his 

FRIENDS. Ye are my FRIENDS, if ye do 

whatsoever I command you.— Love one 

another as I have loved you." 

We do not forget that the same great 
Teacher said, "Love your enemies" and 
"If thine enemy hunger feed him"— 
help to keep him alive. This command to 
us is very different from what God reveals 
concerning his own plan of procedure toward 
his wilful enemies, of whom he 
caused it to be written:— "The enemies 
of the Lord shall lick the dust;"— shall 



fall in death— they "shall die;" they 
"shall be cut off" from life; "all the 
wicked will he destroy." [He will not feed 
them and continue their lives everlastingly.] 
"They shall be punished with an 
everlasting destruction from the presence 
of the Lord and from the glory of his 
power; when he shall come to be glorified 
in his saints and to be admired by all 
them that believe in that [Millennial] 
day." - Psa. 72:9 ; Ezek. 18:4 ; Num. 15:31 ; 
Psa. 145:20 ; 2 Thes. 1:9,10 . 

And his reason for thus giving us a 
different rule from that which he himself 
will follow is readily seen. The enmities 
and oppositions of the present time 
among men are mostly attributable to 
mutual weaknesses and imperfections and 
misunderstandings; and we who are totally 
incapable of reading and judging the 
hearts, the underlying motives, the wills of 
our fellow-men, could not unerringly judge 
which are the few real enemies of righteousness 
and which, its many blinded, deceived 
or only partly informed or over-tempted 
friends. Therefore, if thine enemy 
hunger, feed him; he is probably a 
deceived friend of God and hence of 
yours. As for the few times when by 
feeding our starving enemy we should really 
help perpetuate a being unworthy of 
life and whom God has declared should 
be and shall be destroyed, the Lord tells 
us to leave that to him, that he has not 
yet made us the representatives and executors 
of his laws. But he does tell us 
also that no real enemy of his and ours, 
no informed and really wilful enemy of 
righteousness, shall escape just punishment 
because of our exercise of leniency. 
He declares, "Vengeance is mine, I will 
repay, saith the Lord." Therefore, dearly 
beloved "avenge not yourselves"— 
follow instructions, feed all enemies and 
trust to the Lord who can and will, in 
his due time, render "vengeance to his 
enemies."— Rom. 12:19 ; Jas. 5:1-6 . 

And God, indeed, for a time follows the 
very rule thus laid down for us. He does not 
now destroy his enemies, but feeds them; 
sending rain upon the just and upon the 
unjust and causing the sun to shine upon 
the evil as well as the good. God waits, 
as he tells us to do, until his due time arrives, 
when (during the Millennial age) 
he shall cause the knowledge of his 



character, his plan and his laws to be 
clearly and fully made known to all men. 
Then the real enemies, the wilful evildoers, 
shall be manifested; and the multitude 
of present enemies, through inherited 
weaknesses, deceptions, and misconceptions, 
whom he foresees will become his 
friends, shall be manifested also. Then the 
"friends," the "sheep," shall enter into 
life— the second life, the non-ending life; 
while the "enemies," the "goats," shall be 
cut off from life— enter into death, the second 
death, non-ending death;— an "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the 
Lord" and from all further opposition to 
his glory and power. Self-willed Satan, 
and all his children, all who willingly 
prefer his course of enmity to God and 
righteousness, shall go into destruction 
(symbolized by the lake of fire) "the 
second death." ( Rev. 20:14 .) God seeketh 
not to bend the unwilling, but is 
pleased to receive and help and restore 
the willing ones. He does not propose 
to use his power to chain unwilling devils 
to his throne, but to open through Christ 
a way to life by which whosoever wills 
may come and partake freely. Neither 
will God destroy the wills of the unwilling 
and make them mere machines; rather 
than have such children he could and 
would, as our Lord declared, create men 
out of stones. ( Matt. 3:9 .) No; God 
"seeketh such to worship him [and to 
enjoy his favors] as worship him [willingly] 
in spirit and in truth." All the good 
things which God hath in reservation are 
for those who love him.— 1 Cor. 2:9 . 

For this purpose of proving and manifesting 
who are the friends of God, "God 
hath appointed a day [a time— the Millennial 
day] in the which he will judge 
[grant a trial to] the world, in righteousness 
[It will be a just, fair trial, full, complete, 
final], by that man whom he hath 
afore ordained— Jesus Christ, the righteous 
one." He must reign [andjudge, 
and the Church shall reign andjudge with 
him- 1 Cor. 15:25 ; 2 Tim. 2:12 ] until 
he hath put all enemies under his feet" 
(—not upon thrones of honor), and until he 
has liberated all the groaning, travailing and 
sin-sick creation from the bondage of corruption 
and death into that freedom from 
pain, sorrow and dying which is the divine 
provision for all the sons of God. ( Rom. 8:21 .) 



Yea, God's Anointed shall not 
only reign, but reign in righteousness. 
He will lay justice to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet, and the hail shall 
sweep away the refuge and delusions of 
lies, and he will stamp out evil and wilful 
evil-doers forever. ( Isa. 28:17 .) The God 
of peace will introduce lasting peace and 
blessing by crushing Satan and all his wilful 
children (his wilful followers, who in spite 
of full knowledge, will, like him and with 
his spirit, love evil rather than good) under 
the feet of the Christ —shortly.— 
Rom. 16:20 . 

Then, having finished his work, having 
bought the sheep and having found 
all of this sheep class of mankind who 
had all been lost in the wilderness of sin, 
the Good Shepherd, who knows all his 
sheep (and who will be known by all of 
them, when once they clearly and distinctly 
hear his voice), having destroyed 
the wolves of sin and the wilful goats, 
will bring all the sheep safely and happily 
back to the Eden fold of God, and shall 
deliver up the kingdom to God, even the 
Father, that God and his law and his fold 
may be to such henceforth, forever, their 
all in all. Thenceforth, there shall be no 
more pain, nor sorrow, nor sickness, nor 
dying, nor cause for these; for sin and 
they that loved sin, and all the former 
things shall have passed away forever. 
Thenceforth, all things are new and perfect 
and right and good. 

"WITHOUT THE SHEDDING OF BLOOD 
THERE IS NO REMISSION OF SINS." 

HEB. 9:22 . 

Having looked at the class whom God 
desired to restore to his favor, his 
"friends" (including all those who will 
ever become his friends, obedient to his 
righteous regulations), let us look now at 
the method adopted by divine wisdom for 
effecting reconciliation or atonement between 
God and these. 

That a number of the patriarchs were 
quite willing to be reconciled again to 
God, to be at-one with him and repossess 
themselves of the blessings of Eden, which 
he had prepared for those at-one with 
him, is very evident. It is also evident 
that God would not and did not permit 



that full, complete reconciliation; that 
though he did permit those who longed 
for his friendship and who desired to know 
and to do his will, to have a measure of 
his friendship, what he granted was far 
from full and complete fellowship. He 
never restored them either to the comforts 
or the everlasting -life conditions of Eden. 
Whatever fellowship was granted came to 
them as they were given to Adam, as loving 
provisions. And even the limited 
fellowship, the limited at-one-ment permitted, 
was so hedged about with typical 
sacrifices for sins as to clearly indicate to 
these would-be-friends of God that they 
were unclean —unfit to be recognized by 
God, or to be at-one with him, or to have 
his favors. To appreciate the reason why 
God thus held aloof from men, and how 
full and complete reconciliation has since 
been accomplished between God and 
those who are desirous of being at-one 
with him, and how, ultimately, all the 
"friends" of God shall be sought and 
found, and brought to one-ness with him, 
is to appreciate the philosophy of the plan 
of Salvation, conceived by God before 
the foundation of the world, begun at our 
Redeemer's first advent, and to be completed 
with the close of his Millennial 
reign. 

Obedience to his Creator is not only 
the proper and reasonable course for 
man, but it is the course essential to his 
happiness; for disobedience is not only 
sinful ingratitude, but it is injurious to 
man, who has not the experience and wisdom 
essential to a proper guidance of his 
own affairs. God's regulation, therefore, 
is that his wisdom, his power, his care and 
his love, must be trusted in implicitly by 
all; and his will must be the only law, if 
harmony, peace and blessing to all would 
prevail. He will have nothing short of 
this; hence he would not countenance 
the slightest disobedience on the part of 
the perfect Adam and would not excuse 
disobedience. He would, instead, illustrate, 
to all his intelligent creatures, 
how imperative and unalterable are his 
laws, how disastrous and far-reaching are 
the consequences of disobedience, and 
how necessary his laws are to the general 
well-being of all his creatures. 

Notwithstanding, therefore, God's loving 
sympathy for Adam, and his foreknowledge 



of all the dreadful consequences 
upon his posterity, God determined 
to make an example of the sinner 
and of the natural consequences of sin, and 
so the penalty of sin went into effect. He 
cast Adam out from the garden of Eden 
and all its favors; he no longer treated 
him as his loved creature and friend but 
as one who had rebelled; he virtually said, 

R1177 : page 4 

you have chosen your own path, now walk 

in it, take the consequences, use your own 

will and see where it will land you, and 

how much more joy and liberty you will 

have than if you had remained under my 

easy yoke and light burden— my easy requirement 

of obedience. 

Yet, while treating mankind thus, on 
the lines of justice, God had already 
planned for the recovery of all such of 
the human family as would desire to render 
full obedience to his just laws and arrangements. 
He could not change his 
laws to suit the imperfect, fallen, weak 
condition of such as desired to return to 
full obedience and favor; he could not 
accept as perfect that which was far from 
perfection. To do so would bring confusion 
into God's kingdom, and for 
him to recognize sin and affiliate with 
sinners and in any degree countenance 
their sins and weaknesses would be to 
partake of sin and be a partner in it with 
sinners. 

It is asked, Why did God not restore 
men from death— from sickness, pain and 
mental and moral imperfection, and from 
the tomb— and then let them show their 
harmony and obedience? We answer, that 
was impossible! It is impossible for God to 
lie or to deny himself, or his own sentence 
against sin. ( Heb. 6:18; 2 Tim. 2: 13 .) 
God's sentence against sin was that "the 

soul that sinneth, it shall die;" and even 
God himself could not now change that 
sentence; hence God could not restore 
the condemned and dying and dead race 
and offer them another trial: Adam had 
been tried and had failed, and the sentence 
was passed and could never be altered, 
because God's law, like himself, 
changes not, forever. 

But some will inquire, Did not the 
death of Adam meet the penalty? and 



could not God justly have made him alive 
and perfect again the next moment after 
life had become extinct— the next moment 
after the penalty had been fully inflicted? 
No; you misunderstand the penalty 
of sin. You seem to think of the 
matter as though the penalty of sin read, 
The being who sins shall cease to exist 
for a moment, or more, as a penalty for his 
sin: or, The wages of sin is a temporary 
suspension of existence: or, The body of 

R1177 : page 5 

the person who sins shall die. But none 
of these properly represent the penalty, 
which was that the soul should die— the 
being should cease to exist. When this 
penalty is fully studied and realized, it 
will be seen that utter extinction of being 
was the penalty, and that a merely 
temporary suspension of animation would 
not be a fulfillment of it. 

How, then, could any hope of a future 
and everlasting life be entertained for any? 
From a human standpoint there was no 
room for hope, because there could be no 
room for expecting God to break his word 
or change his righteous law. But nevertheless, 
God held out a hope to such as 
desired and endeavored to return to his 
favor, though he did not explain the process 
by which he would recover them, but 
left that for faith to reason upon. And 
faith reasoned that if God could not break 
his word about the penalty, he could not 
break it with reference to the recovery 
from it. 

Even the shadowy sacrifices and typical 
services of the Law-Covenant, made with 
the seed of Abraham, but slightly disclosed 
what would be God's method of 
meeting the penalty inflicted upon Adam 
and his family and canceling it, so far as 
it would work injury and loss of existence 
to those of the race whom God loves and 
calls his "friends"— even all who love 
righteousness, and God the King of the 
righteous, and also all who would do so 
if they fully and clearly understood the 
truth. We, however, who live since the 
great Redeemer came and gave his life for 
"his sheep" [not for the "goats"], and 
who are of his sheep, are privileged to understand 
these "mysteries" of Jehovah's 
plan (Matt. 13:11 ; John 16:13 ), so that 



we may not only fully and clearly comprehend 

the portion of it already accomplished, 

viz., the ransom given for the 

life of Adam and all who lost life through 

his disobedience, but listening to the great 

Shepherd's voice, gradually, more and 

more, the length and breadth and height 

and depth of that plan are revealed to us; 

showing us that the results of Christ's 

obedience to the Father's plan, in the 

voluntary sacrifice of himself (the man 

Christ Jesus) as Adam's substitute or ransom-price, 

will fully and completely offset 

and cancel the penalty upon Adam and 

his children. 

How, now, does the case stand in view 
of the ransom given by our Redeemer at 
Calvary— Did it secure everlasting life 
for that entire race of sinners? 

No; it did not secure everlasting life, 
nor even a right to it, either for Adam 
or for a single one of his posterity. 

What then did Christ's death accomplish 
for men? 

It merely and only canceled and set 
aside the penalty upon Adam for that first 
disobedience;— which penalty, as long as 
it remained against the race, prohibited 
their ever returning to perfection and life. 
Now, they may return to divine fellowship 
and favor, and thence to perfection 
and everlasting life, if they can do so. 

But men are unable to recover themselves 
"out of the horrible pit and out of 
the miry clay" of sin, which has become 
a great cancer upon the bodies and minds 
and morals of our race, which, however 
loathsome and abhorrent to those who 
long for purity and righteousness, has become 
a part of our very being and is 
sapping and drawing the life forces daily 
and hourly. And these cry out, Oh! 
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver 
me from this corrupt state and set me free 
so that I might do right and be in harmony 
with God and have his blessing and 
favor and gift of everlasting life! 

The ransom opened the way for the 
powerful Mediator to establish the New 
Covenant with all desirous of reconciliation. 
Before that sacrifice for Adam's 
sin was made, God could not enter into 
covenant relations with those under death-sentence 
for violating his laws. Nor could 
Christ as Mediator offer pardon or restore 
to perfection of life those under divine 



sentence, without opposing God's perfect 
law; which he could not and would not do. 

As an illustration, Suppose that a bookkeeper 
in governmental employ had proven 
dishonest and had been legally sentenced 
and imprisoned for the offense; 
and suppose the penalty was one that 
could be met by the payment of a money 
fine; suppose that the man had thoroughly 
repented and reformed and made such 
restitution as he could for his embezzlements; 
suppose that a friend of his, a 
physician, knowing all about the case, 
should pay the fine and secure his release; 
suppose, too, that the government officials 
were willing that he should return to his 
old position and former salary, but suppose 
that the man had during his confinement 
become paralyzed and lost his ability 
to write and to calculate. All will see 
that a payment of his fine [his ransom] 
could not restore him to his former work 
and pay, if he could not fill the requirements. 
But if the physician who redeemed 
him from the condemnation of the law 
by paying his fine should also be skillful 
in treating his disease and restoring him 
to his former condition and thus to his 
former employ and its wages, the two-fold 
work of Christ as Redeemer and Restorer 
would be illustrated in him. 

Christ's death as man's ransom sets free 
from condemnation, fully, entirely; but 
the effect of sin has paralyzed all mankind, 
mentally, morally and physically, so that 
the good that we would we often cannot 
do. We are, therefore, notwithstanding 
the ransom, wholly unable to fill the original 
place in God's service designed for 
us, and are unable, therefore, to get the 
wages of righteousness— everlasting life. 
Mankind must still look to Christ, the 
Redeemer, and, earnestly desiring it, put 
themselves under the treatment of this 
Great Physician for the restoration of all 
the lost powers. And such as come to 
him, he will not refuse, but will put them 
under the strict regimen of the New Covenant, 
and so long as they continue thereunder 
he will treat their cases, correcting, 
instructing, exercising them, etc., until 
they are fully cured and restored to the 
lost portion and favors. 

Praise God for the all-important work 
accomplished at the cross, by which the 
sentence of extinction was lifted from the 



race! yet it is very evident that since 
God's law continues the same yesterday, 
to-day, and forever, and since he still 
must and does refuse full communion and 
fellowship with sinners, and since we cannot 
recover ourselves from the plague of 
sin, it is very evident, indeed, that some 
great physician, able to cure our malady 
and to restore us to mental, moral and 
physical health and perfection, must be 
sent to us by our gracious Creator or our 
case would still be hopeless. 

God knew this all along, and so provided 
that the obedient one who, willingly, 
for our redemption left the heavenly 
nature and glory and became a man, that 
as a man he might give himself a ransom 
(a corresponding price) for and instead of 
the first man, the transgressor ( 1 Tim. 2:6 ; 

1 Cor. 15:21 ), should be the one 
who, as the great Physician, Savior and 
Life-giver, should not only redeem Adam 
and his children from the sentence and 
penalty of extinction, but should "save 
HIS PEOPLE from their sins;" and delivering 
these, his people, from sin and death, 
should finally present them perfect, blameless, 
unreprovable before the Father, fit 
objects of his love and communion, restored 
to the divine likeness, in which 
they will be able, as father Adam was in 
Eden, to fully comprehend and fully perform 
all the divine requirements. And 
in addition to what Adam had, they will 
have the valuable experiences of the present 
time, proving to them the love of their 
Creator and Lord and giving assurance 
that he and all his laws seek only their 
permanent blessing and joy. 

CENTRE AND CIRCUMFERENCE. 

The hope of the world, then, has a 
circumference as well as a centre; the 
centre is the Redemption or Ransom, 
the circumference the Deliverance, the 

R1178 : page 5 

Life-giving, the Restitution to the divine 
favors; and the various provisions and 
conditions of the New Covenant connect 
this centre with its circumference as spokes 
do in a wheel. 

Only by following the New Covenant 
provisions can any of the redeemed reach 



the grand limits of perfection. Its provisions, 
however, are ample for the bringing 
of all the willing ones to a condition, 
mental, moral and physical, where God 
can recognize them as worthy of his favor 
and communion. Those who recognize the 
sacrifice of Christ as the Ransom-price of 
the race have it as an assurance of the 
sincerity of God's promises of deliverance, 
and as a practical demonstration of 
his sympathy and love which amounts to 
a conviction that he will in his own due 
time do all that he ever promised;— "exceeding 
abundantly more than we can 
ask" or at present imagine.— Eph. 3:20 . 

As the long delay of over 4000 years 
until the Ransom was given perplexed the 
Lord's faithful among the Jews, so the 
long delay of the Great Physician, as the 
Life-giver, the Restorer, since his giving 
of the Ransom, since the release from the 
sentence of extinction ( Rom. 4:17-19 ), 
has greatly perplexed many of the Lord's 
faithful ones during the Gospel age. But 
now, as his due time comes for the further 
explanation of his plan to his people 
( Dan. 12:9,10 ; Luke 12:37 ), it is all 
made clear and plain. We now see that 
the past six thousand years were used in 
God's plan for the multiplying of the 
race, sufficient to fill the earth when as a 
whole it is made a Paradise, fit for perfect 
men in fellowship with God; and that 
during this period, long to us as measured 
by the short measure of present existence, 
but short to the great Eternal, each generation 
played its noble or ignoble part 
and got its lessons and experiences with 
sin and its consequences, and was laid 
away in the dust. There they await the 
coming of the great Deliverer, fully 
authorized by the satisfaction of the 
sentence upon us, secured by his own 
payment of the penalty against us; 
and fully competent, by reason of his own 
resurrection and high exaltation to the 
divine nature ( 2 Pet. 1:4 ), to "save 
unto the uttermost" all who will come 
unto the Father by him. He shall come in 
power and great dignity, and, opening 
the prison doors of the tomb, shall call 
back to being, in orderly succession, the 
generations of the dead, and offer to each 
and to all fullest opportunity to demonstrate 
their willingness to come into full 
harmony and covenant relationship with 



God, upon the only conditions which God 
can or will or ought to make, viz., absolute, 
prompt and willing obedience to his 
righteous government, which is wisely instituted 
for man's eternal happiness. 

God's people see, further, that the delay 
since the payment of the ransom-price 
has been utilized by God for the call and 
testing and selecting of a "little flock" 
of specially zealous and earnest lovers of 
righteousness; whose testing is specially 
severe, because accomplished during the 
period in which error and wrong and sin 
are permitted to triumph and hold sway 
in the world; in a time when it costs the 
sacrifice of much that is convenient and 
pleasurable. But if called to endure more 
than will be exacted of the world in general, 
during the Millennial reign of the 
great Deliverer, they have also exceeding 
great and precious promises, of divine 
favor and honors, far beyond those given 
to Adam and to be restored to all the 
willing ones of his posterity. 

While the obedient world, in general, 
will have human life and honors and every 
earthly good restored to them by the 
great Mediator of the New Covenant, as 
the reward of obedience to God's regulations 
under favorable conditions, the 
"little flock," selected during the Gospel 
age, are to have a new nature given to 
them; they are to be "changed," from 
human to divine nature ( 2 Pet. 1:4 ), and 
to have correspondingly changed bodies, 
no longer flesh and blood and bones, but 
immortal spirit-bodies. Now begotten of 
God's spirit through his word of promise, 
they pledge themselves to sacrifice the 
earthly, human interests, blessings, honors 
and pleasures (to which they, in common 
with the lovers of righteousness, friends 
of God, of the whole world, are heirs according 
to the New Covenant), that instead 
they might obtain the still higher 
favor of joint-heirship with Christ Jesus, 
the Redeemer, under the Abrahamic Covenant; 
to be the Seed of blessing, through 
whom the divine plan of the New Covenant 
shall be extended to whosoever wills, 
and shall save all of God's "friends," 
his "sheep," "his people, from their 
sins."- Matt. 1:21 . 



R1178 : page 5 

THE NEW COVENANT IN HIS BLOOD. 

It is important that we should see, clearly, 
that in God's arrangement for the reconciling 
to himself of the world, i.e., of 
such of the world as do or shall, after fuller 
knowledge of the Lord, earnestly desire 
a reconciliation, he in no degree 
compromises the matter of sin; he in no 
way lifts one particle of the penalty first 
pronounced against sin. His proposition, 
first and last, is to "save HIS PEOPLE from 
their sins," not in them. And it is only 
"his people" that he will save (deliver, 
clear, release) from the power and consequences 
of their sins. While all are released 
from the condemnation of Adam's 
sin, each has a varying quantity and variety 
of sins and imperfections of his own, 
only partially the results of inherited 
weaknesses, to be gotten rid of before 
he can be perfected and fit for the favors 
and covenant-relationship of Jehovah. 
This is the work which Christ Jesus now 
does for his church, the consecrated, and 
this is the work which, in a little different 
form, Christ and his church, his Bride, 
are to do for "whosoever wills" of all 
the race, during the Millennial age. 

The Lord's method in dealing with his 
Church, the "little flock" of the Gospel 
age, is as follows: He assures us that if 
we fully accept of him, first as our Redeemer 
who bought us with his own precious 
blood, and secondly, if we desire 
to avail ourselves of the privileges, thus 
afforded us, of returning to obedience 
and harmony and fellowship with God, 
and to the lasting life and blessings which 
these conditions secure, he will own us as 

R1178 : page 6 

friends of God, for whom the New Covenant 
was made; and that under the conditions 
of that covenant all such may 
reckon forgiven all the sins of the past 
(and all the sins and errors of future days 
which they may unwillingly commit). 
And this state of reckoned forgiveness, 
reckoned purity, reckoned soundness and 
sinlessness, is termed "justification by 
faith," because it is not an actual righting 
and perfecting of the sinner. If he abides 



in covenant-relationship with God, that 
is, if he continues to trust in the redeeming 
blood of Christ, and continues to 
despise sin and to desire and seek fellowship 
with God— so long he is reckoned 
and treated as "justified freely from all 
things." And if he should ignorantly 
and unintentionally do a wrong, which 
knowingly and realizingly he would not 
have done, his justification continues; such 
a transgression is not reckoned to be a sin 
under the favorable conditions of the New 
Covenant. Even though, under strong 
temptation, such an one should stumble 
and commit a sin, yet his heart remain 
true to the Lord, so that reflection upon 
the act or word shall cause sorrow and 
contrite repentance and so far as possible 
a correction of the wrong— this shall not 
be treated as a violation and cancellation 
of his justification under the New Covenant 
(though he may receive "stripes," 
"chastisements," for his correction); because 
his heart, his will, is still loyal toward 
God, so that he would not have 
committed the transgression had he been 
strong and able to resist the temptation. 
The corrective dealings of the 
Lord with such will, however, teach them 
that they must go to him for strength for 
every weakness, that his strength may be 
perfectly manifested, even through their 
weaknesses. 

But if the individual should turn from 
righteousness to love sin, or if he should 
reject the precious blood (sacrifice) of 
Christ, by which the New Covenant came 
into operation, and by which he had once 
been sanctified ( Heb. 6:4-8 ; 10:26-31 ), 
his justification is canceled, he is no longer 
reckoned justified, perfect, but his sin 
remains. He is yet in his sins; in the 
very gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity. 
To such the special favors of God 
are closed, though with the whole world 
they share the general bounties— rain, 
sunshine, food, etc., and perhaps may 
prosper beyond many of the Lord's 
"friends," the covenant-keepers, during 
the present time, while evil is permitted 
to rule the earth. 

We would have it clearly seen that 
earnest desire after righteousness and reconciliation 
with God, and the recognition 
of Christ's ransom-sacrifice as the only 
way by which this desire can be accomplished, 



are the only conditions upon 

which the Lord God will enter into any 

covenant with the condemned and imperfect 

children of Adam, now or in the 

coming age. And the moment these conditions 

are complied with by any, that 

moment they are reckoned and treated as 

though they were perfect and sinless, as 

the happy objects of divine love and favor, 

except that they are not released at 

once from the aches and pains and imperfections 

which sin brought on them. 

But, why are not all such "friends" of 
righteousness at once released from the encumbrances 
and penalties of sin? Because 
divine wisdom (which, as we grow in 
grace, we are more and more able to appreciate) 
sees best to test and prove the 
sincerity of our professed love and promised 
obedience to his arrangements. Our 
everlasting fidelity must be assured; it 
must be demonstrated that our turning to 
God is more than a fancy, a whim, an 
experiment on our part. All experimenting 
must all be done in the present or in 
the Millennial age, and the real, final, fixed 
preference of each must be ascertained; 
whether he chooses righteousness (and 
thus chooses everlasting life, its reward) 
or whether he prefers sin (and thus chooses 

R1179 : page 6 

everlasting destruction, extinction— its reward). 

Because, God's purpose, as he declares 

it, is that sin and imperfection shall 

not be permitted to go beyond the close of 

the Millennium; that all who do not prefer 

and rejoice in righteousness shall be cut 

off; and that sin and its consequences, pain, 

sorrow and dying, shall never more be 

permitted to mar the perfect bliss of eternity 

among any of his creatures. So, 

then, it is for our everlasting good as well 

as for the good of all God's creatures that 

he does not at once actually justify (make 

perfect) all who profess to accept the New 

Covenant conditions. The reckoned justification, 

or justification by faith, answers 

every purpose best; it permits the return 

to favor and fellowship and introduces the 

sin-sick soul to the great Physician and 

Life-giver, who sees to it that the wounds 

do not heal merely on the surface to break 

out afresh, but keeps them open at the 

surface until they heal thoroughly from 



the heart outward. 

In general, as thus far considered, the 
New Covenant has the same effects upon 
the contrite believers of the Gospel age 
that it will have upon the same class of 
the coming Millennial age. But now 
we will notice some differences. During 
the Millennium, while each one who desires 
reconciliation and accepts of the Redeemer 
as the way, the truth, and the life, 
will thereby come under the conditions 
of the New Covenant and by faith may 
instantly realize his justification, his pardon, 
and his at-one-ment with God, 
though still actually imperfect (just as the 
same class now do), he will not, as we do, 
continue on in imperfection down to the 
tomb, but will gradually (more or less 
rapidly, in proportion to his love of righteousness 
and trust in the Redeemer, who 
will then also be his King) make progress 
toward perfection— mentally, morally 
and physically, until at the close of that 
age of trial ("judgment") all mankind 
shall have had fullest knowledge of the 
wages of sin and of the wages of righteousness, 
and under fullest opportunity 
each will have made his choice (as well 
all who will have fallen into the Adamic 
death, which Christ's ransom-sacrifice has 
changed into a limited "sleep," as those 
who will be awake at the time that reign 
of righteousness begins); and each one 
worthy of everlasting life will by that time 
have attained perfection. Thus, the general 
perfecting of God's "friends," "his 
people," Christ's followers or "sheep," 
will be gradual. This is the general resurrection 

[raising up] which shall, inch by 
inch, during Christ's reign, lift up, up, up, 
out of death and all its imperfections, all 
whom the Lord, their Judge, shall find 
worthy of life; so that all that was lost 
in Adam shall be restored by Christ, the 
Second Adam— perfection of organism 
and perfection of life (vitality) and perfection 
of joy in fellowship with God. 

This difference, however, in the method 
of dealing with them and with us, is 
not owing to a difference in the operation 
of the New Covenant, as might at first 
appear, but to the change of administration 
—to the fact that the development of 
another feature of the divine plan makes 
the change of dealing expedient. 

The New Covenant relates not to the 



method, by which restitution will come 

to those who come into this covenant-relationship, 

but to the restoration of harmony 

or at-one-ment between God and 

"his people." His people, being degraded 

in sin, and imperfect, are unfit for at-one-ment 

with their holy Creator, and the 

New Covenant is the name of the new 

arrangement God is willing to enter into 
with these, through the merit of Christ's 
death, reckoning them and treating with 
them as though perfect, until the Great 
Teacher and Restorer shall have perfected 
them actually. Then, the New Covenant 
will be at an end; and there will be no 
further use for it, since there will no longer 
be any creature to bring into harmony 
with God, all then being in a condition 
of fullest harmony and obedience. And 
then, too, the special work of Christ as 

Mediator of the New Covenant will be 
at an end, for the same reasons.— 

1 Cor. 15:25-28 . 

The Millennial period is the proper 
time in God's arrangement for the Lord 
Jesus, as Judge and Law-giver, to try or 
judge the world, to prove which are worthy 
of life and to raise them up to it; and 
to prove which are unworthy, and to cut 
them off forever in the second death, as 
unworthy cumberers of the ground. So, 
then, the offer of the New Covenant conditions 
and privileges to any is the offer 
of life everlasting upon God's conditions; 
it is the offer of a resurrection; for, as we 
have heretofore shown, the mere awakening 
of mankind from the sleep of the 
tomb is not, by a great deal, all that is 
meant by the word resurrection (Greek, 

anastasis). The awakening is merely the 
first or preliminary step which, under the 
beneficent arrangement of the New Covenant, 
will furnish opportunity to all to 
come to a full knowledge of God's love 
and gracious provision. Then, by coming 
into willing harmony with the provisions 
and conditions of the New Covenant, Life, 
in the full, true sense of the word, may be 
gradually attained by whosoever wills. 

But let us not for one moment lose sight 
of the one fact, made so prominent in 
God's Word, that all of God's provisions 
for future blessing are in and through the 
terms and conditions of the New Covenant, 
which contains no hope, or blessing, 
or provision, for any who love unrighteousness, 



when they see its character 
and results fully. Its provisions are all 
and only for the friends of God, the lovers 
of righteousness. No provision is 
made for the everlasting life of wilful 
sinners, but, as it is written: "He that 
believeth into the Son hath life [Provision 
has been made through Christ, whereby all 
such shall, by resurrection, attain to perfect 
LIFE. At present, like all other New Covenant 
favors, this LIFE is possessed by 
faith and hope only;— it is hid with 
Christ in God.- Rom. 8:24 ; Gal. 2:20 ; 
Col. 3:3 ]; but he that disobeyeth the 
Son [when he and the New Covenant are 
made fully known— 1 Tim. 2:4 ; Isa. 11:9 ; 
Acts 3:22,23 ] shall not see LIFE; 
but the wrath of God abideth on him."— 

1 John 3:36 . 

All that are in their graves shall come 
forth to consciousness, to a measure of 
life as at present (which, however, is really 
a dying condition); but none shall ever 
see LIFE, in the true, proper, full sense of 
the term, except upon hearty compliance 
with all the conditions of the New Covenant. 
Thus the friends of God, the lovers 
of righteousness, will be manifested and 
raised up, while all others shall be cut 
off in the second death, without ever having 
really and fully experienced perfect 
life;— having, however, possessed and 
understood and wilfully rejected the conditions 
upon which they might have attained 
to that life. 

"The wrath of God," his condemnation 
to extinction, will abide or continue upon 
all who, when fully aware of its blessed 
provisions, reject the New Covenant conditions 
of reconciliation with him. As 
already shown, it was not for such that 
the Lord provided redemption and salvation; 
and had divine wisdom, seeing the 
hearts of men, foreseen that all would reject 
the New Covenant opportunity for 
reconciliation, we cannot doubt that no 
such covenant of salvation would have 
been provided; on the contrary, infinite 
wisdom and love would long ago have 
blotted out the race as a brood of vipers. 
The New Covenant is the city of refuge 
to which all who hate their sins and who 
would escape the avenging sword of justice 
may flee and be saved from destruction. 
We who are under its protection 
can sing of our deliverance, "We have 



escaped the condemnation that is on the 
world." Many, very many more, thank 
God, will similarly escape by coming within 
the gates of the same covenant— under 
the influence and control of the great 
Mediator of that New Covenant who 
bridged the chasm of condemnation and 
opened the way into it, at the cost of the 
sacrifice of himself. But whoever, knowing 
all, shall refuse and neglect to come 
under this refuge provided, continues in 
condemnation still; is still under the 
wrath of God; still deserves the wages of 
sin— death, extinction. 

We have heretofore shown that the 
"little flock" of the Gospel age is to 
constitute the First Resurrection, i.e., 
the chief or choice resurrection; it is thus 
designated, because it is to be not only a 

raising up to perfect life but to perfect 
life on a higher plane or nature— to the 
divine instead of the human nature. For 
the same reason the Apostle Paul calls it 
the out-resurrection (exanastasis), or the 
resurrection of the selected-out ones. 
(See Phil. 3:11 .) However, the word 
first is appropriate also as describing the 
order; for the resurrection of the "little 
flock" comes first in order, too. It began 
with Christ the head— it will be finished 
at his second advent in the perfecting of 
"the church, which is his body." 

We have seen, too, that in the past 
ages some valiantly overcame obstacles, 
and would not compromise their conscience 
to procure deliverance, that they 
might obtain a better, more favorable, 
resurrection. ( Heb. 11:35 .) And we 
have seen, too, that the "better" or favorable 
feature of their resurrection (though 
they will not have part in the First Resurrection, 
which will include none but the 
Bride, the Lamb's wife, whose call and 
selection did not begin until our Lord 
came to redeem and to call them) consists 
in the fact that they will not be obliged 
to come to perfection slowly, step by step 
during the Millennial age of trial. Their 
trial was completed under severely trying 
conditions; and this is evident, for "they 
had this testimony, that they pleased God 
and that God is not ashamed to be called 

their God." Hence they, like the Gospel 
age little flock, are counted as having 
passed from condemnation to death into 
justification of life. And when God's 



due time shall come, both of these classes 
will get the reward of Life— perfect life — 
instantly; though not in the same instant, 
because the Gospel church as the body of 
Christ will have precedence, "God having 
provided a still better thing [a still 

R1180 : page 6 

better resurrection] for us, that they without 
us should not be made perfect."— 
Heb. 11:40. 

They who see clearly how the justified 
ones of the Gospel age, the "Bride," and 
the justified ones of the preceding time, 

R1180 : page 7 

whom the Christ shall "make princes 

[rulers] in all the earth," are to have each 

a resurrection to LIFE [the one to spiritual 

and the other to human perfection], can 

see, as no others can see, the meaning of 

the Prophet's words ( Dan. 12:2 ) that 

some shall awake to everlasting Life and 

some awake still in the same condition of 

condemnation, imperfection and shame, 

in which they fell asleep in death. Some 

(two small classes) will come forth already 

acquitted, justified to life; while 

the many who will come up to perfection, 

will come during the age of trial 

and be of the resurrection of trial or resurrection 

of condemnation. And some— 

we have every reason to believe they will 

be few— shall never come up to life at 

all, shall never escape the condemnation 

or "wrath," and "shall not see LIFE;" 

because of wilful, intelligent opposition 

to God. Such adversaries of God and 

of righteousness are called the servants 

[angels] of Satan ( Matt. 25:41 ), the 

children of the devil ( 1 John 3:10 ), and 

such like names, because they pattern after 

his character and partake willingly of his 

spirit. And such shall be destroyed with 

Satan in the second death, symbolized by 

the lake of fire. ( Matt. 25:41 ; Rev. 20:14 .) 

And this their punishment (extinction 

in second death) is to be an everlasting 

punishment. There will be no 

ransom and restitution from the second 

death, because it will be inflicted only upon 

the wilfully evil, who first will have had 

and rejected all the abundant opportunity 

of reconciliation afforded by the New 



Covenant. The rewards and punishments 
at the close of the Millennial age are, 
both, final and everlasting. The one class 
the Judge decides to be worthy of life 
everlasting and the other worthy of death 
everlasting— extinction.— Matt. 25:46 . 

So, also, is the statement that there 
shall be a resurrection of both the just 
and the unjust. The just are those of the 
Gospel age and of the preceding times 
who are justified to life and rise perfect, 
in "the resurrection of the just." The 
resurrection (raising up, up to perfection) 
of the unjust should not be understood to 
mean that unjust persons will reach perfection 
(for the Lord's words, and the 
New Covenant's conditions, forbid the 
thought that any except the just shall ever 
see LIFE); but should be understood to 
mean that not only the few, who now 
through faith and obedience are recognized 
by God as the just, but others, 
many others, now unjust, shall have the 
opportunity of being lifted up to perfection. 
And, indeed, it might be said, truly, 
that any who have the means or opportunity 
of resurrection placed within 
their grasp, really receive a resurrection. 

The Apostle Peter expressed a general 
truth when he said: "Of a truth I perceive 
that God is no respecter of persons; 
but in every nation he that feareth him 
and worketh righteousness is accepted of 
him." ( Acts 10:34 .) Of a truth we 
see, too, that all not of this character described 
will be rejected. But, as God for 
a time recognized only Israel, his typically 
holy people, and left others unrecognized, 
treating them as strangers and aliens until 
the Gospel age opened a door of favors to 
the few who have ears to hear the present 
call; so there are throughout the world 
to-day millions whom God regards as his 
"friends," though he has not yet revealed 
himself and his plan of salvation, under 
the New Covenant, to them. These, as 
yet, are blinded by Satan with false representations 
of God's character and plan 
and often deluded as to what is right and 
what is wrong, and are thus hindered 
now by weaknesses within and by errors 
without. They reverence the Creator 
and ignorantly worship him, and prefer 
and make some effort for righteousness, 
as far as they can appreciate it. These 
all, of every age, among them such noble, 



shining heathen lights as Aristotle, Plato, 
Confucius and others, are the "sheep" 
whom our Lord came to seek and to save; 
such are the "friends" for whom he laid 
down his life; such are "his people" 
whom he came to save from their sins 
(John 10:16; 15:13,14; Matt. 1:21 ); 
though as yet the vast majority know not 
of the Redeemer or the precious ransom-price 
he gave or of the gracious conditions 
of the New Covenant sealed and 
ratified by his blood. 

Nor can even such "friends" ever be 
saved, ever reach everlasting life, except 
under the conditions of that New Covenant 
—faith and obedience. That is God's 
way and his only way. Therefore, the 
Millennial age is appointed to be the period 
in which these who constitute the vast 
majority of God's "friends" shall be 
raised to perfection; and it is called the 
resurrection of the [now] unjustified, because 
they are as yet unbelievers who have 
not yet come to a sufficiency of knowledge. 
How could they become believers 
without hearing of Christ— without a full, 
clear understanding of God's character 
and plan and covenant? And how 
could such as have fallen into the Adamic 
sleep come to a knowledge of the truth 
( Eccl. 9:10 ) without being awakened? 
Therefore it is appointed of God that all 
that are in their graves shall hear the 
summons of the Son of man and come 
forth. And the ransom and its precious 
opportunities for reconciliation shall be 
testified to all; all shall come to an accurate 
knowledge of the Truth; the blinded 
eyes shall be opened and the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped; "and they that hear 
[obey] shall LIVE," and the soul that shall 
not hear [obey] that Teacher shall be cut 
off from among his people, shall die the 
second death.— 1 Tim. 2:4,6 ; Isa. 35:5 ; 
John 5:25 ; Acts 3:23 . 

The fact that the New Covenant is spoken 
of as being made only with God's 
people has confused many; because (1) 
they have failed to note that God recognizes 
as "his people" all who fear him 
and work righteousness, including all who 
under fuller light than they now have 
would do so; and because (2) in reading 
the Old Testament prophecies, which 
promise the New Covenant, they apply 
all its promises to the Jews or to the Gospel 



church, or to both of these exclusively; 
and failing to see the true lengths and 
breadths of the expression, "God's people," 
fail also to see that Israel and its 
Covenant were largely typical of the New 
Covenant and the millions on millions, 
who shall ultimately come unto God 
under its provisions, more ample than 
that of the Jewish Covenant, and under 
its Mediator, more powerful than Moses, 
and able to save to the uttermost all 
that come unto God by him. In order 
that they may come, all shall be called, 
"all shall hear his voice." In order that 
they may come, he "will draw all;" all 
shall be drawn by the fullest, clearest 
presentation of the truth. Yet "if any 
man [thus drawn] draw back, my soul 
shall have no pleasure in him;" the soul 
[being] that will not hear [obey] that 
Teacher shall be cut off as unworthy of 
LIFE. But all such as hear and come to 
an appreciation of the truth and love it 
and enter a covenant of obedience then, 
shall sing, with spirit and with the understanding 
also, as we do now— 

"He drew me and I followed on, 
Charmed to confess the voice divine." 
Hallelujah! What a Savior! And what 
a grand, glorious, comprehensive and yet 
exclusive salvation he is working out: 
comprehensive in that none are debarred 
from its privileges in any sense or degree; 
exclusive in that it will exclude all that 
would tend to mar true joy and pleasure 
and will admit only such as will possess 
the mental and moral likeness of God— 
his people, his children. Verily, God 
will "call those his people who were not 
his people, and her beloved who was not 
beloved." Israel not only represented 
the beloved, the true Bride, the "little 
flock," the "royal priesthood," in her 
typical priesthood, but also represented 
typically all of God's people as they shall 
all yet be blessed under the grand antitypical 
priesthood of Christ and the Gospel 
church, who not only render "better 
sacrifices, but by and by shall be established 
as a kingdom of priests after the 
order of Melchizedeck. But as the sacrifices 
for sin under Israel's covenant and 
by her High Priest were for Israel only, 
and yet only typical of the true High 
Priest's mediatorial sacrifice of atonement, 
for the sins of the whole world, so it is 



evident that the New Covenant ratified 
by his blood [death] applies not to Israel 
only but to all whom Israel represented, 
viz., all who ever shall become God's 
covenant people under the New Covenant. 

How grievously, then, they err who 
misunderstand us to teach that the just 
and the unjust, the holy and the evil 
disposed, shall be compelled to keep each 
other's distasteful company throughout 
eternity. Above we have shown that 
God's plan is to give eternal life to none 
but the righteous, but that he has made 
the most abundant provision, through 
Christ and the New Covenant, for all to 
become righteous. 

And how foolish and unscriptural is the 
view of those ("orthodox"?) Christian 
friends, who, stumbling over the New 
Covenant, narrowly see only the selection 
of the present (really only a work preliminary 
to the coming work of blessing). 
This leads some on the one hand to so 
narrow down their ideas of the provisions 
of the New Covenant that they see only 
the very few saints of the present time 
blessed under it, and the masses entirely 
ignored and not even brought to a knowledge 
of its provisions that they might accept 
or reject them. And it leads others to 
the other extreme, of holding that all the 
ignorant heathen, and the "so-so" majority 
of mankind (including all except 
the foulest murderers, and even such of 
them as shall breathe a prayer for mercy 
before they die), will all, though still 
morally filthy, untaught of God, undisciplined 
and untried, be hustled together into 
the society of the Lord, the saints and the 
holy angels, to constitute the family of 
God. Surely, sane Christian people who 
have no love for such companionship now 
can only picture it for the future from two 
causes: (1) their false ideas of the divine 

R1181 : page 7 

plan, which they suppose has provided 
only heaven or eternal torture for all at 
the close of the present life, and (2) 
they are too generous of heart to consign 
the vast majority, or any but the 
vilest of the vile, to such a penalty as 
eternal torment, and would rather spend a 
portion of eternity in such uncongenial 
society and trust to improving them, than 



to think of their agonies. Such generous 
souls should learn the way of the Lord 
more perfectly. They should see that 
their plan of saving the masses is, to say 
the least, very crude and imperfect. They 
should see that their view of results would 
make it appear that the New Covenant is 
really a compromise with sin on God's 
part, instead of an arrangement by which 
sinners might be saved from their sins and 
brought into harmony with God and to 
perfection. It would be strange, indeed, 
if divine wisdom could not devise a better 
plan. 

On the other hand, our views of the 
divine plan should not be confounded 
with those of Universalists, which represent 
God as so unjustly weak and loving 
that he cannot execute the laws of his 
kingdom; or so untruthful as to have declared 
a falsehood, which he never meant 
to execute, when he said, "The soul that 
sinneth, it shall die." What wonder, if 
these find no place for the New Covenant 
and no use for "the blood of the New 
Covenant," nor for "the Mediator of the 
Covenant," in their theory touching the 
World's Hope. 

Their hope, built upon the assumed 
weakness of God's character and his inability 
to execute the penalty he prescribed 
against sin, or upon his change of mind, 
or his deception of mankind in naming a 
penalty which he never intended to execute 
against any, is surely a hope built 
upon a sandy foundation and not upon 
the rock foundation of the New Covenant, 
sealed with the precious blood. 

Neither should the views we present 
be confounded with the views of what we 
might term Irresponsible -Universalism, 
which claims that man has no responsibility, 
and merely acts and thinks as acted 
upon by divine power and providence, 
which places the responsibility for sin all 
upon God, and which, consistently with 
that false premise, holds that a ransom for 
man's sin, and a New Covenant based 
upon it, would be but a farce; since, if 
man is not responsible for sin, he needed 
no atonement to be made for him, and 
since God caused the sin, he alone is responsible 
and is bound by his own justice 
to release all men from the penalties of 
sin (which, according to their view, are 
undeserved) and bring all to everlasting 



life and joy. 

This view is a shamefully weak, unreasonable 
and unjust one. It is a calumny 
upon man as well as a blasphemy 
against the great Creator. It is a calumny 
upon men in that it represents them as so 
many living machines without will for evil 
or for good; which, therefore, no amount 
of experience could either benefit or injure; 
and which would be as unworthy of 
reward for right-doing as undeserving of 
punishment for evil-doing. It is a blasphemy 
against God in that it represents 
him as using his power for evil. Worse 
than that, it represents him as using his 
power to produce an unmitigated evil, in 
bringing sin, pain and death upon a creature 
which, it claims, was not only not 
responsible, but by nature incapable of 
being in any way benefited or exercised 
by the evil; having no will of his own to 
be exercised, but being merely a tool, and 
a toy, in the hands of the Creator. And, 
still worse, this view would make it appear 
that, after doing all these great wrongs 
to man, God had added insult to injury 
by charging his own sin to the man, and 
calling man a sinner when he was not; 
and providing typical sacrifices for sin 
first and then pretending to love the sinners 
so as to give his Son to be their Redeemer, 
making a farce of the death of 
Christ and keeping up the delusion and 
deception through the apostles and the 
Gospel church since, until some of these 
wise men found out the fraud God was 
perpetrating, and exposed him— calling 
the exposition The Spirit of the Word. 

The spirit of a very unsound reason, 
much rather, are such teachings. The 
spirit of a heart going about to establish 

R1181 : page 8 

its own uprightness and sinlessness at the 
expense of slandering the character of 
the great Creator. The spirit of a man 
who is seeking hopelessly, vainly, for a 
firm footing upon his own reasonings, and 
who has not submitted his reasonings to 
the divine testimony. We have no use 
for such a spirit: it is not worthy even 
to be called the spirit of the world; for 
that is more true, more noble, more 
reasonable. 
But the weakness of this latter, irrational, 



"Irresponsible-Universalism" is shown 
in its claim, that God will save all men, 
eternally, because his justice demands that 
his wrong against man shall be righted. 
The reasoning, here, is on a par with the 
rest; it is unreasonable nonsense to claim 
that justice would demand anything or be 
a moving consideration at all in such a 
being as this theory would make out God 
to be. If so unjust as to perpetrate all 
this wrong for six thousand years, there 
certainly is no ground for any faith in his 
justice. If he has lied and deceived in 
the past, as this theory would imply, there 
could be no better reason asked for rejecting 
and disbelieving any and all promises 
for the future. This theory builds upon the 
shifting sands of human speculation only 
(and very poor sand even), and not upon 
the New Covenant, sealed with the precious 
blood of Christ. 

On the contrary, the view we here present 
is harmonious; it is consistent with 
reason and with all that God has revealed 
of his own character. It recognizes man's 
responsibility for his own will. It recognizes 
God's justice and man's guilt. It 
does not excuse sin but applies God's 
remedy for its healing. It does not offer 
to heal wilful sinners, but repentant ones. 
It does not heal ignorant ones, because 
of ignorance, nor wiser ones on account 
of knowledge, but provides that all must 
come to a clear, full knowledge of the 
truth, and that then, only such as fully 
and heartily accept of Christ's atoning 
work, and make use of it, to obtain access 
to God, and restoration to harmony 
with him, and shall prove themselves willingly 
so, under a trial, shall ever see LIFE 
in its fulness, or go beyond the Millennial 
age to enter the portals of that blessed 
eternity beyond, which God hath provided 
only for those who love him. 



R1173 : page 8 

RESTITUTION PROGRESSING. 

We have heretofore called attention to 
the great improvement of late years in 
the climate of Palestine from the increase 
of rain-falls and the consequent increased 
productiveness of its soil; and we have 



remarked that similar and other changes 
will be in order gradually throughout the 
earth to fit and prepare it for the Millennial 
reign of Christ and for the support 
of the millions of the dead as they shall 
be gradually awakened, "every man in 
his own order." 

Below we print a clipping which bears 
pointedly upon this subject, and shows 
that, as we have anticipated, some features 
of the restitution will glide in very 
imperceptibly. 

"A paper called The Iron comes forward 
with the remark that what were supposed 
to be deserts are rapidly vanishing 
before the advance of civilization. There 
was a time when the United States had 
one of no small size, when it was considered 
that all the land west of the Missouri 
River was a barren waste. The farmers 
of Kansas, Nebraska and Dakota have 
disposed of much of the great American 
Desert. Once upon a time large portions 
of the interior of Africa were believed to 
be arid and uncultivable. Now we learn 
that they are fruitful and well populated. 
The interior of Australia has been held 
up as an awful example of a howling wilderness, 
destitute of water and of animal 
or vegetable life. That illusion is now 
being rapidly dispelled. Recent explorers 
report that inner Australia is no Saharan 
waste, and that, though uninhabited, it 
can support a large population. There 
are grassy plains, large lakes, and also 
traces of gold and precious stones. A 
north and south railway is now being made 
through the center of Australia, and doubtless 
with its completion the last trace of 
desert will vanish. The iron horse is a 
wonderful dispeller of illusions of that 
kind. The truth is that there are vast 
regions in America, Asia and Australia, 
which are barren from the standpoint of 
primitive and ignorant agriculture, but 
which when taken in hand by the educated 
farmer of the present day, with his implements, 
develop into fertile fields and 
pastures." 

And as with the natural changes, so 
with many of the moral and political reforms 
also: Many of these are coming in 

R1174 : page 8 

gradually. It would be a mistake, however, 



to expect that all would glide in 
smoothly. The words of the Lord and 
the apostles and the prophets most clearly 
indicate that the progress of nature's new 
birth will be marked by grievous spasms 
and throes in the old order of things,— 
cloudbursts, storms, earthquakes, etc., in 
nature, in politics, in religion, in everything. 
All the selfish and evil arrangements 
of the present shall be thoroughly 
shaken out, so that nothing but good shall 
remain.- Heb. 12:26-29 ; Jas. 5:1-8 . 



R1174 : page 8 

A RAILWAY TO JERUSALEM. 

"The British Consular Agent at Jaffa, 
in the last report of the trade of his district, 
states that a concession for a railway 
from Jaffa to Jerusalem has been 
granted by the Sultan to Mr. Joseph Navon, 
an Ottoman subject, for 71 years. It 
is stated that a company has been formed 
in England and France to carry out the 
scheme, and that the engineers are soon 
expected to undertake the work. The 
carriage road between Jaffa and Jerusalem 
has been greatly improved. The Government 
sold last year the income from the 
toll of the road for L. 2,085, as compared 
with L. 1,8 12 the year before last, which 
shows an increase in the traffic. The Jewish 
colonies in Palestine are greatly improving; 
one of them, which is called 
Richon le Zion, has planted about 2,000,000 
vines, and is promising well. The colonists 
are good laborers, nearly all their 
land is cultivated. The greater part of 
them are Turkish subjects, and all are 
subject to the laws of the country."— Sel. 



R1181 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., FEBRUARY, 1890. NO. 3. 



page 1 

WE HAVE printed a second edition of 
the January TOWER in order to supply the 
many calls for sample copies for the friends 
of our readers. Many consider the article 
on the New Covenant, in that issue, specially 
good for new readers. We will 
supply free what you can use judiciously. 
Send in your orders. 



UNWILLING to drop from our lists any 
who would desire the regular visits of the 
TOWER for the present year, we send the 
present issue to many who have not yet 
renewed their subscriptions either by payment 
or promise of future payment or by 
request to have it among those too poor 
to pay. Please attend to the matter at 
once, as we do not wish to push the paper 
upon any who do not desire it enough to 
ask for it, after the terms have been so arranged 
as to leave all without excuse. 
Otherwise do not blame us if you miss it 
hereafter. 



R1183 :page 1 

THE CHURCH at Allegheny cordially 
invites such consecrated lovers of our Redeemer 
as can conveniently do so, to meet 
and celebrate with us the Lord's death by 
partaking of the Memorial Supper on the 
evening of April 3d next; also to participate 
in the four days of Special Bible 
Study which as usual will follow the 
memorial. 

The meetings will be held in Bible 
House Chapel, Arch Street. In our next 
we hope to be able to announce special 
railroad rates for friends from a distance. 



R1182 :page 1 



THE ANNIVERSARY SUP PER-- APRIL 3D. 

"This do in remembrance of me." 

We give early notice of the date for the 
celebration of the Lord's Supper because 
all have not the conveniences for calculating 
the date, and because many who 
rely upon the TOWER for the information 
are so far away that they do not get the 
TOWER for about a month after they are 
mailed. 

The date given is not the date of the 
beginning of the Jewish Passover feast-week, 
for it is not that which we celebrate. 
We celebrate the killing of the true Paschal 
Lamb— "the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sins of the world," and 
through whom we, as his Church of the 
First-born, are already by faith passed over 
from death unto life. 

The killing of the lamb took place the 
day before the Passover feast-week began, 
and our Lord was crucified as its antitype 
on that day— the 14th day of the Hebrew 
month Nisan, which this year would correspond 
to April 4th. In the Jewish 
reckoning the day begins to count from 
the previous evening at six o'clock (April 
3d), and since our Lord on that evening 
preceding the day of his crucifixion celebrated 
his own death, with his disciples, 

R1183 :page 1 

and left them a charge to "do this" in 
remembrance of him, we will celebrate it 
as usual on the anniversary, which, as above 
stated, will this year be April 3d, at a convenient 
hour after six o'clock P.M. 

But, remember, we "do this" not of 
fear or constraint, or law, but in grateful 
remembrance of our ransom. 



R1181 :page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



Our Presbyterian friends are still holding 
general public attention. The reports 
of the discussion, for and against 
the revision of their Confession of Faith, 
before the various Presbyteries, occupy 
prominent places in the daily papers, and 



the public scans the arguments on both 
sides with deep interest. These discussions 
are doing great good in the direction 
of waking up thought among Christian 
people of all denominations. It is 
thus kindling the fire which shall burn 
out the wood, hay and stubble of traditional 
errors from not only Presbyterianism 
but from all isms. 

The discussions and votes of the various 
Presbyteries settle nothing, however. They 
are only preliminary: the question of revision 
or no revision can be decided only by 
the General Assembly, when it shall finally 
pass upon the question. The pity is that 
great men will tie themselves up to a doctrine 
and stick to it, though they believe 
it to be erroneous and God-dishonoring, 
until the majority of their sect agrees to let 
them confess and preach the Truth. 

The New York Presbytery has developed 
some strong men and opened their 
lips; and they have said so much that 
they can never retrace their steps, and 
would be ashamed to remain in the denomination 
should the conclusion be a refusal 
to revise the creed. The vote of the 
New York Presbytery was almost unanimously 
in favor of revision, but it furnishes 
no criterion as to others, for only 
forty-eight out of a total of two hundred 
and eleven Presbyteries have yet voted 
on the question. 

Below we give extracts from the Press 
reports of some of the pointed utterances 
before the New York Presbytery during 
its discussion of the subject. 

Rev. Dr. Crosby took the floor— his first 
appearance in the Presbytery since the debate 
began. He was one of the committee 
who reported in favor of the revision of 
the Confession. He said: 

"The only permanent standard for any 
church of Jesus Christ is the Word of 
God. Any church that has its standard 
in human philosophy or inner consciousness 
will disintegrate by its own weight. 
Consequently, when the question of revision 
of our standards of faith came up, 
the only question I wished to consider 
and examine was, Are these standards in 
accordance with the Word of God? 

"When I examined the foundation of 
our faith for the hundredth time, with 
especial reference to this occasion, I found 
one, and only one statement in the Confession 



which, to my mind, is clearly and 
diametrically opposed to the Word of God. 
The more I have examined it, the more I 
am convinced that this one in particular 
is contrary to the Word of God, pernicious 
to the church, and injurious to the 
highest and holiest interests of religion. 
That one phrase or declaration is the use 

R1182 :page 1 

of the verb, pass by, in the seventh section 

of the third chapter. When I say 

that only this one phrase contradicts scripture, 

I don't mean to say that I approve 

of all the others. Still, I can allow them 

but when I see a statement teaching a fatalistic 

doctrine, contrary to the Bible, 

from Genesis to Revelation, my soul revolts 

at it. Here is the section: 

THE OBNOXIOUS SECTION. 

"The rest of mankind God was 
pleased, according to the unsearchable 
counsel of his own will, whereby he extendeth 
or withholdeth mercy as he pleaseth, 
for the glory of His sovereign power 
over his creatures, to pass by, and to ordain 
them to dishonor and wrath for their 
sin, to the praise of His glorious justice.' 

"Now what is meant by the phrase 
'Pass by?' In the parable of the Good 
Samaritan the priest passed by the man 
who fell among thieves; the Levite also 
passed him by. Here it is said in our 
standard of belief that God treats his 
creatures as the priest and the Levite 
treated the traveler, and this in the face 
of statements declaring that he loves the 
whole world. 

"Our creed, although in some respects 
the grandest ever penned, is confessedly 
imperfect, acknowledged to be so by those 
who are opposed to revision. Now this 
is the best time for revision, and for this 
reason, if for no other, I am in favor of 
the committee's report." 

Rev. Dr. G. Wylie, a young man, made 
an appeal in behalf of the Confession as 
it is, in which he said it was in harmony 
with the creeds of other Protestant 
churches. He quoted the free will part 
of the Thirty-nine Articles of the Episcopal 
Church to show how Calvinistic it 
was. He said he didn't believe in putting 



new cloth into an old garment, in patching 
the seventeenth century creed with 
nineteenth century doctrine. As to infant 
damnation, he said: 

"We refuse to baptize children of notoriously 
immoral parents, but if they are 
of the elect, what right have we to refuse 
them baptism?" 

Dr. Paxton did not favor revision. He 
thought that if the Creed should be revised 
the great body of people known as 
Presbyterians, losing the label of Calvin, 
would be like a dog which, being sent by 
express with a tag on his collar giving the 
name and address of his master, on the 
way ate his tag and lost his identity. 

The Rev. Dr. Van Dyke began one of 
the most striking speeches of the entire 
discussion, with Dr. Paxton's parable of 
the dog which had "ate his tag" for his 
text. "The Westminster Confession as 
it now stands," he said, "affixes a tag to 
the human race, to this effect: 'Part is 
consigned to heaven and part to hell, and 
no man can find out to which part he belongs, 
nor would it make any difference 
if he could.' Now, if I were an expressman 
I would refuse to forward a tagless 
dog, so I refuse to believe this unintelligible, 
improbable dogma. 

"We have voted for revision. Now, 
what is the revision to be? I am in 
favor of the committee's report because 
it eliminates reprobation from the Confession, 
and suggests the formation of a 
new Creed, more Scriptural than the Confession, 
as a basis of union with other reformed 
churches. But first, the elimination 
of reprobation should be done as 
soon as possible. 

"Ante-natal damnation! No man ever 
died for that doctrine. Why, then, should 
any one clasp it to his bosom, and weep 
tears at the thought of losing it, as if it 
had been bathed in the blood of martyrs? 
Such a position is like that of the old woman 
who said: 'There's that blessed doctrine 
of universal depravity. What a comfort 
it is, if we only lived up to it.' 

"The Heavenly Father spreads a feast 
for all; is it for us to say that he refuses 
to let the poor sinner eat of the crumbs 
which fall from his table? And for what 
reason? To satisfy our logic? It is but 
measuring the mind of the Almighty with 
the wisdom of the seventeenth century. 



The doctrine is unscriptural. As for the 

text about the potter— who ever heard of 

a potter making a vessel merely to destroy 

it? Reprobation is a 'horrible' doctrine. 

The adjective is not mine, but Calvin's, 

who pushed it to its logical conclusion, 

and taught the damnation of infants. I 

don't weep for the tears shed over the 

destruction of part of the Confession, but 

for the tears of the mothers who have 

been taught to believe that their harmless, 

new-born babes were torn from their 

breasts to be plunged into everlasting perdition; 

I would weep for the unhappy 

creatures in mad-houses, whose light of 

R1182 : page 2 

reason has been put out by the heresy of 
ante-natal perdition. 

"I know not what others may do, but 
as for me, I intend to keep on disbelieving, 
ignoring, and denying the doctrine 
of reprobation. I intend to teach that 
there are no infants in hell, no limits to 
God's love; that there is salvation open 
to all mankind, and that no man is punished 
but for his own sin. Is that Calvinism? 
Before God, I don't know or care. 
It is Christianity." 

Dr. Parkhurst said: "If we are going 
to retain the preterition idea in our Confession, 
then we must be true to it in our 
preaching as Presbyterian ministers, and 
on occasion declare it in all frankness. 
We shall be obliged to address our congregations 
somewhat after this manner: 
'My friends, I am sorry to say it, but as 
a Calvinistic Presbyterian I am bound to 
say it, that Christ did not die for all. 
There is a certain amount of fatalism in 
the case. Some men are damned, and 
not only that, but congenitally damned; 
damned before they are born, hated of 
God even in the moment of conception.' 

"The story of Jacob and Esau, as interpreted 
by the hyper-Calvinists, means 
all that, when you tell the whole thing out 
in flat-footed English. Now, if I concluded 
that that was a Scripture doctrine, 
and that salvation was not absolutely free 
to every creature, I would tear my Geneva 
gown to shreds and rip up my Bible into 
paper-rags before another Sabbath. 

"This thing is in the air. It has come 
to stay and come to grow. It is futile to 



talk about repressing it. You may box 
up your reservoir, but the closer you box 
it the more destructive the outburst you 
are preparing for yourself, if, while you 
are boxing, the brooks are flowing down 
into it from off the hill-slopes." 

The Rev. Dr. Vincent, Professor in 
the Union Theological Seminary, said: 
"God's Word is for all time; creeds for 
the age in which they are formulated. It 
is a mistake to call the Westminster divines 
giants; it implies degeneracy in us. 
The Scripture is better understood to-day 
than it was then. It is well to pay respect 
to Augustine, Calvin and the Westminster 
divines, but why should we take 
a rigid faith from their dead hands! 

"Augustine, Calvin and some of the 
Westminster divines believed in infant 
damnation, and I heard it asserted 25 
years ago by a Presbyterian minister, who 
subsequently went over to rationalism. If 
that horrible implication can be found in 
the Confession, where is the humanity of 
leaving it in that record of exploded belief 
and torment of weak hearts? The 
Confession does not give the heathen a 
ghost of a chance. The fair inference 
from it is that countless millions who 
never heard of Christ are damned for not 
believing in him. Why do we stand up 
so stoutly for Calvin? Was Calvin crucified 
for us, and in his name are we 
baptized?" 

AN IRREVOCABLE STEP. 

In conclusion, Dr. Vincent, after setting 
forth still more strongly his disbelief in 
the Confession, said the Church had already 
taken an irrevocable step; that it 
had cut loose from its position of six 
months ago and could not go back. 

Dr. Hastings said, speaking for those 
favoring revision: "What we have said 
we mean, like honest men, without concealment 
or fear, and we shall stand by it 
whether the Presbytery stands by it or not." 



While our friends are thus gagging over 
their unsavory mess ( Isa. 28:8 ), how 
clear and beautiful is the doctrine of election 
when rightly understood. 



page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Michigan. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I take 
the first opportunity to acknowledge your 
kind greetings and sentiments expressed 
in the January TOWER to the brethren 
that are "scattered abroad." For one I 
am thankful for this channel of communion 
between members of the body. 

While I might wish that the TOWER 
may each succeeding month go to many 
new readers I still believe that the "special 
issues," in the form of "Dawn," are 
to be the real "gold" and "silver" 
sledge-hammers that the Lord will continue 
to use in battering down the walls 
of Babylon and building up the "city" 
which has foundations. I will, however, 
do all I can to increase the circulation of 
the monthly TOWER, but I am sure that 
some others will be more efficient in this 
line than myself. 

Through grace I have been able to sell 
over 350 copies of Dawn here during the 
two weeks past, against many obstacles- 
sickness, prejudice, etc. I enclose P.O. 
order for $25 as an offering to the Master, 
which I trust he will accept through the 
Tract Fund. 

Last night I met with a few of the 
sheep here who have, of late, been meeting 
once a week to study the Bible in connection 
with Dawn. Last evening we 
considered the chapter on "Ransom and 
Restitution," and all present were greatly 
blessed by the truths brought to light. 

There is weeping and gnashing of teeth 
when the truth gets into the camp of its 
enemies. But we will rejoice in the Lord 
and seek to do good unto those that hate 
us and speak evil of us. 

I do not sell as many of Vol. I. as I 
would if not selling Vol. II., but I think 
I sell a third or a half more books 
than if I were handling only one volume. 
I think the second volume is very 
strengthening to those who desire the 
truth, and I trust that others will appreciate 
it as the "night" and the "day" 
draw on. So in all I think it is as well 
to sell the two volumes together. In 



Coldwater, where I sold about 80 of Vol. 
I. two years ago, I sold over 150 this 
time by selling the two volumes. 

At Quincy I sold about 75 books, and 
when I returned to deliver them after an 
absence of two days I found the people in 
a terrible state about "that book." The 
false shepherds had started an alarm and 
it found the ear of nearly all in Babylon 
at that place. But I delivered the most 
of my books, preaching a little as I went. 
The spirit of Antichrist is indeed working 
"that none should buy or sell in the 
marts except those that have the mark of 
the beast or the number of his name." 

Have you noticed the articles from the 
pen of Editor Stead concerning the Pope 
and the Catholic Church? He suggests 
the need of a common head for the world 
to look to, to guide it in social and religious 
reforms, and of course thinks the 
Pope should be the one to fill this place. 
Surely all the world groaneth and waiteth 
for the manifestations of the sons of God 
and the true Head of the Church. 

It is with much joy that I say "I long 
to meet you" at the Spring meeting. 
Like Brother Adamson, I had hardly expected 
(on account of the work) to be 
there, until a few months ago. I believe, 
however, that when the time comes 
I should have found it hard to stay away. 

With much love and joy in the Truth, 
I remain yours in hope of witnessing unto 
the end the "good confession." 
S. D. ROGERS. 

Milwaukee, Wis. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-The ever-welcome 
TOWER came this morning. I have 
read the article, The New Covenant, and 
find the same harmony and consistency 
in its teaching as in all subjects treated in 
Dawn and TOWER in the past; link after 
link, making the great chain of truth, "so 
that the man of God may be complete; 
thoroughly fitted for every good work." 

At the close of the article, Where Does 
the Money Come From, I can fully endorse 
your emphatic warning against all 
who profess to beg in Christ's name, and 
am glad you have written this warning in 
TOWER. 

For many years past I have been disgusted 
with these pious beggars. How 
grand the sentiment, God says, My son, 



give me thy heart. And when we fully 
give our heart to God he asks nothing 
more. We have given all. 

I rejoice, dear brother, at the great 
work God is doing, with a few of his 
sharpened arrows. Some have entirely 
departed from Babylon, some running for 
the great prize, to be joint-heirs with 
Christ, some rejoicing in prospect of restitution, 
many others beginning to see a 
little. But there is much yet to do. Babylon's 
walls are still strong, and her defenders 
defiant, and we on the outside are 
despised and scorned. Nevertheless we 
have no cause for discouragement, for 
God's children shall all be delivered from 
her chains of error. 

I have proved what I had reason to 
expect, viz.: that in separating myself from 
worldly churches the small business that 
I have been engaged in here for a number 
of years is becoming so small, it looks as 
if I shall be compelled to close it out entirely, 
and look for some other means of 
sustaining life while it is God's will for 
me to remain here. But I am not looking 
backward, but forward, and have great 
reason to rejoice. 

Yours in the Master's service, J. P . 

Palestine, Tex. 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-I received a 
copy of the Dawn, Vol. I., yesterday. I 
went out this morning, got seventeen subscribers 
and the promise of several others. 
I don't think it will be any trouble for me 
to sell them. You may send me forty. 
I have to roll my baby around with me, 
which makes it very tiresome. I am 
highly pleased with the TOWER. 

MRS. W. B . 

Manchester, England. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose 
an order sheet and a money order for the 
Tower Publishing Co. Kindly have them 
send the books, papers and tracts at earliest 
convenience. 

It is just about 12 months since I began 
to enjoy the glorious liberty of the children 
of God, through reading Z.W.T. 
publications. The joy that has been mine 
since the opening of my heart to receive 
the Truth cannot be told. Praise the 
dear Lord! I am sure that I would not 
exchange a twelve months' experience of 



the Truth for 50 years' enjoyment of what 
was to be had in the nominal Church. 
Nay, any exchange would be impossible; 
for, who, having the use of his senses, 
would exchange a reality for a sham? 

I think I ought to tell you of the great 
progress I have made in the knowledge of 
the will and purposes of God as revealed 
in his Word during the past year. It is a 
wonder to myself. Whereas it took me 
many years to get a smattering of scriptural 
knowledge, now I seem to be quite 
conversant with all our Father's plans. 

how thankful I am to be delivered, not 
only from the bondage of sin, but also 
from that of error. And won't it be 
grand by and by to be delivered also from 
the bondage of corruption? 

I do not readily get a hearing for the 
Truth. People were so prejudiced against 
me for leaving the church (?) that the 
whole neighborhood leaves me on one 
side. However, the Lord does give me 
opportunities sometimes. I must tell you 
that I have taken no statements in TOWER 
or Dawns for granted, but have made 
them my own by searching them out. 
Somehow, after seeing the general plan as 
shown in Vol. I., it has been so easy and 
natural to see and take the following 
truths as the Lord has given them to me. 

That the Lord will continue to keep us 
steadfast in the faith is my earnest prayer, 
and that you and your dear wife may be 
kept faithful in the service of the truth. 
With deep love to you and to all of the 
Church with you, in which my wife joins, 

1 am, dear brother, yours in the Lord, 

J. H . 

Cherokee, Iowa. 
TOWER PUB. CO., ALLEGHENY, PA.~ 
Mr. and Mrs. C. T. Russell and Brethren, 
greeting:— Yes, we unite with you in 
heart and hand and voice and prayer 
that, from the condition in which the 
new year finds us, the light, 
"The radiance from the cross, 
The depth of love revealing," 
may shine more and more until perfect 
day; and that— 
"Still new beauties we may see 

And still increasing light." 
O how my heart rejoices, because the 
Lord lets me continue to see that "radiance 
from the cross afar, the Saviour's love 



revealing." 

We now understand why we did not get 
a TOWER for December. Still we never 
had any other feeling in regard to it than 
perfect submission, for we knew all would 
be right when we received the light. I 
really expected to get Dawn Vol. III. 
in consequence, but now do not have any 
undue anxiety about it, am simply waiting 
in expectation. 

I got a letter last fall from Brother Russell 
which was very fatherly, and did me 
and the brethren here much good. I hail 
the TOWER with a hearty welcome and 
peruse its pages with edifying benefit. 

I go on Saturdays and such days as I 
can get opportunity, to the brethren and 
others to whom I have sold Dawns, and 
have a talk with them of their progress in 
the reading of Dawn and receiving light. 
Some are able to receive in part; some 
stumble at some points. Some, only a 
very few as yet, have had the fog of traditions 
scattered from before their eyes and 
see the glorious truth the Bible teaches. 
The "Helping Hand" clears away the 
mists. 

I am unable to say at present how many 
have come to a firm stand on truth pointed 
out by Dawn, but I can cheerfully say 
that the Lord's work is progressing in 
this regard slowly but surely. In due 
time "the righteous shall see it and rejoice, 
and all iniquity shall stop her 
mouth. Whoso is wise and will observe 
these things, even he shall understand 
the loving kindness of the Lord." 

A broken vessel in the service of our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 

Very humbly, yours, A. D . 

Liverpool, England. 
DEAR BROTHER:-I have just received 
your very encouraging letter. May God 
give you grace and strength for the work 
he has called you to do. Having so much 
to do for the Lord, it is a great privilege 
to receive a personal letter, and though I 
may write at times, I do not expect you 
to answer, as the work for the general 
good of all must be done first. I may 
say that when I first read your TOWER, I 
used to give one-tenth of my income to 
the Lord, but through the light of the 
truth I was led to see myself obeying the 
Law whereas I am under grace. Praise 



God! So it is not the tenth now, it is 
all —a living sacrifice. The last order 
came to hand all right. Many thanks for 
same. May God bless you and Mrs. Russell, 
and all the brethren and sisters in 
Jesus. Yours in Jesus, J. B . 

Clare, Mich. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-After reading 
Dawn, Vol. II., the chapters on "The 
Times of the Gentiles," "The Jubilee 
Cycles," Israel's Double and the Time 
Chronology, I became convinced that we 
are indeed in the time of the harvest, 
while the chapter on the manner of our 
Lord's second coming and the harmony 
of present indications leaves no room for 
even a doubt. Then in place of marrying 
and settling down, as I undoubtedly 
would have done, I sold off my personal 
property, paid all my indebtedness except 
a mortgage on some land, to engage in 
this harvest work. As I have not as yet 
been able to sell the land, and it being 
mostly unimproved will not rent for 
enough to pay the interest on the mortgage 
and the taxes, I thought to spend 
about a week in the spring putting in 
enough of a crop to pay the expenses of 
the place till I can sell it. If I can sell 
it for even a good deal less than I thought 
it was worth two years ago, I would have 
a few hundred dollars left to use as an offering 
to the Lord. My neighbors thought 
me very foolish at the course I have taken, 
and when I began to hold up the truth I 
met with opposition, but our blessed Lord 
and Saviour suffered without the gates 
and we may go to him without the camp 
bearing his reproach. I esteem the reproach 
of Christ greater riches than the 
treasures of Egypt. I will not be afraid 
of them, neither of their words, nor be 
dismayed at their looks. 

Yours in the Lord, W. B 



"He that reapeth receiveth wages, and 
gathereth fruit unto everlasting life." 



R1183 : page 3 

HIS GRACE SUFFICIENT. 



"Anywhere that Jesus calls me, 

Any work he gives to do, 
Any trial or affliction 

He may call me to pass through, 
My glad heart has the assurance 

He will help me bear and do. 

"O, the blessedness of trusting, 

And the full heart satisfied! 
O, the holy joy of loving 

Only Him, the Crucified! 
Looking up with faith unwav'ring 

To the wounds in his dear side. 

"Peace abiding like a river; 

Rest the world can never know; 
Faith that sees the pitying Father 

Wheresoe'er the feet may go;— 
Love uprising, filling, sweet'ning 

Every cup of pain and woe. 

"All my soul is filled with blessing 

While I sit at thy dear feet; 
And a consciousness of serving 

Makes the hallowed cross more sweet, 
While I own thy full salvation 

And the cleansing all complete. 

"If the way be rough and thorny, 
Thou did'st tread the same for me; 

Shall the servant than the Master 
More exempt from trial be? 

If I may at last behold thee, 
It will be enough for me." 
— Selected. 



R1183 : page 3 

RELIGIONS OF THE WORLD. 



The church can best appreciate her own 
position of special favor at this time by 
contrast with the actual condition of the 
rest of the world. And a little reflection 
upon the world's condition of superstition 
and ignorance should bring us, not only 
into a fuller appreciation of our own privileges, 
but also into sympathy and pity for 
the world in its present cheerless gloom 
and aimless gropings in the dark. The 
thought should never be lost sight of, that 
what we receive as special favor from God 
is not for selfish gratification, but for the 



universal blessing of all his creatures. 

And only such as have this benevolent 

disposition to bless, who look forward to 

the prize of our high calling with special 

delight because of its grand opportunities 

to lift up the fallen, to liberate the captives 

of sin and death, to recover sight to 

the blind, to fill the earth with the knowledge 

of the truth and to lead all mankind 

along the highway of holiness to everlasting 

life and to the true end of human existence, 

which is to glorify God in the 

completeness and grandeur of true manhood 

and to enjoy his favor forever, will 

be counted worthy to reign with Christ. 

Let us take a glimpse then at the world's 
present religious condition:— 

The principal religions of the world 
outside of Christianity are Brahmanism, 
Buddhism, Confucianism and Mohammedanism. 
These with the various corrupt 
forms of Christianity sway the minds of 
almost the entire population of the earth. 
The exceptions are some savage and half-civilized 
tribes in central and southern 
Africa, the Esquimaux of the far north, 
some islands of the seas, and the Indian 
tribes of America, all of whom have crude 
ideas of their own, very generally remote 
from the truth and giving evidence of 
fearful forebodings or cheerless gloom in 
view of the uncertainties of future existence, 
or the conditions under which existence 
may be perpetuated beyond the 
tomb. 

Brahmanism is the prevailing religion 
of Hindoostan, and its adherents are estimated 
to number from 120,000,000 to 
150,000,000. Its age is uncertain, as its 
literature presents neither history, annals 
nor chronology, though it is probable 
that it existed some centuries before Christ, 
as its sacred books extend back from 
twenty to thirty centuries. Its theology 
is a chaotic mass of dreamy speculation 
having no well ordered system of thought. 
It is described as not a system, but a 
medley, and not a philosophy, but a 
dream. Its sacred books are the Vedas 
and the Institutes of Manu. From the 
former it appears that anciently the Brahmans 
were worshippers of the elements- 
light, fire, water, etc. 

In theory their religion rests upon the 
Laws of Manu. This work sustains the 
laws of caste and the authority of the 



priesthood, represents Brahma as the supreme 
deity and self-sacrifice (self-inflicted 
torments) as the supreme duty. It presents 
elaborate, ritualistic and ceremonial 
rules of the most exacting character, and 
promulgates the doctrine of the transmigration 
of souls. Though Brahmanism 
has many gods, its one supreme god is 
Brahm; and according to its philosophy 
Brahm is the only being in the universe 
who actually exists: all else is illusory, 
not real. It is said that in order to put 
forth his energy Brahm took upon himself 
bodily form and became three gods- 
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, and to these 
three were intrusted the arrangement and 
government of the universe after Brahm 
had relapsed into his proper state of unconscious 
sleep. 

The highest future bliss to which the 
Brahmanist aspires is absorption into 
Brahm; and as his normal condition is 
presumed to be that of unconscious 
sleep, absorption into Brahm would signify 
nothing more than annihilation. 
However, before he reaches this consummation 
of his hopes, the Brahmanist expects 
to pass through a series of transmigrations, 
until deemed worthy of it. His 
desire is to so act in the present life as to 
rise a grade higher in the next birth. If 
he has been wicked he will be a step lower, 
or if very wicked he will be sent to 
one or other of the innumerable hells to 
expiate his guilt and to reappear on earth 
in mineral, vegetable or animal form before 
he rises again to the human. Or if 
counted worthy to advance upward he enjoys 
a heaven of carnal delights with one 
or other of the superior gods. His worthiness 
of future reward, however, is not 
made dependent upon actual virtue, but 
rather upon conformity to Brahman rites 
and ceremonies, the liberal support of the 
priesthood, etc. Prayers and painful penances 
take the place of true devotion, and 
even suicide is recommended as particularly 
meritorious; and as a consequence, 
it is said that numbers annually throw 
themselves over precipices, bury themselves 
alive in graves dug by their nearest 
kindred, or drown themselves in some of 
the sacred rivers. And voluntary widow-burning 
and infanticide were common 
until suppressed by the British government 
in 1830, though it is still practiced 



in some parts, and doubtless will be until 
the old superstition as to its merit has 
passed away. Some of the penances performed 
by zealous Brahmans have been 
of the most revolting character; as for 
instance, crawling for miles on hands and 
knees over sharp stones, holding up an 
arm above the head for months, cutting 
themselves, disfiguring themselves, etc. 

All India is divided into four castes— 
the Brahmans or priestly class; a military 
class; a mercantile class; and a 
servile class; but the Brahman or priestly 
class is the favored and oppressive one. 
These live on alms and are supported liberally 
by kings and people, as the priesthood 
of the Church of Rome and others 
are. In fact so similar is the power of Brahmanism 
to bind its blind votaries to servile 
submission to the dictates of the Brahman 
or priestly class, that the system has been 
named the Romanism of India. 

R1184 : page 3 

Buddhism. —The despotism of the 
Brahmans gave rise in the seventh century 
B.C. to Buddhism, which was a protest 
against the corrupt religion of that age. 
It has been called the Protestantism of 
India. Though born in Hindoostan, it 
now has little sway there; but it has full 
sway in Ceylon and the eastern peninsula. 
It claims nearly two-thirds of the population 
of China. It prevails also in Japan 
and north of the Himalayas, in Thibet, 
among the Mongolian population of Central 
Asia, and extends into Siberia and 
Swedish Lapland. Its adherents are estimated 
at from 300,000,000 to 400,000,000 
—more than one third of the human race. 

Its founder is said to have been a 
certain prince named Gotama, afterward 
called Buddha, though the legends concerning 
him partake so much of the character 
of fiction as to leave it somewhat 
uncertain whether such a person actually 
existed. However, the ideas ascribed to 
him are the foundation principles of Buddhism. 
The system assumes that existence 
is the cause of all evil, that ignorance is 
the ultimate cause of existence; and that, 
therefore, with the removal of ignorance, 
existence and all its attendant miseries 
would be cut off. 

Buddhism is more properly termed a 



system of philosophy than of theology; 
for it has no god. It recognizes no being 
with greater supernatural power than man 
is supposed capable of attaining by virtue, 
austerity and wisdom. Disgusted with the 
many gods of Brahmanism and the priestcraft 
that imposed upon a superstitious 
people, Buddhism, at least in its early and 
purer form, taught that religious excellence 
consists only in wisdom and personal 
virtue. Buddhism renounces the 
many gods of Brahmanism, discards all 
idea and necessity for a priesthood, and 
does away with all caste. Instead of a 
god they set up an ideal character which 
they term Buddha, not for worship, but 
for the imitation of mankind. And though 
an image of Buddha adorns the center 
of the Buddhist temple, and before it offerings 
of fruit and flowers are placed, the 
ceremonies are not viewed by intelligent 
Buddhists as acts of worship, but as simply 
commemorative of a character worthy 
of remembrance and imitation; for Buddha, 
it was claimed, was nothing more 
than what any good man may become. 
The more ignorant, however, regard him 
as a deity. 

Instead of believing the future of the 
soul to be dependent upon an infallible 
priestly class, it is believed to depend 
wholly upon the operation of inflexible 
law. And instead of the prayers and penances 
prescribed by Brahmanism, Buddhism 
counsels temperance, justice, honesty, 
truth, repentance and confession 
of sin and reformation of character, claiming 
that these principles alone are the 
conditions of virtue and true happiness. 
And in the absence of a knowledge of the 
true God it appeals to and glorifies human 
reason and conscience only. 

The original idea of Buddhism was indeed 
a noble one. It was an effort to 
cast off the fetters of blind superstition, 
and a bold strike for individual liberty; 
and it gives evidence of a sincere desire 
for truth and righteousness and a struggle 
against great opposition to attain it. In 
the absence of a knowledge of God, it 
was an endeavor to follow the clearest 
light they possessed, viz., reason and conscience; 
though with the ignorant who 
failed to catch the true idea of the commemoration 
of Buddha's memory, the 
ceremonies have degenerated into a meaningless 



idolatry, of which the prayer-mill 
is a prominent feature in some countries. 
And though the system provides for no 
priests, a class of self-appointed mendicants 
corresponds somewhat to a priestly 
class, but its only clerical function is 
to read the Buddhist scriptures on stated 
occasions, or to run the prayer-mill for the 
people, for which they receive a small 
compensation. 

Though Buddhism was almost a complete 
revolution of thought from Brahmanism, 
yet it carried with it the absurd doctrine 
of the transmigration of souls and 
of numerous heavens for the good according 
to merit, and about 136 hells situated 
inside the earth for the wicked, according 
to their deserts. And the gloomy end, 
whenever or however reached, is annihilation 
for good and bad alike. The highest 
incentive to virtue which the system 
presents is the speedy arrival at the end 
of existence; for misery, it is believed, 
is not merely a taint in existence, but the 
very essence of it. 

Confucianism is also a philosophy rather 
than a religion, and having its beginning 
only a century later than Buddhism 
(the sixth century B.C.) it very closely 
resembles that system; and though Buddhism 
claims about two thirds of the population 
of China, Confucianism is the basis 
of the social and political life of that nation. 
Confucius (whose original name 
was Kong until Latinized by the Jesuit 
missionaries,) is described as a grave, sober, 
upright and thoughtful man, with high 
moral and intellectual attainments and 
aspirations. 

Carefully trained by a widowed mother, 
he early developed these traits of character, 
and at her death, reviving an ancient 
custom, he spent three years in mourning 
for her, devoting his time and thought to 
the study of moral philosophy by reflection 
upon the principles of moral law, 
furnished by conscience and reason. After 
this he traveled extensively throughout 
the kingdom of China, preaching his doctrines, 
and though for a time he labored 
against great opposition and even persecution, 
as all reformers do, his reputation 
as a public reformer soon became very 
great, his followers being mainly persons 
of middle and mature age— grave, sober, 
thoughtful and respectable citizens, many 



of them occupying important public stations. 

His system has no god, no priesthood, 

no temple, and it regards the universe 

as a grand self-sustaining order. It 

rather doubts a future existence, yet conforms 

to certain ancient religious ceremonies 

on the presumption that some future 

good may accrue from so doing— 

"There may be some meaning in them," 

said Confucius, "and they may affect 

your welfare in a way you do not know 

of. As for the genii and spirits, sacrifice 

to them. I have nothing to tell regarding 

them, whether they exist or not; but 

their worship is part of an august and awful 

ceremonial which a wise man will not 

neglect nor despise." This ignorance of 

things unseen and future, yet fear or hope 

concerning them, is the foundation for 

many absurd superstitions among the Chinese, 

such as scaring away the devils with 

noisy demonstrations, and the disallowance 

of telegraph wires and railroads for fear 

of offending the spirits of the winds, etc. 

It was the special endeavor of Confucius 
to direct the attention of men to the 
duties of social and political life. He 
said, "I teach you nothing but what you 
might learn yourselves, viz., the observance 
of three fundamental laws of relation, 
between sovereign and subject, father and 
child, husband and wife; and the five capital 
virtues,— universal charity, impartial 

R1184 : page 4 

justice, conformity to ceremonies and established 

usages, rectitude of heart and 

mind, and pure sincerity." This, in fact, 

is the whole doctrine of Confucianism in 

a nutshell. By the education of the 

masses according to these principles, he 

believed and taught that the elevation and 

happiness of men would be secured; 

and accordingly schools are established 

throughout the length and breadth of the 

Chinese empire. The writings of Confucius, 

which were designed to perpetuate 

his doctrines of moral philosophy and 

political economy, are read with great 

solemnity on the first and fifteenth of 

every month by a mandarin [a civil officer] 

in robes of ceremony. The veneration 

of Confucius by the Chinese amounts 

to worship among the masses, but like 

that of the Buddhists for Buddha, it is, 



strictly speaking, only commemorative of 

the memory of a good man. Throughout 

China there are temples erected to 

his memory, adorned with ancestral tablets, 

the center of which is that of Confucius. 

And to these offerings, etc., are 

presented. 

Mohammedanism —dates from the seventh 
century A.D., fourteen centuries later 
than Buddhism and thirteen later than Confucianism. 
It prevails chiefly in Turkey, 
Africa, Asia, Persia and parts of India, 
and its adherents number from 130,000,000 
to 150,000,000 of people. In the fifteenth 
century, having penetrated Europe, it became 
a formidable foe to Christianity. 
Its founder, Mohammed, accepted both 
the Old and New Testament Scriptures 
and claimed to be the Comforter promised 
by Christ. The Koran, however, he 
claimed as superior to the Bible, asserting 
that it is as old as God himself and that 
it was conveyed to the lowest heaven by 
Gabriel and thence to himself. The Koran 
is, therefore, the sacred and authoritative 
book among the followers of Mohammed. 

Their religion partakes somewhat of the 
nature of both Judaism and Christianity. 
It presents one God and various ranks of 
angels. Mohammedans believe that Christ 
was a great prophet. They deny the idea of 
a trinity, believe in the resurrection of the 
dead, a final judgment, and a future state 
of rewards and punishments in heaven and 
hell. They teach that the dead have an 
intermediate conscious existence between 
death and resurrection, and that they 
dwell somewhere near the place where the 
dust of the body reposes. They are extreme 
believers in predestination. Friday 
is their sabbath; they must pray five times 
a day, fast and give alms, and must go to 
Mecca, their sacred city, once during life, 
either personally or by a substitute. 

Nothing more praiseworthy can be said 
of Mohammed than that he was a great 
and successful fanatic and impostor, 
having nothing of the high-toned moral 
character which history ascribes to 
the founders of both Buddhism and Confucianism. 
His religion is a miserable 
hash of Christianity, Judaism and a former 
heathen idolatry and superstition; and 
its aggressive character was signalized by 
determined efforts to conquer the world 
with carnal weapons. In recent years it 



has made considerable progress in India 
in displacing Brahmanism. 

Such is the religious condition of what 
is commonly known as the heathen world. 

R1185 : page 4 

Truly it has its lights and shadows. In 
the midst of the gloom of ignorance of 
God, and of human history, and of the 
true end of human existence, it is pleasing 
to note that some noble souls struggled 
after righteousness, sought earnestly for 
truth and zealously endeavored to lift up 
a standard of righteousness for the people. 
And when we consider the disabilities 
under which such labored, and the poor 
incentives which their lame reasonings 
discerned, we can only admire their true 
nobility of character in following the 
guidance of reason and conscience. And 
while we realize a blessed freedom from 
the superstitions which bound them, we 
dare not take to ourselves the credit of 
superior wisdom or virtue, but must ascribe 
all we have, over and above what they 
had, to the superior advantages of our 
favored circumstances under divine 
providence. 

Glancing at the view of the world's 
condition presented in DAWN, Vol. I., 
page 16, we see that it is indeed a dark 
picture. Out of a population of 1,424,000,000, 
how small a proportion are even 
nominally Christian. And how corrupt 
and debasing, and how thoroughly anti-Christian 
are the great and powerful systems 
which claim the name of Christ, only 
the more thoroughly to impose upon the 
ignorance and credulity of mankind. 

The great Roman and Greek Catholic 
churches, originally one, and only separated 
by the spirit of rivalry and strife to 
be greatest, hold sway over the minds of 
274,000,000 of people, and to a great extent 
also over 116,000,000 more through 
their system of errors which still clings 
to Protestantism. The Catholic Church 
is the organized development of that great 
falling away from the doctrine of the Lord 
and the apostles, which began to be established 
about the third century. The 
eleventh century witnessed the separation 
of the eastern and western churches— the 
Greek and the Roman Catholic, each of 
which has since been torn by many dissensions 



and involved in many unsavory disputes 

and quarrels. But how do their doctrines 

compare with the heathen philosophies 

above named? They talk much of 

their zeal for the conversion of the "benighted 

heathen" nations, but to what 

would they convert them? 

Let us see: Professing to know God 
and holding in their possession for centuries 
past the divine revelation, contrary 
to that revelation they misrepresent God 
as a character so abominable and detestable 
in unrivaled cruelty, malice, vindictiveness 
and hate, that the heathen mind 
turns away in horrified disgust, as every 
missionary to foreign lands will testify 
and as many leading missionaries have 
disconsolately reported to the home boards 
who sent them out. (See TOWERS of June 
and November, 1888.) The heathen have 
no faith in a god who could deliberately 
plan to eternally torment the creatures he 
has made and professes to love. 

The central feature of Catholic doctrine 
is the mass, in which bread and wine 
are considered to be changed into the 
actual flesh and blood of Christ and sacrificed 
each time afresh, as an atonement 
for sins, by priests, as instead of the one 
continual sacrifice of Christ on Calvary 
for the sins of the world, which it sets 
aside as insufficient. And the power to forgive 
sins and absolve from guilt, thus presumably 
placed in the hands of a self-exalted 
and often corrupt priesthood, led to 
the doctrines of penance, auricular confession, 
indulgences, etc. When these 
had gained a firm and substantial basis, 
the whole body of nominal Christians 
were thereby plunged into an abyss 
of superstition and servile obedience 
to the machinations of a priesthood more 
tyrannical than the grossest forms of heathenism, 
and into an idolatry as debasing 
as any the world ever witnessed— a worship 
and adoration of angels, of the human 
mother of our Lord, and of fallible 
and often corrupt and abominable characters 
who were canonized as saints by 
the high-priests of Romanism. And its 
supposed meritorious prayers and tormenting 
penances, its debasing servility to 
a tyrannical priesthood of supposed absolute 
power over the present and future 
life, its monstrous system of indulgences 
and its abominable persecutions of truth 



and righteousness, mark the great Antichrist 
as the most desolating abomination 
that ever cursed the earth. 

While all this is applicable with greatest 
force to the Church of Rome, the Greek 
Church has little indeed to boast of a 
more favorable character. And all who 
have come out from that great anti-Christian 
system, and stopped short of an entire 
cleansing from her pollutions, have much 
whereof to be ashamed. This is true, in 
varying measure, of every sect of what 
Romanists call the Protestant Sedition. 

If the creeds and practices of nominal 
Christianity were a fair representation of 
the doctrines of Christ, many of the heathen 
philosophies would rank its equals, if 
not its superiors. And many honest skeptics, 
failing to discern the grains of wheat 
among the chaff and tares, and the pure 
seed of truth among the many counterfeit 
errors, have rejected the Way, the Truth 
and the Life whom they otherwise would 
have welcomed and shall yet know and 
accept. But, thank God, he has not left 
himself without a witness in the world. 
He has his grains of wheat, though they 
be "few" and unrecognized by the world 
and its historians. And while darkness covers 
the earth and gross darkness the people, 
while the nations have for many long centuries 
forgotten God and almost erased his 
image from their hearts, God has always 
had a people, a few, who retained 
his memory and endeavored to follow his 
leading— in remote ages a few solitary 
patriarchs, then a small nation, then Jehovah's 
Anointed came and a faithful few 
of that small nation received him and 
formed the nucleus of the Christian 
Church; and all through the centuries of 
the Christian era such have been added to 
that nucleus as shall be saved in the first 
resurrection at the end of this age— in all 
a "little flock." But blessed and holy 
are all they that have part in the first 
resurrection. 

This little flock of the true friends of 
God have during the Gospel age been 
"the light of the world" and "the salt 
of the earth." And though their light 
has not yet enlightened all, we rejoice to 
know that this body of Christ, with Jesus 
their Head, is the true light which in due 
time shall enlighten every man, the Sun 
of righteousness which shall arise with 



healing beams to enlighten and bless the 
world. ( Matt. 13:43 ; Mai. 4:2 .) Yes, 
ere long it shall be the "city set on a hill" 
—the "New Jerusalem"— "which cannot 
be hid." ( Matt. 5:13,14 .) And though 
its place during the Gospel age has been 
in the wilderness, though it has been unknown 
and unrecognized by the world as 
the church, (as a religious system,) and 
though, like their Lord, they have been 
despised and rejected of men, persecuted 
as heretics and esteemed the filth 
and offscouring of the earth, nevertheless, 
they have truly been, even under these 
unfavorable circumstances, the very salt 
of the earth, and their sufferings for righteousness 
sake have been sacrifices of sweet 
savor unto God. 

The principles of truth and righteousness 
which they perseveringly held and 
patiently suffered for, often even unto 
death, and the divine revelation to which 
they pointed as the source of their faith 
and hope and the inspiration of their 
labors and endurance, was not without its 
effect. The seeds of truth have taken 
root in many lands and brought forth 
fruits to the praise of God and the honor 
of his name. And wherever it sprang up, 
it, like salt, has had its preservative influence 
for good, notwithstanding the false 
systems and their false doctrines and practices. 
Let all of that little flock, who yet remain, 
rejoice in the glorious prospect that 
ere long the whole church, complete and 
glorified, shall be given the heathen and the 
uttermost parts of the earth for a possession, 
and the right and power to bless all the families 
of the earth; making plain the paths of 
righteousness, casting up a highway for 
the people and gathering out the stones; 
lifting up a standard for the people, inspiring 
all hearts with joyful hope, unstopping 
deaf ears and opening blind eyes, rewarding 
righteousness and correcting iniquity, 
and eventually wiping all tears from off 
all faces. And they shall come with songs 
and everlasting joy upon their heads, and 
sorrow and sighing shall flee away, because 
ignorance and superstition and sin and 
death shall be no more. 



R1185 : page 4 



THE PRESENT APOSTASY. 

I have never read 2 Thes. 2 without 
finding my thoughts led away to the Papal 
Apostasy; and still I believe the Holy 
Spirit refers, in this chapter, to Rome. 
But, as history, which some one has defined 
as a record of fulfilled prophecy 
given in detail, is said continually to repeat 
itself, I am now compelled by circumstances 
to believe that a special reference 
is made to "the falling away" of 
these last days, which, to my own mind, 
is far more startling, and is soon to become 
more vast in extent, and awful in 
result, than even was the relapse of the 
early Church into the follies of Romanism. 

Numbers of men who are connected 
with Protestant churches, and who appear 
to the world as ministers of Christ, are 
rejecting the Scriptures with the greatest 
contempt, and branding the faith of those 
who build their hopes on the blood of 
Christ as "the religion of the shambles." 

A very few years ago, of all the languishing 
"isms," Unitarianism appeared 
most sickly. To-day its adherents, 
open and secret, gathering in its own synagogues, 
or assembling in the churches of 
all denominations, are to be numbered 
by thousands. 

R1186 : page 4 

I know this will seem incredible to 
many good folk; but if, the next time 
they receive a call from their popular 
minister, they will press home the question, 
"What think ye of Christ?" nor be 
content with a vaguely given answer— if 
they shall pointedly ask him whether the 
Scripture, as a whole, be the Word of 
God; and whether Christ's blood was 
shed as a propitiation for sin— some of 
these may possibly be startled to find that 
their own spiritual guide has been practically 
nothing more nor less than a Unitarian 
himself. 

If ever there was a time when we should 
try the spirits to know whether they are 
of God, it is the present time. And this 
is a solemn duty we owe to God, ourselves 
and the Church; nor must the dread of 
being deemed uncharitable prevent us 
from discharging it. Toleration of error 
is injury to truth; charity dealt out to 



Antichrist is uncharitableness to Christ. 

We must not be deceived with high-sounding 

words; the emissaries of error 

deal largely in these, especially when 

speaking of "the exalted sentiments of 

Scripture," and the character of Christ. 

We must remember that either the Scriptures 

are the very Word of God, or they 

form a mass of misleading absurdities, 

self-contradictions, and glaring falsehoods; 

R1186 : page 5 

and the sacrifice of Christ must 
either have been for the sinner's salvation, 
or a useless parade of self-endurance. We 
have not here a matter of mere views and 
opinions, in which men who cannot agree 
may yet agree to differ. It is written that 

"In none other is there salvation; neither 
is there any other name under heaven that 
is given among men wherein we must be 
saved." (R.V.) But what must be the 
fate of those who, while they profess to 
regard Him as a great teacher, and admire 
Him as a great pattern, refuse Him 
as the only Savior? 

There is no more plainly expressed 
truth in the Word of God than, "Without 
the shedding of blood there is no remission 
of sin." What, then, becomes 
of the sin of such as trample under foot 
the blood of Christ, and blasphemously 
make mention of it as savoring of the 
shambles? We constantly hear of men who 
are said to be good men, though "rather 
shaky" on the doctrine of the Atonement. 
But if "shaky" here, of what value to 
themselves or others is their soundness elsewhere? 
And yet when we question the 
right of such to minister in the Church 
of Christ, we are "uncharitable;" and 
most uncharitable, if we venture to expose 
their errors to the unwary souls they would 
fain beguile with their soul-destroying 
doctrine. Yet, if it is some one who 
confesses Him as Christ and Lord, and is 
contending earnestly for the faith once 
delivered to the saints, that may be the 
subject of conversation, no word shall be 
too severe for such a one, because of his 
narrow-mindedness. A significant fact; 
but happy those who go forth to Jesus, 
outside the camp, bearing his reproach! 

One thing with regard to the present 
apostasy must be specially noted— that 



many of those who now deny the Lord 

that bought them were once ultra-evangelicals 

both in views and doctrine. What 

does it mean? What, but this— that they 

refused to use the light God gave them, 

and have been given over to judicial darkness? 

It was said by one of these men, 

but a few months since: "My present 

belief can neither give joy to me, nor 

allow me to administer cheer to any one 

else." Yet the poor man remained bound, 

as it were, in chains of darkness. His 

pulpit work had become most bitter bondage, 

yet, like blinded Samson at the mill, 

he felt compelled still to "grind on." 

"Where are we?" asked another whose 

name had become famous through all the 

English speaking world, of a friend of 

mine who was standing by his dying bed. 

"All, to me, seems dark," he added. 

Yet there appeared no disposition to return 

to the light from which he had wilfully 

wandered. Nay, and here is the 

danger that threatens so many— loving 

darkness rather than light, we may choose 

the darkness rather than the light, and 

God may set his seal on our choice. 

Then, as Whittier sings:— 

Forever round the mercy seat, 
The guiding lights of love might burn; 

But still, if habit-bound, the feet 
Would lack the will to turn. 
JOHN E. LINNELL. 

We are glad to recognize, here and 
there, a voice lifted in defense of this 
foundation truth of Christianity; but such 
defences of the faith once delivered to 
the saints are few; they are only isolated 
voices here and there. As the TOWER 
pointed out some years ago, as indicated 
by the sure word of prophecy, the whole 
nominal church is rapidly plunging into 
the ditch of Infidelity. And no matter, 
if for a time they retain some of the 
superstructure, when the foundation is repudiated 
all that is left of the building is 
inevitably doomed. 

Yet the picture is not so dark as this 
writer presumes; for few indeed have been 
fully enlightened and "have tasted of the 
good word of God, and the powers [advantages] 
of the age to come." But if 
any such fall away, there remaineth for 
them no more an offering for sin; but a 
certain, fearful looking for of judgment 
and fiery indignation which shall devour 



the adversaries who knowingly trample 
under foot the precious blood of Christ, 
counting it a common thing, and who do 
despite unto the spirit of favor exercised 
through Christ.-- Heb. 6:4-8 ; 10:26-31 . 



R1187 : page 5 
RELIGIOUS DECLENSION. 



While so much is being said with regard 
to the wonderful results of revival efforts 
throughout the country, it is well to look 
on the other side of the picture, and see 
what the signs of the times indicate. In 
a recent number of the Congregationalist 
is an editorial, from which we make the 
following suggestive extracts, as showing 
the condition of religious interest in the 
sections referred to. Speaking especially 
of Vermont, the Congregationalist says:— 

"It is found that about sixty-nine 
churches have died out altogether in that 
state, or been united to others. It is found 
that the membership of Congregational 
churches, there, has diminished by about 
3000 in the last fifty years. It is found that, 
of those residents who live two miles or 
more from church, but about one third 
ever attend it. It is believed that of an 
entire population of 332,268, from 100,000 
to 125,000, besides invalids and little 
children, never hear the gospel. 

'"Trust in God, and keep your powder 
dry,' was the old Yankee war-cry that 
did the business for the enemy; but it 
won't be long, if things are allowed to go 
on as they are going, before we shall find 
that our powder is all so damp that its 
goodness is gone. Our strength will have 
flattened out into weakness. Our churches 
will be having only a name to live, while 
actually dead from removal, and rust, and 
general inefficiency. Barbarism will have 
been too much for them. We have no 
idea that Vermont is specially a sinner in 
these respects. It is indeed our impression 
that every New England state could, 
at least in some of its latitudes and longitudes, 
quite parallel her figures." 

In commenting on the foregoing the 
New York Observer says:— 

"We have been hopeful that the discouraging 
statements could be explained 



in such a way that there would be no 
ground for serious apprehension as to the 
future of evangelical religion. It is evident, 
however, that there is considerable 
alarm among those who are most 
interested." 



R1186 : page 5 

GO AND TELL JESUS. 



Some years ago, says Dr. Clemence, a 
Christian lady came to me in great distress, 
and said: "Sir, I have such a burden 
on my heart. I am engaged in a 
boarding school where are many pupils, 
and I know I ought to tell them about the 
Savior's love, but I cannot. It seems as 
if a padlock were on my lips; I cannot 
speak of Christ, and it is a burden on me 
every day." 

I said: "Do I understand your case? 
You love Christ?" 

"Yes." 

"You want to speak for him?" 

"Indeed I do." 

"You cannot?" 

"Cannot say a word." 

"And is that a burden to you?" 

"Indeed it is." 

"Well now," said I, "do not tell another 
soul on earth what you have told 
me, but go and tell Jesus. Instead of asking 
help from man, go and cast the burden 
upon him. He lives to baptize you 
with every power you want. Just go and 
tell Jesus what you feel, and leave the 
whole matter with him." 

I saw no more of her for some weeks; 
but the next time she came to see me, instead 
of the face looking as if she were 
weighed down with a burden, it was radiant 
with joy. I asked her: "How is it 
with you now?" 

"O," she said, "I did as you told me. 
Instead of speaking to man about it, I 
flung the burden on Christ, and it is gone! 
I can speak for him now. My tongue is 
unloosed, and I can praise God."— Sel. 



R1186 : page 5 



THE CHARACTER OF OUR SACRIFICE. 

It is claimed by some that the sacrifice 
which the church is invited to make is a 
sacrifice of sinful practices and thoughts 
in which we formerly took delight, and 
that thus we are to follow in the Master's 
footprints as he set us an example. 

This is a great mistake. Renouncing 
sin is in no sense a sacrifice, and in so 
doing we are not following our Lord's 
footprints; for he had no sins to renounce. 
He was "holy, harmless, undefiled, and 
separate from sinners;" he was "the 
Lamb of God without spot or blemish;" 
he knew no sin; he was the "holy one," 
the "just one." We cannot begin, therefore, 
to follow in his footsteps until we 
have been first cleansed from our sins 
through faith in his blood as the price of 
our redemption. Then, through his merit 
imputed to us, we are holy (pure), and 
therefore, if we offer ourselves to God as 
sacrifices, we are acceptable as sharers together 
with our Lord in his sufferings for 
the sins of the world. This is clearly expressed 
in Paul's words to those already 
justified by faith in Christ— "Present 
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable 
to God." 

Not only do the apostles thus present 
it, but the types which prefigured the sacrifice 
taught the same thing. The animal 
presented for the typical sacrifice must be 
the most choice of its kind— "without 
blemish." ( Exod. 12:5 ; Lev. 9:3 ; 
Exod. 29:1 ; Lev. 1:3 .) Had our Lord 
not been absolutely free from sin, he never 
could have redeemed us. It was because 
there was not one such spotless one among 
men, that no man could by any means redeem 
his brother, or give to God a ransom 
for him.- Psa. 49:7 . 

Instead, therefore, of insulting God by 
offering our sins as a sacrifice upon his 
altar, and claiming therefor the exceeding 
great reward of exaltation to the divine 
nature, we should forsake our sins because 

R1187 : page 5 

they are sinful, because we have no right 
to them and should take no pleasure in 
them. We are not to claim a reward for 
simply doing our duty. When we simply 
pay a debt, do we expect the creditor to 



reward us handsomely for it? Do we not 
rather pay the creditor a reward (interest) 
for not compelling us to pay it sooner? 
What would he think, if the debtor should 
demand the reward, or interest? And 
what must our heavenly Father think of 
poor bankrupts who have not a farthing 
to pay their past indebtedness, and who 
are daily plunging deeper into debt and 
at best can only make a feeble effort to 
resist sin, coming to him with nothing to 
cancel the sins of the past and with mere 
promises of reformation which they cannot 
fulfill, and then claiming therefor the 
exceeding great reward of being made 
sharers and joint-heirs with his Son who 
never knew sin? Think you, would not 
such presumption justly merit deep abasement? 
especially, where the spotless robe 
of the imputed righteousness of Christ 
has been offered and recognized and 
spurned? Will such a one be accounted 
worthy to be the bride of the King's 
Son, or as meriting the divine favor 
in any way? Far from it. Well 
did the Psalmist put the prayer in our 
mouths— "Keep back thy servant from 
presumptuous sins, let them not have 
dominion over me."— Psa. 19:13 . 

The sacrifice which we are privileged, 
not compelled, to make, is a sacrifice of 
things to which we have a right through 
Christ, and things which in themselves 
are lawful and right. As condemned sinners 
we had no rights; all our rights were 
forfeited and therefore we must die. But 
when our life was redeemed from destruction 
by the payment of our ransom price, 
and we gratefully accepted of the favor 
of life through faith in the precious blood 
of Christ, then, all the rights and privileges 
of perfect men are reckoned as 
restored to us. As believers these rights 
are now ours, though we have not 
yet come into actual possession of the 
things thus secured to us. And these rights 
are what we are now privileged to sacrifice; 
and if completely sacrificed, then 
we may be sure "it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give us the kingdom," and to 
make us joint-heirs with his Son in all 
his glory. 

The sacrifice of all our rights implies 
the sacrifice of life itself as human beings, 
trusting to the power of God to raise us 
from death, not to human being, but to 



being in a higher nature, according to 

his promise. And what we cannot understand 

of the philosophy of so great a work 

we must simply trust to God's promise. 

The actual experience of the great restitution, 
in which all the rest of mankind 
shall be so greatly blessed, shall never 
come to the body of Christ, since they 
sacrifice this purchased right for the privilege 
of sharing with Christ in the higher 
nature and glory. They give up all hope 
of that, and make no claims on God's 
bounty or favor for the life that now is. 
All that remains of our humanity is to be 
spent in the divine service— in active cooperation 
with the Lord's plan, sacrificing 
all earthly interests for that great 
cause, and expecting no reward of an 
earthly kind. 

Such being the conditions on which we 
may obtain the exceeding great reward 
offered to us, how necessary that we should 
keep our eye fixed on the glory of the exceeding 
great and precious promises, that 
by these we may gain strength as new 
creatures, to keep the old nature, the 
human, continually subject to the will of 
God; that we carry out our covenant 
faithfully unto death, being daily crucified 
with Christ and sharers in his sufferings. 



R1188 : page 5 
THE SLANDERER. 



"Against slander there is no defense. 
It starts with a word, with a nod, with a 
shrug, with a look, with a smile. It is 
pestilence walking in darkness, spreading 
contagion far and wide, which the most 
wary traveler cannot avoid; it is the heart-searching 
dagger of the dark assassin; it 
is the poisoned arrow whose wounds are 
incurable; it is the mortal sting of the 
deadly adder, murder its employment, innocence 
its prey, and ruin its sport. The 
man who breaks into my dwelling, or 
meets me on the public road and robs me 
of my property, does me injury. He stops 
me on the way to wealth, strips me of my 
hard-earned savings, involves me in difficulty, 
and brings my family to penury and 

R1188 : page 6 



want. But he does me an injury that can 

be repaired. Industry and economy may 

again bring me into circumstances of ease 

and affluence. The man who, coming at 

the midnight hour, fires my dwelling, 

does me an injury— he burns my roof, my 

pillow, my raiment, my very shelter from 

the storm and tempests; but he does me 

an injury that can be repaired. The storm 

may indeed beat upon me, and chilling 

blasts assail me; but Charity will receive 

me into her dwelling, will give me food 

to eat and raiment to put on, will timely 

assist me, raising a new roof over the ashes 

of the old, and I shall again sit by my 

own fireside, and taste the sweets of friendship 

and of home. But the man who circulates 

false reports concerning my character, 

who exposes every act of my life 

which may be misrepresented to my disadvantage, 

who goes first to this, then to 

that individual, tells them he is very tender 

of my reputation, enjoins upon them 

the strictest secrecy, and then fills their 

ears with hearsays and rumors, and, what 

is worse, leaves them to dwell upon the 

hints and suggestions of his own busy imagination 

—the man who thus "filches 

from me my good name" does me an injury 

which neither industry, charity, nor 

time itself can repair. — Selected. 



R1187 : page 6 

"BE YE, THEREFORE, SOBER." 



"The end of all things is at hand: be ye, therefore, 
sober, and watch unto prayer."— 1 Pet. 4:7 . 

Remembering that eighteen centuries 
have passed since Peter gave this counsel to 
the church, he might be considered as somewhat 
premature in regard to the proximity 
of the time of the end; but considering 
the great week which commenced with 
the creation of man and ends with his full 
restitution to the image and favor of God, 
each of whose days is a thousand years 
( 2 Pet. 3:8 ), and that Peter was living in 
the fifth day of this great week, we see that 
from this standpoint his words were true. 
The end of the old order of things— the 
end of the dominion of evil, is to be in 



the close of the sixth day (the sixth thousand 
years), and thus was indeed at hand, 
as was also the second coming of the Lord 
and the setting up of his kingdom. 

While this and all similar expressions, 
referring to their time as the last days, 
were thus true then, the apostle himself 
probably did not so understand it; for the 
significance of the time-prophecies was in 
all probability wisely hidden from their 
view, as it was from the prophets, since 
the length of a single one of these days 
would have seemed very long and consequently 
a cause of discouragement to them. 
But the spirit which inspired the words of 
the apostles and prophets could see that 
while from God's standpoint the end of 
all things was at hand in the fifth day of 
the week, and these words were, therefore, 
true in this sense when declared to the early 
church, would also be true from the human 
standpoint when fully understood by the 
church in the end of the age. How true it is, 
therefore, in our day, when we are made 
to see clearly that the year 1914 will be 
the full end of the Times of the Gentiles, 
and that the next twenty-four years, therefore, 
must bring about the full 
consummation. 

In view of these things, how apt the 
Apostle's counsel to watchfulness and sobriety; 
for what a lamentable calamity it 
would be to any of the saints, who had 
thus far run well for the prize of their high 
calling, to become discouraged and falter 
and fail when so near the realization of 
their glorious hope. Let us, therefore, be 
sober; let us guard against the worldly 
spirit and its stupefying and intoxicating 
influence upon our spiritual life. Refuse 
the first draught of the wine of worldly-mindedness 
and you will not be tempted 
to take the second. If you take the first, 
it may revive the old appetite and thus 
quickly and suddenly precipitate your fall. 

Therefore, watch unto prayer: pray for 
divine assistance, to resist even the slightest 
encroachment of the enemy, and bear 
in mind that to the watchful and prayerful 
is promised grace sufficient to overcome 
the world. 

With this timely counsel the Apostle 
then proceeds to show us how to cultivate 
the spirit of Christ, saying: "Above all 
things have fervent charity (love) among 
yourselves; for charity (love) shall cover 



the multitude of sins. Love is one of the 
first essentials of the Christian character, 
and while Christians must love all men 
as God loves them— not always for what 
they are, but for what they shall be when 
character shall have been developed and 
made perfect— yet they can love each 
other in a much higher sense, as those in 
whom the God-likeness is already developing 
and perfecting. If such cannot 
love each other whom they see, how can 
they love God whom they see not? Love 

R1188 : page 6 

to God may be rightly judged an empty 

profession, if it find no expression toward 

those possessing his spirit and likeness. 

Among these love should have glowing, 

fervent and constant expression. Love 

so fervent, considering the imperfections 

of the earthen vessel and yet the strivings 

of the spirit to overcome, can cover a 

multitude of sins— of short-comings and 

failures to measure up to our highest ideas 

of moral excellence. And while thus regarded 

of one another we are so regarded 

of God who also looketh upon the heart, 

and noting there the warm impulses of 

love toward him and his, excuses all our 

unwilful sins through the merit of our Redeemer. 

"Love," said the Apostle, "is 

the fulfilling of the law;" consequently, 

if we have pure and fervent love, and if 

we walk not after the flesh but after the 

spirit, the law is reckoned as fulfilled in us. 

( Rom. 13:10 ; 8:1 .) Therefore, above all 

things have fervent love among yourselves; 

and let it be manifested in the use of 

"hospitality one toward another without 

grudging. As every man hath received 

the gift [the favors of life], even so minister 

the same one to another as good 

stewards of the manifold grace of God." 

There is probably nothing better calculated 
to cement and knit together the 
body of Christ than Christian hospitality 
—the fellowshiping of members of the 
body of Christ and ministering to one 
another the temporal and spiritual favors. 
However humble those favors may be, they 
give evidence of the love that prompts 
the dispensing of them. Those who have 
much of this world's good things, who 
have a well ordered and comfortable home-life, 
have good opportunities for this kind 



of service; and while some of those in 
less favored circumstances might hesitate 
to show the hospitality they feel toward 
those more favored, such advances on the 
part of the latter class quickly show that 
the class distinctions based upon relative 
degrees of wealth or pedigree, etc., which 
obtain in the world, find no recognition 
in the body of Christ, where all are one. 
And those in humble circumstances will 
have no pride of rivalry, etc., to sustain, 
but in simplicity and love will delight to 
manifest the hospitality they feel toward 
both those in more and those in less favored 
circumstances— to minister to them 
both of their temporal and their spiritual 
good things according to their several 
needs, as good and faithful stewards of 
the manifold grace of God. 

Then let every member of the body be 
solicitous for his influence over every other 
member, taking heed that he place no 
stumbling block in his brother's way, but 
that in all things his course shall prove 
helpful to the saints. "If any man 
speak," says the apostle, "let him speak 
as the oracles of God." If we would 
teach the truth, let us first prove it and 
make sure that it is truth, and not present 
crude ideas and human imaginations to 
stumble the weaker brother. And likewise 
in dispensing religious reading matter, 
we should be similarly careful to speak 
by this agency also as the oracles of God. 
No tract or book or paper should be 
handed to another, which we cannot endorse. 
Thus we may speak as the oracles 
of God and minister of the ability which 
God giveth, that God in all things may 
be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom 
be praise and dominion forever and ever. 



R1188 : page 6 

THE REPROACH OF CHRIST. 



"Whosoever, therefore, shall be ashamed of me 
and of my words in this adulterous and sinful 
generation, of him also shall the Son of man be 
ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father 
with the holy angels."— Mark 8:38 . 

There is nothing in the world so beautiful 
to me as a little child, said one who 



fondly contemplated the sweet innocence 
and awakening mentality of a little grandson, 
very dear to her heart. The remark 
awakened a train of thought, and led to 
the consideration, Does God so view it? 
and is it really so? Let us see. The charm 
of childhood is its innocence, its purity 
as yet uncontaminated with actual sin, its 
awakening mental and moral powers, and 
the freshness and beauty of its new physical 
life. But viewing the matter from 
God's standpoint, we see there is something 
more beautiful still— that disciplined 
and ripened character, whether realized 
in young or middle life or in ripe old age, 
is of far greater value and comeliness in 
his sight. What! are the bent form, the 
faltering step and the whitened locks of 
age more beautiful than the freshness and 
vigor of youth? No; but under the rude 
blasts of the present imperfect conditions 
of human life, which ultimately wreck 
and ruin the physical structure, in some 
cases characters have been developed 
which far surpass in grandeur and beauty 
the innocence and simplicity of childhood. 
It is character that God most admires 
and loves; and if we take his standpoint, 
it is what we will most appreciate. 

When God created Adam pure and innocent 
and in his own likeness— "very 
good"— doubtless he was worthy of love 
and admiration; but nevertheless, that he 
and his race might have the greater beauty 
of matured and disciplined character, 
and be worthy of still more love, God, 
for seven thousand years, submits them to 
the rude hand of discipline with the ultimate 
design of developing and perfecting 
character. 

The primary significance of the word 
character is, to make sharp, to cut into 
furrows, to engrave. Youthful innocence 
presents its first symmetrical and beautiful 
tracings, while mature and ripened age, 
if rightly exercised by the discipline of 
years, approaches very nearly the grand 
and glorious finish. The tiny rose-bud 
has its beauty, but hope and faith look 
forward to the perfect, full-blown flower; 
and the bud must swell, develop and open 
out its close-shut leaves in full-blown loveliness, 
before its grandeur and refreshing 
fragrance can be realized. Just so it is 
with character; and, therefore, the most 
beautiful thing on earth, in God's estimation, 



is a tried, disciplined and well developed 
character. A character which 
has yielded to the influence of evil is not 
the development (engraving) of the beautiful 
tracings found to some extent in 
every individual in youthful innocence, 
but a blurring and effacing of those tracings 
and the substitution of the deformities 
of evil. 

While the inner flower of character is 
developing, the outer leaves that infolded 
the bud may be withering and dying; but 
he who is intent on watching for the 
flower, and waiting for its inner glory and 
fragrance, has but little regard to the outer 
fading leaves which in its infancy was 
all that was to any extent visible. Just so 
may we regard the infirmities of age, the 
loss of youthful vigor and beauty, the silvered 
hair, the wrinkled brow, the bent 
form, the halting step and voice, and the 
trembling limbs, if the fragrance and beauty 
of the ripened character present their 
charms. In due time God, who greatly 
values it, will trim off the outer leaves and 
transplant it to a more congenial soil and 
clime, where it will bloom in eternal 
beauty. 

Let those who would appreciate the developed 
character mark carefully the features 
visible even in the infantile tracings. 

R1189 : page 6 

Mark the baby's dignity— how sober and 
thoughtful and inquisitive and anxious to 
learn; note the first evidences of conscience, 
how he tries to balance the problems 
of right and wrong. Mark how he 
expects truth as a matter of course, and is 
surprised at falsehood and duplicity. See 
how love springs up and overflows the 
baby heart, and how benevolence tries to 
repay parental affection with smiles and 
loving caresses; yet each may have its evil 
counterpart as a possibility, but not as a 
part of the first tracings of character. 
These baby graces and charms are but the 
first tracings of character. Under careful 
discipline and training and favorable conditions 
these early traced features of character 
would develop uninterruptedly. But 
such conditions do not generally obtain in 
the present life, and as evil reigns, character 
is stunted, dwarfed, and the excrescences 
of evil appear, to disfigure and mar 



the creature and pervert its high and noble 
faculties to ignoble and base uses. 
But, on the other hand, view the rightly 
developed character of maturity. See 
how careful study of the principles of 
righteousness has dignified the thoughtful 
countenance; observe the easy, quiet grace 
with which errors are dropped and truth 
is gladly and thankfully embraced, because 
the desire for, and appreciation of, truth 
has been carefully cultivated. Mark how 
conscience, skilled in its judgment of 
right and wrong, and unflinchingly committed 
to the right, guides the actions 
with unwavering precision; how truth and 
equity, love and benevolence, rule and 
triumph over every temptation to evil. 
And with such a character, however inferior 
the physical form, even it is in a 
measure glorified. The open countenance 
accompanies the transparent virtues of the 
soul; quiet dignity and easy grace are the 
outward expressions of a soul at peace 
and in delightful communion with God. 
Studious care in the building of character 
is expressed in the thoughtful countenance; 
and the joys of hope and faith 
add a halo of glory, beautiful in the highest 
sense to every beholder. The perfume 
of such ripe and full-blown characters 
are blessings to those about them and 
precious foretastes of the wealth of blessing 
in store for the whole world when 
such shall have been exalted to their promised 
position and privilege of authority 
and power. 

A strong character is one which by continued 
effort and overcoming of evil has become 

R1189 : page 7 

established in righteousness. Righteousness 
has become the uniform habit of 
life. Some characters develop and strengthen 
very early in life, some in middle life, 
and some later, though every added year 
will bring its added glory if properly used. 
And every one whose own character is 
developing with energy has a keen appreciation 
of such development in others. 
Thus it is that the body of Christ, every 
member of which is thus actively engaged 
in character building, is knit together in 
love. They see in each other that which 
actually calls forth their love, however 
unlovely they may appear to people of 



the world who look not upon the heart 
but merely upon the outward form and 
conditions and circumstances. 

While every child of God is engaged to 
a greater or less extent in this work of character-building, 
some grow steadily stronger 
while others, through lack of consecrated 
effort, are weak and vacillating, measurably 
swayed by the influence of the world, the 
flesh or the devil, yet not entirely so, but 
still making some effort toward righteousness. 
Such characters are not willing to 
be closely identified with the body of 
Christ, but would follow "afar off." They 
are not quite willing to share the reproaches 
of Christ, and so keep at convenient 
distance. Such have not learned to view 
character from God's standpoint and to 
appreciate it and the truth which develops 
it. But such characters are weak and unworthy 
of their privileges. If we have 
taken the Lord's standpoint, which is the 
only standpoint of actual merit, we should 
learn to value the truth and those characters 
which have been and are being 
moulded and fashioned by it, above all 
other considerations, and not be in the 
least ashamed to be identified with it 
or them. Such strong characters God 
loves and honors, while he declares that 
he is ashamed of the weak, vacillating ones 
who follow him afar off. He says, "He 
that is ashamed of me and of my words 
in this adulterous and sinful generation, 
of him also shall the Son of man be 
ashamed when he cometh in the glory of 
his Father with the holy angels." 

There are many ways of showing ourselves 
ashamed of Christ. We are ashamed 
of Christ, if we are ashamed of any member 
of his body, however humble or poor 
or unlearned; if we are ashamed to be 
identified as their friends and companions. 
We are ashamed of Christ, if we are 
ashamed to be recognized by the world 
and nominal Christians as members of his 
despised body, which they do not recognize 
but which they reject and everywhere 
speak against. We are ashamed of Christ, 
if we are ashamed of his doctrines, either 
as a whole or in part. 

To be ashamed of any of these is only 
to prove that such a character is weak and 
vacillating and far short of that full development 
which the Lord desires, and the possession 
of which, only, he will own and exalt 



as his bride and joint-heir. He would rightly 
be ashamed to take for his bride one so 
inferior to the true standard of moral excellence. 
Blessed is he, therefore, who 
overcomes these weaknesses, and who 
in humility and teachableness endeavors 
steadily to cultivate a harmonious and 
symmetrical character. 

Soon Christ's appreciation of those 
strong, beautiful, symmetrical characters 
which have followed him closely in this evil 
time, from principle, and not for praise 
of men, will be expressed in their glorious 
exaltation as his bride and joint-heir. 
MRS. C. T. R. 



"Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be 
done on earth as it is done in heaven. 



R1189 : page 7 

THE UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES OF 
PRESENT CIVILIZATION. 

Having received the spirit which is of 
God ( 1 Cor. 2:12 ) and no longer looking 
at present governments as from God- 
though realizing that he permits them— 
we know that they must pass away.— 

1 John 2:16,17 . 

The great statesmen of the different 
eras have devoted their time and study to 
formulate some kind of government that 
will secure an equilibrium in human relations, 
and thereby remain permanent. 
We know from history that every effort in 
this direction has failed, and Scripture 
prophecy informs us that all present and 
future trials must meet the same fate, until 
the Lord has come and has established his 
government in righteousness.— Dan. 2:31-35 ; 
and Dan. 7 . 

In addition to understanding the plain 
Bible teachings on this important subject, 
it is also the privilege of the saints to fully 
comprehend the reason why all government 
of and by man in his fallen condition 
is "beastly" in its character, and 
must terminate in times of trouble; and 
also why our Lord's government will be 
everlasting. The base of action for every 
carnal man— and this includes all who 



are not really born from the spirit ( John 3:3-8 ), 
—is pure self-interest. This principle 
is so fully understood and endorsed 
not only by the world, but also, in practice, 
by the nominal church, that the saying 
of "Every man for himself, and the 
devil take the hindmost," has been given 
the position of an axiom. The same 
principle is recognized in the world's 
maxim, "If you don't look out for No. 1, 
no one else will." A moment's reflection 
will convince anyone that the more 
perfectly these propositions are carried 
into effect, the sooner and more complete 
must be the overturning of all government, 
and the consequent condition of 
thorough anarchy. While the world's 
great ones, both inside and outside of 
Babylon, are relying on education of the 
masses to open up an escape from this 
foreseen condition, we know from our 
Bibles that much of the knowledge current 
to-day is knowledge "falsely so-called," 
and that only a new mind, secured 
through a complete consecration of 
one's being to God ( Rom. 12:2,1 ), will 
transform this motive of the depraved 
heart. In relying on a burnishing of the 
intellect only, by the means now in use, 
the world is leaning on a broken staff and 
must again be disappointed. Statistics 
prove that among people of American 
parentage in those parts of the United 
States where the public school system is 
best maintained, and illiteracy is at a 
minimum, there is a larger percentage of 
criminals than among the same class in 
those portions of the country where schools 
are poorly sustained and illiteracy reaches 
its maximum. The same fact is demonstrated 
in another way by comparing the 
percentage of criminals of American parentage 
in any given locality now, with 
those of the same class in the same locality 
twenty -five or thirty years ago. We copy 
an article from the St. Paul (Minnesota) 
Globe of Sunday, June 9th, 1889, which 
covers this ground fully, and shows that 
thinking men of the world are realizing 
the danger of cultivating the intellect, 
and leaving the heart free to follow out 
its own evil imaginations. ( Matt. 15:18,19 ; 
Gal. 5:19-21 .) We clip the 
following from the article referred to:— 

R1190 : page 7 



OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 

"I now come to the fifth charge that 
is brought against our public schools, and 
I consider it the most terrible arraignment 
of the system I have ever seen, and the 
proofs the most crushing. Its strength 
lies entirely in the official figures of the 
United States census reports, as carefully 
tabulated by the late assistant attorney 
general of the United States. The figures 
have been verified and authenticated by 
those who were best able to judge, and 
their accuracy will not be disputed. 

"Now keeping steadily in view this 
common standpoint, namely, that a people 
properly educated are more moral, 
virtuous, contented, happy and law-abiding 
than an ignorant people, let us suppose 
that we find somewhere, living side 
by side, two communities, one of which 
is made up almost entirely of educated 
people, while the other is largely composed 
of illiterate people; and let us further 
suppose that amongst those considered 
educated you find that in proportion to 
their population they have more criminals, 
paupers and insane, and their death list 
shows more suicides and more deaths from 
the criminal indulgence of the brutal 
passions than that of the illiterates,— what 
conclusion would you arrive at with reference 
to that kind of education? 

"For such educated community, let us 
take the native-born white population of 
the six New England states, to-wit: Massachusetts, 
Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, 
Connecticut and Rhode Island, 
and for the unlettered community we will 
take the native-born whites of the six 
states of Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, 
Georgia, North Carolina and South Carolina. 
It will be observed that the states 
thus enumerated are either a part of the 
original thirteen, or such as have been 
carved out therefrom. 

"Both of these communities started on 
their career of existence about the same 
time; both spoke the same language and 
had been accustomed to the same laws, 
manners and usages. There was one important 
particular, however, in which these 
two communities widely differed at the 
very start, as we shall presently see. More 
than two hundred years ago the principle 



was incorporated into the legislation of 
Massachusetts that the whole people must 
be educated to a certain degree at the 
public expense, irrespective of any social 
distinctions. Virginia, which may represent 
the Southern states named, had at 
that time no general free school system. 

"Now we find that in 1860 Massachusetts 
and her five New England sisters had 
2,665,945 native-born white inhabitants, 
and out of these only 8,543 adults who 
could not read or write, while Virginia, 
with her five sisters, numbered 3,181,969 
native-born whites, of whom 262,802 
adults could neither read nor write. So 
that in the six New England states the 
proportion of illiterate native whites was 
only one to every 312, while Virginia and 
her five sisters counted one illiterate to 
every twelve. But mark you! How stand 
the criminal lists? Massachusetts, etc., 
out of about 2-1/2 millions, had on the first 
day of June, 1860, just 2,459 criminals 
in prison (i.e., one to every 1,084); while 
Virginia, etc., out of over 3 millions, had 
but 447 in prison (i.e., one to every 
6,670); this being a disproportion between 
the two communities of more than 
six to one. A glance at the same table 
will show that the natives educated under 
the New England system had one pauper 
to every 178, while those without it had 
but one pauper to every 345. 

"Of those who in one year had died 
by suicide, New England had one to every 
13,285 of the entire population while Virginia 
and her five sisters had but one to 
56,584, and of those who perished the victims 
of their criminal lusts, New England 
had one to every 84,737, while her southern 
neighbors had but one to every 128,729. 
From the census report of 1870 it 
appears that the New England states had 
one insane person to every 800 native-born 
inhabitants, while in the other states 
named one insane came to 1,682 native 
inhabitants. 

"One very noticeable fact in this connection, 
as shown by the foregoing, is 
that the state of Massachusetts, which 
claims the honor of being the founder of 
the New England system of education, 
while she had by far the smallest proportion 
of illiterate persons, had at the same 
time much the largest proportion of criminals, 
viz., one to every 649 native white 



inhabitants. 

"In their efforts to find some plausible 
explanation for the astounding growth of 
crime in their states, the advocates of 
state-governed schools have sometimes 
claimed that this difference is owing to a 
variety of local causes, entirely unconnected 
with and independent of difference 
in educational systems. But this is, in 
our opinion, entirely refuted by the fact 
that in the very same localities every material 
increase of expenditures for public 
school purposes has, without a single exception, 
been followed by a corresponding 
increase of crime. 

"In 1850 the state of Massachusetts, 
for example, had a native white population 
of 827,430. At that date her public 
school pupils numbered 176,475, and she 
expended $5.70 for each pupil; and her 
criminal list showing was only one to every 
1,267 native inhabitants. But coming 
down to 1880, we find the native white 
population numbering 1,320,897 and the 
public school pupils 316,630, and $14.83 
per pupil being expended; and the convicts 
were one to every 638. Similar results 
show themselves in other states, as 
New York, Ohio, California, etc." 



These facts, though they do not show 
what the writer intended to show, namely, 
that Catholic school training is superior 
to and more beneficial than public school 
training, for the higher proportion of 
criminals is to be traced to the corruption 
of the prevailing social system, getting 
worse and worse, which makes itself felt 
more in factory than rural districts, yet 
they forcibly demonstrate what God tells 
us in his Word, we may expect. ( 2 Tim. 3:1-7 ; 
4:3-4 ; 2 Pet. 3:3-5 .) It seems 
to us a truism that increase of knowledge 
among those whose hearts are 
depraved, and who are given over to 
self-seeking, will simply increase the means 
of lawlessness. As the lower classes, so-called, 
learn more and more what their 
rights as men are, in these days of the 
beginning of the "Restoration of all 
things, spoken of by all the holy prophets" 
( Acts 3:21 ), and as they get more 
understanding of the means in vogue at 
present to obtain and maintain desired 



ends, (which is the old law of Might,) 

they will begin to match lawlessness with 

lawlessness. This course of action can 

produce but one fruit, viz., practical anarchy. 

We, whose eyes are anointed 

( Rev. 3:18 ), must stand aloof, and take 

sides with neither the capitalistic forces 

that would strangle the rising giant of free 

thought, nor with that great army which 

is realizing more and more its full rights, 

and smarting under the injustice and oppression 

that would forbid it to come into 

possession of its privileges, and which, 

before long, will put force against force, 

thus endeavoring to gain right ends by 

wrong means. As we cannot approve of 

the course of either of these great classes, 

we will be misunderstood by both, and 

R1190 : page 8 

necessarily subjected to bad treatment 
from both. The weakness of the present 
boasted civilization is that it has heard 
Christ's teachings of love, meekness, forgiveness 
and righteousness ( Matt. 5 th, 
6 th and 7 th chapters), and then gone and 
done them not. Hence, in the coming 
trouble, the house so carefully erected on 
the sands of selfishness must fall. 

Let us briefly and in contrast look into 
God's "perfect law of love." If all men 
loved God supremely and "their neighbors 
as themselves," they would "walk 
humbly before God," and "look not every 
man at his own things, but also at the 
things of others." ( Phil. 2:4 .) Christ having 
paid the price and redeemed the race 
from the condemnation of Adam's sin 
( 1 Tim. 2:6 ; 1 Cor. 15:22 ), and thus 
justified all to life ( Rom. 5:18 ), all would 
receive the testimony of the ransom, and 
become reconciled to God, who would 
not impute their sins to them. ( 2 Cor. 5:19 .) 
Then going about to build up 
others, as well as themselves, a state of 
equipoise would exist in the body politic, 
and a reign would be inaugurated that 
must, by its very nature, be co-extensive 
with man's life. W. E. PAGE. 

EDITORIAL COMMENT. 

Nothing becomes more evident to us 
all, daily, than the fact that none of the 
fallen race is capable of self-government 



or self-guidance in any respect. The 

wisest and the oldest see continually how 

they have frequently mistaken and chosen 

evils, thinking them good. And much 

more so is this true of the young and inexperienced. 

There is but one remedy, 

but one safe course, therefore, for both 

old and young, viz.: "Commit thy way 

[course, plans, conduct, ideas] unto the 

Lord, and he will bring it to pass." In 

other words, all need to be converted; 

not in the ordinary sense but in the fullest 

sense converted (turned) to God, to submit 

every thought and act and plan to 

his superior wisdom and to obey his orders, 

whether the necessity or expediency 

of so doing is seen or not seen, at the 

time. The future will reveal the wisdom 

of the Lord's way— the very near future 

in most cases. 

Unless the heart be converted and 
brought fully into loving captivity to the 
Lord, all the knowledge that can be 
gained will but increase the capacity for 
evil,— for gratifying selfish desires. But 
to the fully converted heart every item of 
experience and education brings length 
and breadth and nobility of character 
and leads on and on into the depth of 
the unsearchable riches of God in Christ 
—riches of wisdom, riches of grace, riches 
of experience and riches of love. 

But what has the Church of Rome to 
answer to these statistics? She charges 

R1191 : page 8 

that for all this increase of crime in proportion 
to the increase of knowledge our 
public school system is to blame; because 
Roman Catholic errors are not taught 
there. And now she sets herself up as 
the great champion of true education— 
an education of the head and of the heart. 
But what are the facts of history, known 
to all except the Roman Catholics, whose 
youths are supplied with falsified histories? 
The facts are that the Church of Rome 
never favored the education of the people. 
Her schools and colleges of the past were 
all and only for the few and they chiefly, 
almost exclusively, those preparing for 
clerical orders. We want to look over 
Catholic Italy, Catholic Spain, Catholic 
Portugal, Catholic Austria, Catholic Ireland, 
if we want to see what centuries of 



Roman Catholic education would do for 
the people. The curse of America to-day 
is this ignorant, foreign-born population 
and the unlovely papal ideas and 
manners which they introduce through 
their families to American soil. 

A part of the truth not shown by the 
above statistics, but which is generally 
known, is that the most of the crimes are 
committed by Roman Catholics. Who 
does not know that about four out of every 
five murderers executed confess that they 
are members of the Roman Catholic 
Church? Beautiful Christians! Elegant 
examples of what the influence of the spirit 
of Rome produces, are they not? Yes, 
the spirit of Rome is a domineering spirit, 
a brow-beating spirit of tyranny and fear. 
It rules in the church; it rules in the 
monasteries and convents; it rules in the 
family. They are an unhappy people 
from childhood up. You can read it in 
their faces;— superstition, fear, and very 
often ignorance, leave traces which even 
years of after-refinement and broader ideas 
among the well-to-do scarcely obliterate. 
The loveless, domineering spirit extends 
to their secular affairs between brothers 
and sisters, and between parents and children; 
sourness and moroseness and brutishness 
are the results; and what wonder 
that, raised in such homes and under such 
influences, a bountiful crop of brawlers is 
produced to fill the police stations of all 
the large and small cities, and a bountiful 
crop of murderers for the gallows, and so 
miserable a showing as the above in the 
matter of statistics. 

How ridiculous, then, for a Roman 
Catholic bishop to refer to these statistics. 
And yet thousands will be deceived by 
Rome now, as they have been in the past. 
Her present establishment of a great Roman 
Catholic College at Washington and 
the enlargement of parochial schools will 
deceive many who know not of the past 
or vainly think that this great Antichrist 
system has reformed; and who forget to 
notice that the pupils of their parochial 
schools constitute the majority of the 
criminals. 

What is the remedy for the recognized 
evils? Is it the closing of public schools 
and the return of the masses to the deep 
ignorance and superstition of the "dark 
ages," of which Papacy boasts as her most 



prosperous era? No; that can never be 
done now. Even Papacy abandons that 
policy now. Does the remedy lie in the 
establishment by each sect of its own 
schools in which the various unpalatable 
facts of history will be carefully screened 
out and a false impression given instead 
of a true one? and where the catechism 
of each sect shall duly instruct the children 
of each in the misconceptions of God's 
character and plan prevalent among the 
founders of each sect— which generally 
is bad news of damnation and hate and 
vengeance instead of good tidings of great 
joy which a loving, gracious God has prepared 
for all people? Is this the remedy? 
Shall the few hours of each day of the 
few years of childhood be spent in the 
study of such monstrous concoctions as 
would both shock and bewilder an old 
head, instead of in learning the common 
branches of education? No, no! We see 
enough of that sort of education in the 
thousands of ignorant Hungarians, Italians, 
Irish and Germans, who are arriving 
duly educated according to the Roman 
Catholic standard;— able to repeat word 
for word a Catechism of 327 pages, but 
unable to read or write their own names. 
Shame upon the poor Romanists thus deluded; 
more shame upon others who see 
and know this all, but who for business 
and political reasons silently, and often 
openly, lend support to that system which 
has blighted Europe and now would similarly 
enslave the new world in the chains 
of her superstition. We have great sympathy 
for the poor deluded perverts of 
Rome, and we have a measure of sympathy 
even for some of her priesthood, who are 
evidently also deceived, but for the system 
of Antichrist as a system we have 
neither love nor sympathy, but hate it 
"with a perfect hatred" ( Psa. 139:21,22 ); 
and because we love and adore and 
honor God with a perfect love. The two 
being opposites properly produce opposite 
sentiments. 

The religious training of children should 
be left in the hands of the parents, where 
God placed the responsibility; and neither 
church nor state has the right, under 
the divine arrangement, to supplant the 
parent in this matter, nor to force into 
children along with (or instead of) common 
and useful education, principles and 



theories of religion. If Sunday schools 
are established for the instruction of the 
young in moral and doctrinal matters, 
and if the parents see fit to make use of 
the same, it is their privilege to do so. 
But surely this with the hours of family 
intercourse are quite sufficient. 

Let the "clergy," if they will, deal with 
the stronger minds of the Sunday School 
workers and the parents, and let these in 
turn deal with the tender minds, instilling 
thereinto gentleness, meekness, temperance, 
patience, brotherly kindness, love, 
respect for God, and for parents, and 
strive by precept and example to cultivate 
in the youth love of right and truth, and 
lofty principle, and the Bible story of salvation 
provided by the love of God 
through the Redeemer. This is the remedy, 
the only remedy for the godlessness 
which keeps pace with the increase of 
general intelligence. But this remedy 
cannot be applied either, because the parents 
and teachers and the so-called "clergy" 
of Christendom are unprepared to 
do their parts. False doctrines have so 
distorted their conceptions of right and 
truth and love, and power and authority 
have so displaced meekness and patience, 
that the majority do not know how to 
appreciate the fruits of the spirit of Christ 
and consequently cannot teach them to 
others. The result is that nothing will 
check the general increase of intelligence 
and nothing will hinder the increase of 
crime and lawlessness; but as God's word 
foreshows, the ignoring of his gracious 
plan of salvation and the substituting 
therefor of the terrible, false, God-dishonoring 
traditions of eternal torment, 
etc., in the past, while it did serve to 
blind and bind the ignorant and to build 
up the great system called "Christendom," 
in the end will work the destruction 
of the system, in the anarchy and 
confusion of the battle of the great day 
of God Almighty,— for particulars of 
which we must refer you to MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. III., which we hope to have 
ready by Spring. 



R1191 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., MARCH, 1890. NO. 4. 



R1192 :page 1 

THE APRIL TOWER will contain articles 
in reply to certain questions on (1) 
the genuineness of the first clause of Rev. 20:5 
and (2) "Then Cometh the End" 
—the period of Christ's reign referred 
to in 1 Cor. 15:24-28 ; and (3) the period 
of Israel's favor of which the Gospel 
age is the parallel or "double." 



SOME SEEM to fear to accept our offer to 
send the TOWER free of charge to those 
of the Lord's people who will write 
stating their inability to pay, whether they 
promise payment in the future or not. 
To such we can say little more than we 
have already said, and say continually 
at the head of this column, except this: 

If the Lord has so circumstanced you 
that you are too poor to pay for the 
TOWER you ought not to be too proud to 
say so; and the sooner you get rid of the 
false pride the better it will be for your 
own heart. In accepting our offer you 
are accepting the Lord's grace— through 
those whom he has made stewards of his 
truth and the means to publish it. Our 
terms are such as he has arranged— "Ask, 
and ye shall receive." 

But do not send the addresses of others 
than yourselves unless it be for those who 
cannot write for themselves or of those 
to whom you desire us to send sample 
copies. Each who can must write for 
himself, just as God requires each to 
pray for himself. 

Order all the sample TOWERS you can 
use judiciously, FREE. The January 
number is a good one for many. 



R1191 :page 1 

O.T. TRACTS, 10,000 PER MONTH FREE. 

The TOWER TRACT SOCIETY has decided 



to supply for the remaining ten 

months of this year 10,000 sample copies 

of the Old Theology Tracts per month, 

FREE, to brethren and sisters who are on 

the WATCH TOWER lists, and who desire 

to circulate more than they can afford to 

purchase, and who will promise that the 

number they request shall be carefully 

and judiciously used, one at a time. 

Order each month no more than you are 

sure you can use. This seems to be an 

excellent plan for providing the "hail." 

Now let every one lay his plans wisely 

and prayerfully to make the best possible 

use of this generous provision. Those 

who cannot distribute tracts personally to 

advantage, may send in the addresses of 

such as would be interested. 

Address orders to TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 



R1191 :page 1 

ABOUT POST-OFFICE BOXES. 

Many thanks, dear friends, for the 
trouble you have taken to send us a report 
of the Post-Office boxes. We did 
not intend so much trouble as some of 
you took. We merely meant that when 
next at the Post-Office in your own or 
any other city or town you would look 
over the boxes, make note of how the 
numbers run, and also of those which were 
apparently vacant and for rent. We do not 
want to rent any boxes, but to ascertain 
which numbers at each Post-Office are 
rented, that we may mail to each box-holder 
a sample of Old Theology Tracts. 

Please send in reports from as many 
Post-Offices as possible. No danger of 
duplicates; we will watch that. A postal 
card will do, unless you are writing on 
other matters anyhow. All can help in 
this work, no matter how poor. 



R1192 :page 1 

THE ANNUAL MEMORIAL SUPPER. 

We need not here repeat the strong evidences 
that our Lord instituted his supper 
to be a yearly memorial of his death, 



as "the Lamb of God which taketh away 

the sins of the world"— and as the remembrancer 

of the antitype of the Passover. 

Old readers are familiar with these 

strong evidences, and new readers will 

find an abridged explanation, etc., in the 

WATCH TOWER for March, 1888; of 

which we have a few copies left which we 

will gladly supply them free. 

We hope that all our readers— all who 
see clearly and appreciate the ransom — 
all who realize that the life of the spotless 
Lamb of God, the man Christ Jesus, was 
SUBSTITUTED for the life of Adam and 
his race, in payment of the penalty of 
sin— death— that we might in God's due 
time be released from death and obtain 
everlasting life through him who "bought 
us with his own precious blood" (life); 
whom the Father raised from death in the 
divine nature— may be more zealous than 
ever to show forth their faith in the RANSOM 
as the foundation of all our hopes of 
resurrection and life. For the more 
others fall away from this central truth 
and the more they seek to undermine it and 
to teach that man is "falling upward" 
and needed no ransom, the more all who 
do see this truth clearly should "show 
forth" their faith in the precious blood 
and broken body of our Redeemer by 
obeying his dying words, "Do this in remembrance 
of me." 

So far as possible, meet with those of 
like precious faith —with those who do 
not despise God's favor by counting the 
blood of Christ a common or ordinary 
thing, but see it to be the redemption 
price of the life of the world, as the 
Scriptures everywhere declare. 

The date of the anniversary this year 
will be April 3rd, any time after 6 
o'clock in the evening. This date corresponds 
to the day and hour at which 
our Lord and the apostles celebrated the 
first memorial supper. Yet, like all of 
the Lord's commands to his church, it is 
not given as a law, accompanied by a 
penalty for violation or neglect. Like 
all of his commands it is an easy yoke; instead 
of carrying a penalty it should be 
esteemed a privilege, and our Lord merely 
says, "If ye love me, keep my commands." 
So, then, we exhort all who 
know and love the Lord as their Redeemer 
to commemorate the ransom price which he 



gave— with others if you can, or alone if 
you have not that privilege. 

So many of you as can do so, we most 
cordially invite to meet with the little 
company here in Allegheny. So far as 
possible you will be furnished lodging 
and breakfast without charge while here, 
at the homes of the brethren and sisters 
residing in and near the city; and for 
others who cannot be thus accommodated 
comfortable quarters at low prices will be 
arranged that the housekeepers be not 
overcharged and hindered from attending 
the meetings. Free lunch suppers 
will be arranged for, and good dinners 
will be supplied at a restaurant for 
15 cents each. Thus the total expense to 
a visiting brother or sister will be but 60 
cents for boarding for the four days of 
the meeting. But the arrangements for 
dinners and suppers are intended to apply 
equally to all— those who reside in 
this city as well as others— that all may 
be able to partake of the spiritual food 
and enjoy both spiritual and physical 
refreshment. 

Get here on the evening of April 2nd 
or early on April 3rd, if possible. A general 
meeting will be held in the morning 
of April 3rd, beginning at 10 o'clock, 
and a baptism service in the afternoon. 
The celebration of the Lord's Memorial 
supper will be held in the evening at 8 
o'clock. The three days following will 
be devoted to Bible study, taking up 
whatever topics those in attendance may 
prefer. Come, beloved, with your hearts 
full of love to our great Redeemer and 
full of desire and prayer that you may 
both get good and do good by this communion 
with fellow members of the one 
body. 

Let not the love of money prevent 
your coming and celebrating this supper. 
Think not of the few hours or few days it 
would take from other matters, or the few 
dollars that neglect of business might 
cost. Think rather of the privilege it 
affords of testifying to the Lord your love 
and appreciation of him and his great 
sacrifice on our behalf, and of the blessings 
of such a season of communion with 
saints. 

EXCURSION RATES TO THE MEETING. 



Excursion rates are offered us by the 
railroads mentioned below. They cover almost 
all the territory from New England to 
the Mississippi River, from Canada to the 
Ohio River and West Virginia. 

The reduction amounts to one-third off 
the regular rates. And as our privilege 
of having the excursion rates next year 
will depend somewhat upon the number 
who avail themselves of the privilege this 
year, it is our desire that as many as possible 
avail themselves of these privileges 
—those who live close by as well as those 
from afar. The reduction of fare will be 
made here at Pittsburg upon the purchase 
of your return tickets; but to get this reduction 
you must procure from the ticket 
agent where you start, when purchasing 
your ticket, a statement setting forth the 
fact that you have purchased such tickets 
at full-fare rates with the intention of attending 
the annual meeting of Zion's 
Watch Tower Tract Society. That paper, 
signed by our secretary here, will entitle 
you to the reduced rates on your 
home-bound trip, which must be over the 
same route by which you will come. 

If your home is not on the line of any 
of the railroads mentioned below, you 
must count your excursion as beginning 
at the nearest station on one of these 
roads and must get your certificate and 
through ticket at that point. Buy tickets 
to either Pittsburg or Allegheny and on 
arrival come direct to our office— Bible 
House, Arch Street. 

If possible inform us at once by postal 
card if you intend to come, that arrangements 
for your entertainment may be 
more definite and thus some confusion be 
avoided. 



page 1 

LIST OF RAILROADS MAKING 
THE CONCESSION. 

-EASTERN- 

Baltimore & Ohio, 
Baltimore & Potomac, 
Buffalo Rochester & Pittsburg, 
Camden & Atlantic, 
Central of New Jersey, 



Chesapeake & Ohio, 

Delaware & Hudson Canal Co., 

Delaware, Lackawanna & Western, 

Elmira, Cortland & Northern, 

Lehigh Valley, 

New York Central & Hudson River, 

New York, Lake Erie & Western, 

New York, Ontario & Western, 

Northern Central, 

Pennsylvania, 

Philadelphia & Erie, 

Philadelphia & Reading, 

Philadelphia, Wilmington & Baltimore, 

Rome, Watertown & Ogdensburg (except 

Phoenix Line,) 

Shenandoah Valley, 

Western, New York & Pennsylavnia, 

West Jersey, 

West Shore. 

page 2 

-WESTERN- 

Baltimore & Ohio, 

Canadian Pacfic, 

Chatauqua Lake, 

Chesapeake & Ohio, 

Chicago & Atlantic, 

Chicago & Eastern Illinois, 

Chicago & Grand Trunk, 

Chicago & West Michigan, 

Chicago, Detroit & Niagara Falls Short 

Line, 

Chicago, Peoria & St. Louis, 

Chicago, St. Louis & Pittsburg, 

Cincinnati & Muskingum Valley, 

Cincinnati, Hamilton & Dayton, 

Cincinnati, Jackson & Mackinaw, 

Cincinnati, Lebanon & Northern, 

Cincinnati, Sandusky & Cleveland, 

Cincinnati, Wabash & Michigan, 

Cincinnati, Washington & Baltimore, 

Cleveland & Canton, 

Cleveland & Marietta, 

Cleveland & Pittsburg, 

Cleveland & Western, 

Cleveland, Akron & Columbus, 

Cleveland, Columbus, Cincinnati & St. 

Louis, 

Cleveland, Lorain & Wheeling, 

Columbus & Cincinnati Midland, 

Columbus & Eastern, 

Columbus, Hocking Valley & Toledo, 

Dayton & Union, 

Dayton, Fort Wayne & Chicago, 



Detroit & Cleveland Steam Nav. Co., 

Detroit, Grand Haven & Milwaukee, 

Detroit, Lansing & Northern, 

Evansville & Terre Haute, 

Flint & Pere Marquette, 

Fort Wayne, Cincinnati & Louisville, 

Grand Rapids & Indiana, 

Grand Trunk (West of Toronto). 

Indiana, Illinois & Iowa, 

Indianapolis & Vincennes, 

Indianapolis, Decatur & Western, 

Jacksonville Southeastern, 

Jeffersonville, Madison & Indianapolis, 

Kanawha & Ohio, 

Lake Erie & Western, 

Lake Erie, Alliance & Southern; 

Lake Shore & Michigan Southern, 

Louisville, Evansville & St. Louis, 

Louisville, New Albany & Chicago, 

Michigan Central, 

Midland, 

New York, Chicago & St. Louis, 

New York, Lake Erie & Western, 

Ohio & Missippi, 

Ohio & Northwestern, 

Ohio, Indiana & Western, 

Ohio River, 

Ohio Southern, 

Peoria, Decatur & Evansville, 

Pittsburg, Cincinnati & St. Louis, 

Pittsburg, Fort Wayne & Chicago, 

Pittsburg, Marion & Chicago, 

Saginaw Valley & St. Louis, 

Scioto Valley, 

Toledo & Ohio Central, 

Toledo, Ann Arbor & N. Michigan, 

Toledo, Columbus & Cincinnati, 

Toledo, Peoria & Western, 

Toledo, St. Louis & Kansas City, 

Valley. 

Vandalia Line (T.H.& I.) 

Wabash, 

Western New York & Pennsylavnia, 

Wheeling & Lake Erie. 

Those availing themselves of the concession 
should apply for tickets and certificates 
at the offices of the above-named 
roads at least thirty minuites before train 
time. 

Return tickets will be sold here to 
those holding certificates, at one-third 
the regular full fare. 



R1192 : page 2 



"REJOICE, AND BE EXCEEDING GLAD." 
-MATT. 5:11,12.- 

The Master warned us to expect just 
what we find— that men would say all 
manner of evil against us falsely for his 
sake. Ever since the subject of the ransom 
became the testing question among 
those walking in the light, and since the 
TOWER became the special champion of 
the cross, its editor has been the subject 
of slander, misrepresentation, slyly-put 
inferences and insinuations from the 
leaders of those who fell into the error of 
rejecting Christ's death as the sin-offering 
substituted for the guilty race of Adam. 
Their object in this course is to undermine 
by prejudice what they fail to meet 
by fair reasoning and Scripture. Nor 
should we wonder that those who so set 
themselves upon a theory that they can 
conscientiously twist and turn the hundreds 
of Scripture statements relative to 
how our Lord Jesus bought us with his 
own precious blood, giving his life a ransom 
for ours, claiming these to mean the 
reverse of what they say, could just as 
conscientiously twist and turn and misconstrue 
and misrepresent our words and 
acts, if thereby they could hope to forward 
their no-ransom theories. 

What shall we do about these attacks? 
We shall do as we have done in the past. 
We shall not render railing for railing, but 
leave the whole matter to him who saith, 
"Vengeance is mine, I will repay." This 
is the example set us by our Lord and his 
most notable apostles. We shall not 
stoop to deal in personalities. The WATCH 
TOWER, thank God, has had and still has a 
nobler mission; it deals with Scripture 

R1193 : page 2 

and will continue to expound it, to demolish 

errors and false theories, showing 

up their inconsistencies; but it will not 

be drawn aside from this to petty personal 

quarrels, nor to honor those who 

bark at it in a manner, slanderously untrue, 

though under honeyed words. 

The Lord's promise should suffice us, 
dearly beloved; he says he will bring 
forth our righteousness as the light and 



our judgment as the noonday. ( Psa. 37:5,6 .) 

Let us, as instructed, rejoice, and 

be exceeding glad that we are counted worthy 

of misrepresentation for his sake— especially 

for loyalty to the very foundation 

principle of his holy religion— the 

ransom. 



page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Nebraska. 
TOWER TRACT SOCIETY-DEAR BRETHREN: 

Your tract, "Protestants, Awake" 
has just fallen into my hands, and as I 
have been recently excommunicated from 
the Methodist Episcopal ministry and 
membership for protesting against ecclesiastical 
dogmas and denouncing the errors, 
superstitions, traditions and prelatical 
usurpations of authority, and declaring 
the "whole counsel of God" without 
reference to church creed, or Christless 
cast, I devoured it with avidity and delight. 
May the blessings of God speed 
it on its high and holy mission. 

The time is rapidly coming, yea, now 
is, when we must contend earnestly for 
"the faith" once delivered to the saints, 
and "resist, even unto blood," the son 
of perdition who as an angel of light, nay, 
as "God himself, sitteth in the temple of 
God, showing himself that he is God." 
This is not only true of the Papacy, but 
of Protestantism as well, as you suggest in 
your well-written tract. 

The "abomination of desolation" is 
now "standing in the holy place." 

The depth to which an individual falls 
is determined by the height to which he 
has been exalted. The same is true of 
churches. The M.E. Church having 
been exalted to heaven in point of spirituality, 
and possibilities of holiness, is 
sinking under the weight of her worldliness 
and corruption to the uttermost hell. 
The worldliness of the churches here in 
this great West is alarming and appalling ! 
Men of influence and wealth have 
been courted until they hold with an iron 
grip the balance of power, and dictate 
the policy, shape the administration, padlock 
the preacher, laugh at spirituality 



and frown down any attempt at true 
Christian effort. 

The flood-gates of corruption have been 
opened, and socials, fairs, festivals, balls, 
theatricals, lotteries, grab-bags, broom 
brigades, tamborine drills, games, etc., 
have entered. 

At first the devil came as an angel of 
light. "Oh we must have amusements, 
you know, to attract and hold the young 
people." Yes, how plausible! Now he 
shows his hoofs and horns and is monarch 
of all he surveys. 

What are the preachers doing? They 
are "prophesying smooth things" and 
crying "peace, peace," "no evil shall 
befall you;" and this in the face of what 
God says, "I have set watchmen on thy 
walls, O Jerusalem, who shall never hold 
their peace, day nor night. Ye that make 
mention of the Lord keep not silence." 
"O my people, they who lead thee cause 
thee to err." The preachers here are 
mostly of the time-serving, man-pleasing, 
salary-seeking class. They keep their hand 
on the public pulse and govern themselves 
accordingly. 

The churches are rapidly becoming centres 
for the fun-loving, fashion-displaying, 
mutual admiration classes. The consequence 
is, they are as impotent as an infant 
to successfully grapple with the 
mighty moral, social, political and economic 
problems pressing upon us for solution. 
The tides of immorality, worldliness, 
avarice, intemperance, profanity and 
the social vice are coming in like a flood 
upon us, as resistless as the waters in the 
Conemagh Valley. 

But thanks be unto God forever and 
ever, we have the promise that "the 
Spirit of the Lord will lift up a standard 
against him." "The Lamb shall overcome 
them." "The weapons of our warfare 
are not carnal, but mighty through 
God to the pulling down of strongholds." 
"Thanks be to God, who giveth us the 
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ." 
"Now thanks be unto God who always 
causeth us to triumph." "No weapon 
formed against us shall prosper." "Glory 
to God in the highest." 

Enclosed please find amount to pay for 
"The Plan of the Ages" and "The Time 
is at Hand." 

Also please send me 100 copies of the 



tract, "Protestants, Awake!" Also, sample 

copy of all the tracts you have in 

stock. Yours in the war, J. T. M. 



Troy, N.Y. 

DEAR BRETHREN:-I enclose a P.O. 
order for $18 for books ordered. I see 
strong, convincing evidence of the guidance 
of the Spirit in the work in which 
the Tract Society is engaged. 

Its low prices, its free distribution to 
the poor, its uncompromising spirit with 
error, its independence of all sects and 
isms, its sole reliance on God for success, 
its boldness to attack error wherever it 
exists regardless of consequences, which 
in all probability will be bitter opposition, 
or worse; its strict fidelity to God's 
Word, its reasonableness, and I might as 
well say everything about the enterprise 
seems to bear the impress of genuineness 
and is all convincing, to those who will 
investigate the matter, that it is what it 
claims to be— the truth as revealed in the 
Bible. 

I am surprised at the indifference I find 
everywhere manifested on Bible subjects. 
But it is just the condition of things foretold 
in the Bible. I find many here who 
like the book and want the second volume. 
Still but very few are deeply interested 
in the closing events of the gospel 
age, and but few are running for the race 
for the prize. I cannot tell you how 
much I prize your writings, and I don't 
know how I can spend my time more 
profitably than in circulating the truth, by 
selling DAWN as at present. 

Yours for the truth, E. H . 

Alabama. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have often 
thought I would like to write you of my 
high appreciation of your good work in 
disseminating the truth, and tell you of 
the wonderful comfort and benefit your 
writings afford me. I would not be 
without them for thousands of dollars. My 
only regret is my inability (financially) to 
do more toward spreading the good tidings 
of truth. During the past year I have 
given away about 300 copies of "Old 
Theology" and several copies of Dawn. 
But, alas! how few take hold of the truth. 
Yet I occasionally hear the remark, "I 
agree with him mostly," but that is the 



last. I have found only one, so far, who 
heartily takes to the truth and sympathizes 
with me, and that is my father. 
May be other seed will germinate later on; 
leastwise I shall continue to sow as best I 
can. I would like to devote my entire 
time to the service of our Master, but am 
compelled to work all the time to support 
my family. I greatly rejoice to see the 
glorious Millennial reign of Christ closely 
approaching. May he hasten the day, and 
shield his faithful ones from the preceding 
great tribulation coming on the world. 
Please send me 500 Arp slips. I think I can 
use all these judiciously by enclosing in letters, 
etc. Yours in the love of truth, 
ELSTON LUTTRELL. 

Milwaukee. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am glad to 
know from letters in TOWER that the truth 
is spreading and more laborers are added, 
and some are continually rallying round 
the standard of truth, although the numbers 
are few compared to those still opposing 
the truth. In this vicinity many 
have become interested to some extent, 
and have rejoiced for a time, but I am 
sorry to say but few have the courage or 
will to make the sacrifices. 

What a wonderful book the second volume 
of Dawn is. The proofs are so conclusive. 
I have read it through many 
times, and every time I read it am more 
and more astonished and convinced of 
the presence of our Lord, and that the 
time is indeed at hand. 

Yours in Christian love, J. P. 

Kansas. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I would like to read 
the WATCH TOWER regularly. Though a 
preacher, I am very poor. If possible I 
will pay for it some time during the year. 
I admire your "Old Theology." I greatly 
admire your Christian spirit. May God 
bless you. 

Yours in hope of eternal life, W. B. 

Astonia, Texas. 
MR. C. T. RUSSELL:-Some time ago 
I wrote you to send me Vol. I. of Millennial 
Dawn. I received it and read it, and 
found wonderful knowledge in it, but not 
until my brother-in-law handed me Vol. 
II. did I find the grandest, dearest and 



deepest knowledge that it has been my fortune 
to acquire. I have read first and 
second volumes twice. Indeed I am continually 
studying Vol. II. I notice in it 
that you are engaged on another volume, 
and I want it just as soon as you complete 
it. Very respectfully, J. N. M. 

Eureka Springs, Ark. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., Allegheny, 
Pa.— Gents:— I have just read your Plan 
of the Ages, through the kindness of a 
friend, and it so sharpened my appetite 
for knowledge on this plane that has so 
long been uppermost in my very soul that 
I have a "hungering and thirsting" after 
more light, and covet the best gifts that 
I may study to be approved and be counted 
one of the "little flock." I aspire to 
nothing short of "glorification" and to 
be a "priest and king unto God." Therefore 
please send me for enclosed, Vol. 
II. of Millennial Dawn. "The time is 
at hand," and if there are any subsequent 
volumes to follow, I will send for them in 
due time, whatever may be the outcome 
of the matter. Brother Russell is undoubtedly 
putting many who read his 
works to thinking for themselves. May 
God bless him in his labor. 

Very truly, G. A. V. 

New Orleans. 

DEAR BRETHREN:-I received six copies 
of the DAWN, Vol. IL-cloth-bound. 
I meant it to be paper-covered but forgot 
to say so in my order, so it is my own 
mistake. I enclose $5 to cover the shortage. 
Please renew subscription for 
WATCH TOWER-three copies per month 
—for 1890. The balance use where most 
needed. How lonely some of us would 
be without it. I humbly ask your prayers 
that the Lord would renew a right 
spirit within me. 

My employer has urged me to buy a 
home and pay for the same in small installments, 
(price $2,000,) himself being 
security for the amount; but as I thought 
this would be putting a yoke around my 
neck for a number of years, and perhaps 
would serve to draw my interests away 
from the great prize, I have, against the 
advice of many, refused the otherwise 
kind offer. May the Lord give grace to 
remain a "stranger and foreigner," and 



not get entangled with the things of this 
world, but, instead, to lay up a treasure 
in heaven. Yours, in the Lord, 



R1193 : page 3 

MY ONE TALENT. 

"IN a napkin smooth and white, 
Hidden from all mortal sight, 
My one talent lies to-night. 

"Mine to hoard, or mine to use, 
Mine to keep, or mine to lose; 
May I not do what I choose? 

"Ah! the gift was only lent, 
With the Giver's known intent 
That it should be wisely spent. 

"And I know he will demand 
Every farthing at my hand, 
When I in his presence stand. 

"What will be my grief and shame 
When I hear my humble name, 
And cannot repay his claim! 

"Some will double what they hold; 

Others add to it tenfold, 

And pay back its shining gold. 

"Lord, O teach me what to do! 
I would faithful be and true; 
Still the sacred trust renew. 

"Help me, ere too late it be, 
Something now to do for thee; 
Thou who hast done all for me!" 



R1193 : page 3 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The following will interest all who are 
awake and watching for the conclusions of 
Presbyterianism, upon the question of 
the revision of its creed or "Confession." 

This is a "burning question" in more 
senses than one, and a question which 
affects many other denominations besides 
the one having the discussion. It affects 



all systems whose creeds are based upon 
John Calvin's theology— United Presbyterians, 
Reformed Presbyterians, Baptists 
and others built upon Calvinism. However, 
the members of these other denominations 
do not generally know this; for the 
rising generation in all subscribe to 
and profess the doctrines with almost no 
knowledge of them. And as for the 
ministers who realize what is involved, 
they keep very quiet— hoping that no 
such controversy will disturb their peace 
or expose their creeds to the cold criticism 
of common sense in the light of the Bible 
and of reason. But the hope is vain. 
It will surely come. Every man's work 
shall be tried so as by fire. There will be 
a general turning of things upside down, 
that the truth may now have a chance to 
be heard which has so long been smothered 
by error. 

The following is clipped from a Chicago 
daily:— 

"DR. BARROWS REVOLTS. 

HE REPUDIATES THE OLD THEOLOGY, 

CALLING THE WESTMINSTER CONFESSION 
A HINDRANCE AND A STUMBLING BLOCK 
IN THE CHRISTIAN'S WAY.-HE SAYS 
THE AGE DEMANDS A BROADER 
CREED AND FAITH. 

"Rev. Dr. John H. Barrows, pastor of 
the First Presbyterian Church, preached 
an eloquent sermon yesterday morning 
(Dec. 22d) on the revision of the Presbyterian 
Confession of Faith. He took 
for his text the words: 

" Matthew 9:16-17 : 'No man putteth 
a piece of new cloth unto an old garment, 
for that which is put in to fill up 
taketh from the garment and the rent is 
made worse. 

'"Neither do men put new wine into 
old bottles, else the bottles break, and the 
wine runneth out, and the bottles perish: 
but they put new wine into new bottles, 
and both are preserved.' 

"The Westminster Assembly was appointed 
by the Long Parliament of England, 
and its members began their task 
with a revision of the thirty-nine articles 
of the English church; but when they 
reached the fifteenth article, they dropped 



their work of revision as a useless business, 
and for five years addressed themselves to 
the preparation of a new confession. And 
so, in the judgment of many, the attempt 
to revise the Westminster Confession to-day 
will ultimately be abandoned, and a new 
creed, more scriptural, more in harmony 
with present conditions, briefer and less 
polemical, will take the place of the Westminster 
Assembly's work. Rev. Dr. Gibson, 
of London, said to me recently: 
'You will find, as we found in England, 
that revision will be an endless and unsatisfactory 
task, and that the best solution 
of the present problem will be a 
briefer creed, which shall gradually take 
the place of the old.' The movement of 
revision of some kind pervades the Presbyterian 
Church almost everywhere. Last 
year the established church of Scotland 
changed the terms of subscription, 'leaving 
it to the conscience of each minister to 
decide for himself what he regards as essential 
and necessary articles of faith.' 
This is practically the work of the form 
of subscription now used in America, but 
it has certain disadvantages of which I 
shall speak later. The noble Free Church 
of Scotland, which came out of the establishment 
in 1843, in order to preserve 
the ancient liberty of God's people in 
managing their own spiritual concerns, has 
resolved to revise the Confession. The 
United Presbyterian Church of Scotland in 
1879 made a declaratory statement modifying 
the Confession in three points, making 
the redemption of Christ general in 
extent, affirming human responsibility for 
accepting or rejecting the gospel, and disapproving 
all intolerance. 

"If revision is all that we are to obtain 
after the present discussion, we shall find, 
in my opinion, that we have an exceedingly 
unsatisfactory document on our 
hands, a garment patched in an unseemly 
way and presenting no acceptable 
pattern.... 

"One advantage of the present discussion 
is that it furnishes an opportunity 
for many ministers to express their minds, 
and on account of this I am at liberty to 
speak to you freely and fully. Of course 
the question arises: If there are so many 
things in the confession of faith to which 
some of us take exceptions, how can we 
rightly subscribe to it? How can we remain 



in the Presbyterian ministry or 
eldership?' This question deserves a frank 
and careful answer. When I was invited, 
eight years ago, to this pulpit I had recently 
made a statement of my theological 
views to a Congregational council in 
Boston, a conservative council, and they 
were deemed entirely satisfactory. I am 
in accord with what is called 'New England 
orthodoxy.' I knew but little about 
the confession of faith of the Presbyterian 
Church; but when I was called to this 
pastorate I made it my duty to read it. 
Thinking that I might have some trouble 
in regard to the acceptance of it, a distinguished 
Presbyterian minister of Chicago 
kindly wrote me as follows: 'For 
myself I do not deem our confession and 
mode of administration by any means 
perfect. But I accept the confession as 
containing the system of doctrine taught 
in the holy Scriptures, as well as some 
things not in the holy Scriptures, and the 
government and discipline I approve as, 
in general, good, but susceptible of important 
improvements, especially in the 
direction of the greater liberty of individual 
churches. And my views on this 
matter are at one with a large and increasing 
number of our ministers and 
churches.' And so I, too, according to 
the requirement of our form of government, 
accept the Confession of Faith as 
containing the system of doctrine taught 
in the holy Scriptures. I find there the 
great facts and outlines of that system, 
God's sovereign grace, his mercy in Jesus 
Christ, the offer of salvation on condition 
of repentance and faith, the work of the 
holy spirit in regeneration and sanctification, 
the teaching that the Bible is an infallible 
rule of faith and duty, the promise 
of eternal life through Jesus Christ the 
Lord; and, in short, every essential part 
of Christian truth. I find, also, some 
things that appear to me exaggerations, 
and many things that belong to theological 
metaphysics rather than to essential 
Christian truth. I discover, also, some 
things which appear to me to be erroneous; 
but I find there, as in all the great 
confessions, the system of doctrine taught 
in the Scripture. As the Tower of London 

R1194 : page 3 



contains, or used to contain, the 

crown jewels, beautifully set in coronets 

and scepters, so the Confession contains 

the jewels of heavenly grace and 

truth set in forms of human workmanship. 

But the Tower of London contains not 

only the crown jewels, but many an old 

headpiece and rusty suit of armor and 

outworn weapons; and so I believe the 

Confession contains, besides the precious 

substance of the gospel, pieces of theological 

armor that might well be laid 

aside." 

[This, then, is the "frank and careful 
answer" of Mr. Barrows to his own question: 
"If there are so many things in the 
Confession of Faith to which some of us 
take exceptions, how can we rightly subscribe 
to it?" Briefly summed up the 
answer is— 

1st. I was as honest as the rest— they 
all do it. 

2nd. In subscribing to so many things 
which we do not believe or teach, and 
in pledging ourselves, solemnly, before 
God, that we do believe and that we will 
teach those things, we merely went through 
a form before the public. And we eased 
our consciences from that terrible fraud 
and perjury done in the name of God and 
truth, by having a little private understanding 
between ourselves as ministers, 
to the effect that, "It is only a form, you 
know," and done to hoodwink the public 
and to keep up the usual appearance, 
etc. We doubt very much whether his 
answer to his own question is quite satisfying 
to Dr. Barrows' conscience. 

However, this confession (though it 
should be much more full and frank) is 
to be commended as a first step in the 
right direction. Dr. Barrows' next step 
should be to resign his pulpit and to step 
out of all that he stepped into by 
means of his subscription to a creed 
in which there were "so many things" 
which he heartily disbelieved. The "Doctor" 
should not confess thus his past misdeed 
and still hold on to the position, 
salary, dignities, etc., thus fraudulently 
obtained. He should not only repent of 
the transaction but should cancel it entirely 
and at once. Let him step out boldly 
for the Truth and for fullest freedom 
in teaching it, without any human 
bonds.-Z.W.T. EDITOR.] 



"Hundreds of ministers and thousands 
of elders have accepted the Westminster 
Confession with such an understanding of 
it as this, and the terms of subscription 
have been so liberal that they have not 
been particularly uneasy under the yoke." 

[Hark there! What a confession! The 
"Doctor" solemnly from the pulpit reveals 
the true state of the case— that, 
hundreds of ministers and thousands of elders 
have thus fraudulently pretended to accept 
certain doctrines which contain "so 
many things" they utterly disbelieve and 
repudiate. Are the "common people" of 
the pews to understand that their "rulers 
and teachers" have long been posing before 
them in the role of mountebanks, playing in 
religious and sacred things the juggler 
tricks of sword-swallowers and fire-eaters, 
affecting to swallow the terrible doctrines 
of Calvinism, but really doing nothing of 
the sort? Surely such deceptions will not 
long excite the reverence of the people. 
By and by an honest man will come to be 
appreciated and such dishonesty will meet 
with its just rebuke. It would do so at 
once but for the fact that the people of 
the pews as well as the ministers and elders 
are, many of them, similarly engaged 
in the same deception; and they 
cannot find fault with others for doing 
what they themselves are doing. What 
is needed all around is honesty. Can we 
wonder that God should and does refuse 
to use such ministers as channels for 
truths now due, as vessels for bearing to 
the household of faith "meat in due season?" 
Nor need we wonder that congregations 
of men and women who know of and 
wink at such deceptions, and who practice 
the same in their own subscription to 
creeds they do not believe, are unready 
for the truth? Only honest men and 
women are worthy of present truth.— 
Z.W.T. EDITOR.] 

"But, while not favoring any laxer 
terms of subscription, they would greatly 
prefer to be put in a position that 
would not expose them to even the suspicion 
of being uncandid. They would 
greatly prefer to have a creed no part of 
which failed to command their assent." 

[In other words, they do not like to 
complain, and for the emoluments, the honors 
of men, etc., they are still willing to 
stand up like little men and swallow the 



bitter and perjurous dose of the Confession, 

which stultifies their manhood and 

keeps them dwarfs in spiritual development; 

but they would "greatly prefer" 

to have some little change made, now 

that the nineteenth century light is shining 

in, which exposes their admitted uncandidness 

and is arousing suspicion of 

their general and even their business 

honesty.-Z.W.T. EDITOR.] 

"I have been greatly grieved that on 
account of the confessional barrier we 
have been unable to induce certain beloved 
and honored brethren in this church 
to accept the eldership." 

[Ah yes! some were too noble; no 
doubt they were business men of the 
higher class, used to recognizing principles 
of integrity. We are glad to 
know that there are some whom the seducing 
sophistries of the minister as well 
as the honors of men could not "induce" 
to thus foreswear their convictions. Ah 
yes! those are not only honored in the 
sight of the pastor who could not mislead 
them but they are honored in the sight of 
God also. We wish we could know those 
honorable men by name. We believe 
they are worthy of the truth and that they 
would be ready to receive it. We fear, 
however, that Dr. Barrows' congregation 
did not contain many so honest and so 
honorable as these. Most of those so 
honorable soon come to see that their 
membership and presence in a congregation 
professing faith in a Confession containing 
"so many things" which they do not believe 
is dishonest, a misrepresentation of 
their faith to the dishonor of God as well 
as to the discredit of their own intelligence. 
--Z.W.T. EDITOR.] 

"There are others who are unwilling 
to enter the church because it is anchored 
to a doctrinal statement from so much of 
which they dissent." [These are yet 

R1194 : page 4 

more noble and honorable or else more 
awake.-Z.W.T. EDITOR.] 

"It is well known that assent to the 
Confession is not required of any but ministers 
and elders. But, in spite of this 
there are those who are unwilling to seem 
affiliated with doctrines which they reject, 
and reject because they do not seem to them 



a fair interpretation of the Scriptures." 

[No, "Doctor," you are mistaken; it 
is not well known that assent to the Confession 
is not required of any but ministers 
and elders. The contrary of this, however, 
is well known or ought to be. We 
fear that the delicacy of your own position 
on this question has led you to state 
yourself in such a manner that not many 
will at once fully understand you. Were we 
to state the matter for you as we presume 
it to run in your mind, but in a manner 
not likely to be misunderstood by 
any one, we would state it thus:— 
While the members of the Presbyterian 
Church are required to assent to the 
general Confession of Faith, and thus to 
declare it to be a good expression of their 
belief, yet they are not obliged to make a 
public vow or oath of office that they 
believe and teach it, as the ministers and 
elders are obliged to do. The difference between 
a false vow and a false confession is 
the same difference as between perjury and 
lying. He who disbelieves "so many 
things," if he publicly confesses that he 
does believe them, is guilty of lying before 
God and men, while he who vows 
that he believes and will teach them and 
does neither is guilty of perjury; whether 
custom makes such lying and perjury fashionable 
and respectable or not. We want 
to look at our conduct as God looks at 
it. And if our hearts condemn us of 
either of these sins, let us remember that 
God is still a higher and more strict 
Judge than we are apt to be of ourselves. 
- 1 John 5:20 .-Z.W.T. EDITOR.] 

"Why put so many justly disputable 
things into a confession which is designed 
for a bond of union in a church like 
ours? And why should a church which 
is going forth to conquer India and China 
and Japan for Christ carry in hand, beside 
the word of God, anything less worthy 
than a fresh and modern statement of 
essential truth? I must frankly say that 
I do not like to see any seventeenth century 
theological yoke placed on the rising 
churches of the missionary world. I 
should greatly prefer to see them allowed 
to shape their own creeds. It is probable 
that new flashes of light will come to 
the old doctrines when they have passed 
through the Oriental mind, which is nearer 
to the Biblical ways of thought and 



expression than that of the West." 

[But, "Doctor," pray explain to us 
why it is necessary to use any creed as a 
bond of union? Was not the church of 
the Apostle's days the grand illustration 
of union and purity and love as it should 
but does not exist since bonds of union in 
the shape of creeds were introduced? If 
all creeds and confessions were abandoned 
and the Bible were accepted as the only 
standard of faith, would not the true union 
of heart and faith in fundamentals the 
sooner come about, and be accompanied 
by a personal liberty of conscience? 

And if the heathen churches should be 
at liberty to shape their own creeds, why 
not the churches nearer home have as 
much liberty. And if congregations may 
shape their own creeds why should not 
each individual be accorded fullest liberty 
to shape his own creed?— the liberty 
which Christ arranged for and which the 
Apostles urged. 

And if such liberty would "probably" 
lead to occasional flashes of light uncovering 
the truth of God's word and plan 
more fully and leading "nearer to Biblical 
ways of thought and expression," why 
might not full liberty here at home, under 
the blessing of the same Holy Spirit, 
bring fresh and clearer views now and 
continually? It surely would bring not 
only clearer views than the Westminster 
Confession contains, but clearer views than 

R1195 : page 4 

any "modern statement" of faith. Why 
then tie up with a new creed which would 
hinder the Spirit's teaching and shedding 
of fresh light upon God's word, and which 
shortly would again need revision. Why 
not get free and stay free, and enjoy and 
walk in the light, and keep continually 
growing in grace and in the knowledge 
and love of God?-Z.W.T. EDITOR.] 

"I have preached for eight years in the 
Presbyterian Church and have not failed to 
secure your approval of my teaching as 
substantially orthodox, and I am confident 
that my beloved brethren in the ministry 
have regarded me as properly having 
a place in the ranks of the Presbyterian 
Church. But, if the frank admissions 
which I recently made regarding the defects 
of the Westminster Confession should 



deprive me of rightful standing in the 
Presbyterian Church, then I ought to take 
my position outside of it in company with 
some of the most distinguished professors 
in our theological seminaries. In this 
time of discussion there should be no 
holding back of opinions. I do believe 
that our Confession of Faith is now, and 
has been in the past, a hindrance to the 
progress of the kingdom of Christ. Professor 
Goldwin Smith once remarked to 
a friend of mine that in his judgment the 
Presbyterian Church of America would 
have three times its present strength if it 
had not persisted in carrying a millstone 
around its neck in the shape of the Confession. 
We know that the Cumberland 
Presbyterian Church broke off from us because 
of the teachings of the third chapter 
regarding the decree of reprobation 
or preterition. We know that we have 
been at a serious disadvantage with other 
denominations in commending our doctrine 
to the popular mind, and the present 
discussion will show that inside the 
church there has been so much of drifting 
and departure from the Westminster 
standards that they do not fairly represent 
the convictions of to-day. Whatever his 
success in other things, Professor Briggs, 
of New York, in his recent remarkable 
work, has shown that the Presbyterian 
Church is not in harmony in many points 
with the Westminster standards. He has 
shown that the church to-day and our 
leading theologians differ from the confession 
in their doctrines regarding the 
Scriptures. In regard to creation, in regard 
to the extent of the atonement and 
the work of the spirit, in regard to the 
fate of the heathen, the damnation of 
infants, in regard to the pope, in regard 
to the forgiveness of sins, and on many 
other points, these theologians and leading 
pastors differ from the standards. 
They may also differ from each other as 
much as they differ from the Confession. 
Dr. Briggs has said that 'subscription to 
the Westminster system in the historic 
sense is out of the question.' 

"The changes already brought about 
in Christian thinking make it certain that 
others are to follow. With no express 
authority from the Scriptures men have 
come to believe in the universal salvation 
of all infants. Dr. Charles Hodge did 



more than anybody else to make the 
doctrine universally accepted, but it is 
seen at once that, if all infants are saved, 
this teaching has an immediate bearing on 
the question of the salvability of the 
heathen. Dr. Prentiss has shown that 
the reasons which Dr. Hodge assigns for 
his faith that all infants are to be saved 
cannot be limited to them. The first 
reason is the analogy between Adam and 
Christ. 'So then, as through one trespass 
the judgment came upon all men unto 
condemnation, even so through one act 
of righteousness the free gift came upon 
all men unto justification of life. For, as 
through one man's disobedience the many 
were made sinners, even so through the 
obedience of the One shall the many be 
made righteous.' 

"If the sin of Adam through his connection 
with the race led to universal sinfulness 
on the part of all born into the 
world, may not the righteousness of 
Christ lead to the redemption of all born 
into the world who are cut off before free 
moral agency finds expression in evil 
acts? The second reason which Dr. 
Hodge assigns for his faith is that it is 
more congenial to the nature of God to 
bless than to curse; but this reason cannot 
be limited to children. It is equally 
applicable to multitudes in the heathen 
world. The third ground for Dr. 
Hodge's faith is the conduct and language 
of our Lord in reference to children. 
Precisely the same reasoning, says 
Dr. Prentiss, might be applied to other 
classes. To draw an impassable dividing 
line between infants and all little boys 
and girls, for example, in whom original 
sin has just begun to act, seems most unwarrantably 
to limit the grace of God. 
Universal infant salvation does not and 
cannot stand alone. It shows how inconceivably 
wide and deep is God's mercy 
in Christ Jesus. It shows that, speaking 
after the manner of men, he is doing all 
that he can for the actual redemption of 
the world; nothing keeps any soul from 
the gracious operation of his infinite love 
and pity but his own wilful choice of the 
evil and refusal of the good." 

[Ah no ! Your difficulty, gentlemen, 
lies in the very foundation of your theory; 
and this error leads you to this very 
absurd statement, that God is doing all 



that he can. On the contrary, every one 
knows that if Dr. Prentiss had the one-hundredth 
part of the power and wisdom 
possessed by the Infinite Creator— the Almighty 
—he could speedily cause the 
knowledge of the Lord to fill the whole 
earth. We must admit that interpretation 
of the doctrine of election which teaches 
that God during the present time (the Gospel 
age) is selecting a "little flock" of 
saints fully consecrated to his service, and 
reject that unscriptural feature of Calvinism 
which teaches that all not of this elect 
"little flock" are eternally lost. True, 
they are not yet saved, nor can they ever 
be saved by ignorance or in ignorance of 
Christ; but God's election of the "little 
flock" to be joint-heirs with Christ in the 
Millennial Kingdom is to the very intent 
that through the "elect" class, when 
highly exalted to the power and perfection 
of the divine nature, "all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed" by 
being brought to a knowledge of the 
truth. It is for this purpose that a general 
resurrection of the dead is promised, 
that they as well as those nations living 
at the time the kingdom under the whole 
heavens is given to the elect ( Dan. 7:18,22 ), 
may be blessed under that fulness of 
knowledge of God and his gracious plan 
which shall then fill the world as the 
waters cover the sea. The elect "body" 
under Christ their "Head" are the long 
promised Seed of Abraham, and through 
them the gracious promise ( Gal. 3:16,29 ) 
must yet be fulfilled. That promise has 
not been fulfilled in the past; and it could 
not be fulfilled to those families of the 
earth which have gone down into death 
in any other manner than as God has 
provided— by a resurrection. 

Brethren, joyfully accept God's solution 
of your difficulty— that though none 
can be saved without faith and obedience, 
ample provision for all is made and will 
be applied when "All that are in their 
graves hear the voice of the Son of Man 
and come forth— and they who hear 
(obey) shall live" (shall be fully saved 
from condemnation and death and 
brought to perfect life). Moses, who 
typified this elect church (head and body), 
declared this truth, saying: "A prophet 
shall the Lord your God raise up [elect 
and exalt] unto you, like unto me. Him 



shall ye hear [obey] in all things. And 
it shall come to pass that the soul that 
will not hear [obey] that prophet shall be 
cut off from among his people" [die the 
second death].— Compare Acts 3:22,23 . 

Your remark, that "Nothing keeps 
any soul from the gracious operation of 
God's infinite love and pity but his own 
wilful choice of the evil and refusal of the 
good," will be true then, when Christ's 
church is exalted to the dominion of 
earth, when the Kingdom is come and 
God's will is done on earth as it is done 
in heaven; but it is not true now. The 
gracious operation of infinite love is 
through faith, such faith as can only be 
inspired by a knowledge of the truths of 
God's Word; and these are made void and 
of none effect by mixtures of false doctrines 
of human creeds.— Z.W.T. ED.] 

Dr. Barrows continued, commenting 
upon the words of Dr. Prentiss above 
quoted:— 

"But these convictions of a professor 
in one of our leading seminaries do not 
square with the following extract from the 
tenth chapter of the Confession: 'Much 
less can men not professing the Christian 
religion be saved in any other way whatsoever, 
be they ever so diligent to frame 
their lives according to the light of nature 
and the law of that religion they do 
profess; and to assert and maintain that 
they may, is very pernicious and to be 
detested.' That is, it is the teaching or 
necessary implication of the Confession 
that all those in the heathen world who 
have been most marked for goodness, who 
have had conviction for sins and yearnings 
after the Redeemer they could not 
know, that every pious Jew since the 
Christian church was founded who has 
not accepted the Christ, that Buddha and 
his followers, however benevolent their 
lives— that these with all the numberless 
millions who, born in ignorance of the 
Christ, have crawled through their brief, 
sorrowing, darkened and sinful lives 
in all the lands of paganism, are hopelessly 
doomed to everlasting destruction." 
[But, Dr. Barrows, you fail to 
state the case with its true, full, awful 
force. If Calvinism taught merely that 
all these who never heard of the Redeemer 
could never have the everlasting 
life which he came to give, but must be 



left hopelessly doomed to everlasting destruction 

(obliteration, annihilation) it 

would not be so bad— not nearly so bad. 

It would be a gracious, a merciful provision 

as compared with the awful, God-dishonoring 

doctrines which it does teach; 

for elsewhere that Confession plainly declares 

to the world and especially to all 

who confess it and particularly to those 

who vow to teach it, that these who 

never heard of Christ shall suffer torments 

forever. To deny that Christ redeemed 

the souls of all from destruction, and to 

claim that he is the Redeemer of only the 

R1196 : page 4 

few who have heard of and fully accepted 

R1196 : page 5 

of his offer of life, in the present life, is 
to repudiate him as the Savior of the 
world and to contradict the multitudinous 
statements of the Scriptures to the effect 
that he was a propitiation [satisfaction] 
for the sins of the whole world, 
and that "He gave himself a ransom for 
all, to be testified [to all] in due time." 
This would be a sad mistake, because, 
though it would not alter God's plan one 
whit, it would so hide from those thus 
misinformed much of the glory, and the 
length and breadth and height and depth 
of the divine plan which is being worked 
out only through faith in and obedience 
to the Redeemer. But to teach that 
God will specially perpetuate the lives of 
such unfortunates so as to cause them 
everlasting distress and pain, is not only 
a blasphemy against the divine character, 
but a blot upon the intelligence of those 
many large bodies of otherwise intelligent 
people who hold to it— for it is too 
ridiculous for even the most degraded 
heathens to believe or teach. And besides, 
it would make God a liar, for he 
distinctly declares that the extreme penalty 
of wilful sin and wilful rejection of 
Christ is the death of the soul.— Gen. 3:3 ; 
Isa. 55:3 ; Ezek. 18:4,20 ; Matt. 10:28 . 
-Z.W.T. EDITOR.] 

Dr. Barrows continuing said:— "Who 
gave the Westminster divines any such 
divine authority that their work should 
be deemed the last test of theological 



soundness? We should not claim more 

for them than they claimed for themselves. 

And why should we not trust the 

holy spirit in the church of Christ to-day? 

Is it not dishonoring to him to doubt that 

he is able to lead the church and inspire 

even a heavenlier and more perfect wisdom 

than that which our fathers gained? 

I believe with Rev. Dr. Alexander, of 

New York, that the nineteenth century is 

nearer the mind of Christ than the seventeenth 

century; and I agree with Rev. Dr. 

James Candlish, professor of theology in 

the Free Church of Scotland, that "the 

Westminster Confession, in many parts, 

has ceased to be a statement of the vital 

truths of Christianity in a form suitable 

and intelligible to the mind of the 

present age.' I go further and affirm 

that a question which includes in its fundamental 

teaching the horrible dogma that 

God from eternity has foredoomed the 

great mass of his children to eternal torment, 

passing them by and leaving them 

no possibility of redemption on account 

of the failure of their first parent, Christ 

not dying for them, and they unable, by 

conforming their lives ever so diligently 

to the light of nature, to come within the 

power of his redeeming mercy— I hold 

that such a confession, however magnificent 

in some of its parts, is not in harmony 

with what the church to-day 

believes is the spirit and trend of the 

scriptures. It does not seem to many to 

be like a God of infinite fatherly love, to 

make eternal destinies of such moment 

as heaven and hell hinge on one transaction, 

or even on the first moral acts of 

childhood, when that childhood is handicapped 

and cursed by the weight of ancestral 

sins and inherent moral corruption. 

An earthly father who should enjoin 

his little child to paint like Raphael 

or write like Shakespeare before he was 

three years of age, under penalty of destruction 

of his eyesight or the maiming 

of his hand, would be mercy incarnate 

compared with a heavenly father who 

should demand impossibilities of his 

children under threat of eternal torment, 

and those impossibilities occasioned, not 

by the sinful acts of the children, but by 

the disobedience of their remote ancestor. 

I believe that the church of to-day believes 

better things of God. We know 



that an earthly father, seeing in his child 
inherited tendencies to evil, weaknesses 
and passions traceable to ancestral sin, 
looks upon that child with augmented 
compassion, and, while not excusing his 
sin, regards it with more leniency and 
strives to overcome it with a more patient 
pitifulness and love." 

[Very good, Dr. Barrows! We are glad 
to find you bold enough to confess what 
so many others, your fellow-ministers, 
believe but fear to utter. May this honest 
confession be blessed to your good 
and lead you into still further light. For 
instance, would it not have been equally 
as unjust in our great Creator to 
consign Adam and Eve to eternal 
torture for the disobedience of eating the 
forbidden fruit? Answer this candidly 
to yourself. Then reflect that God never 
said one word about heaven and hell to 
Adam and Eve, but merely warned them 
that if disobedient he would take from 
them the life and blessings then enjoyed. 
And this is the only penalty that God enforced 
against them— death, loss of life; 
and this is the only penalty that we as 
their posterity ever inherited from them 
and their sin— "Dying thou shalt die." 
And all the weaknesses, mental, moral 
and physical, which cause us so much 
trouble, are the direct results of this fall 
from obedience and harmony and life 
with God into the present dying 
condition. 

Again, Dr. B., answer to yourself the 
question: Do not the Scriptures teach, repeatedly, 
in great variety of expressions, 
that our Redeemer accomplished our redemption 
by becoming our ransom [corresponding 
price] by giving to justice full payment 
of all that Adam's guilt demanded as 
his penalty? Next, look at what he gave for 
us. If the Scriptures declare that he is 
suffering, experiencing everlasting torment 
for us, then it would support yours 
and the common theory upon the penalty 
for sin. But you know that your theory 
has no such circumstantial evidence, 
even, to rest upon. Notice on the contrary 
that the record of what our Redeemer 
did for the settlement of the condemnation 
against Adam and his posterity 
agrees with the facts and with the stated 
penalty and with common sense. "He 
died for our sins." "He died, the just for 



the unjust." "As by one man's disobedience 

sin entered the world and death 

[entered] by [as a result of] sin, even so 

by the obedience of one [even unto 

death] justification is come for all." 

( Rom. 5:12,17-20 .) These, and hundreds 

of other texts which your concordance 

will help you to, prove beyond a question 

that the penalty exacted of our Lord, as 

Redeemer, was exactly the penalty pronounced 

against Adam. --Z.W.T. ED.] 

"It appears to me unfortunate to identify 
orthodoxy with any creed statement of 
the past, however excellent. This makes 
orthodoxy a dead thing; it ought to be living 
and progressive. Orthodoxy has 
been defined as 'right thinking about the 
Christian religion.' And I believe there 
should be no line of orthodoxy drawn, 
as one has said, 'inside of the line of 
truth.' Men pray for the unity of the 
church of Christ and yet they oppose that 
which they confess will hasten its coming. 
We have a 'separating theology,' and we 
are told that we ought not to limit our 
teaching to the things in which we agree 
with others. Certainly not. The most 
elaborate Calvinism will doubtless be 
taught in our schools, and every form of 
speculation about the metaphysics of theology 
will be continued. But why should 
all this be imposed upon the elders of 
our churches, who have no theological 
training?" 

[Does this mean, Doctor, that the elders 
and the church at large are too honest 
and are becoming too enlightened for the 
errors of "elaborate Calvinism," but 
that the ministers and seminary professors 
and students will be required to stick to 
mal-odorous Calvinism in its "most elaborate" 
form, rather than acknowledge 
that Calvin was not infallible, and that 
you all erred for so long in teaching and 
preaching his monstrous perversions of 
the truth? Is this your meaning, Doctor? 
If so, it speaks volumes for the 
honesty of the pews when contrasted with 
the pulpits of Presbyterianism. The ministers, 
we may presume, can afford to continue 
to stultify themselves and to make 
vows to believe and teach what they do 
not believe and know that they dare not 
preach in a civilized community in this 
our day. The considerations leading to 
such a sacrifice of principle and manhood 



we can only surmise: Is it a desire to 
maintain the dignity of Presbyterianism? 
And do they seek its perpetuity because 
their titles, salaries, etc., are interwoven 
with the system? We do not prefer to 
impugn the motives of any, but every 
action must have some cause, and we fail to 
see how any good cause could be upheld 
by the continued teaching of the "most 
elaborate Calvinism" among those who 
concede it to be very God-dishonoring. 
It must be zeal for something else than 
God's truth that would lead even to such 
a suggestion as this.— Z.W.T. EDITOR.] 

"Dr. Schaff says that the decree of 
reprobation is 'a logical fiction and contradicts 
the genius of Christianity and the 
plainest declarations of the Bible.' The 
confession makes too many justly disputable 
affirmations, and resembles the man 
who knows a great many things that are 
not so. Our churches will feel this more 
and more as, on account of the widespread 
debate, they come to read the 
Confession of Faith. Professor Henry 
Day, an elder in Dr. John Hall's church 
in New York, is reported as saying that 
'until recently only two elders in that 
church had ever read the Westminster 
standards.' If the final outcome of these 
years of intelligent and charitable Christian 
discussion shall be a new creed which 
we can heartily proclaim, it will express 
a living faith that will give our churches 
and our pulpits a new spiritual power. 
It is better to believe a few things thoroughly 
than to hold a confession that 
weighs down many minds with a deal of 
theological lumber. We crowd too much 
upon the brain and heart of the eldership 
and the ministry. I speak the experience 
of many when I say that multitudes come 
from our theological seminaries with a 
feeble faith in a great many things. An 
editor of one of our leading Presbyterian 
journals calls our confession of faith 'a 
wilderness with more dry places than 
wells of water.' The church of to-day 
rightly shrinks from a theology which 
'condemns the whole race to everlasting 
woe for a single transgression committed 
without our knowledge or consent six 
thousand years ago.' Such a theology 
is an iceberg rapidly melting in the warmer 

R1197 : page 5 



water and warmer breezes of a more 
southern sea. 

"God has not condemned us to walk 
the same round of thinking which our 
fathers trod. We hold in our hand the 
Bible, which, like nature, is a field for 
endless investigation. The Bible never 
grows old. It has been said, 'Christ 
never gave men definitions; he gave them 
paradoxes. A definition shuts you up at 
once; a paradox you can think about till 
the day of your death.' Hence we expect 
to see more and more light breaking 
from God's word. Men who turn away 
from seventeenth century creeds can be 
made to feel that this is a revelation from 
heaven. 

"I discover in our communities a 
growing number of men who constitute 
much of the intellectual and moral and 
business strength of our times, men whom 
we all honor, and many of them men of 
Christian faith and prayer, who are not 
within our churches as communicants. 
They are not affiliated in spirit with unbelief 
or with extreme liberalism. I have a 
great deal of regard for these men, and of 
sympathy with their intellectual difficulties. 
I hope to see the day when they shall 
constitute a noble part of our Christian 
churches. Whether or not what I deem 
an obstacle to such results is to be removed, 
I close my sermon this morning 
by affirming anew the universality, the 
simplicity and the divine earnestness of 
the offer of salvation: 'Come unto me, all 
ye that labor and are heavy-laden, and I 
will give you rest.. ..God so loved the 
world that he gave his only begotten Son 
that whosoever believeth on him should 
not perish but have everlasting life. Turn 
ye, turn ye, why will ye die?'" 

[Yes, here is the trouble: the people 
have neglected God's Word, and have 
accepted as infallible the creeds of the 
seventeenth century, made by good, pious, 
but mistaken men, still greatly 
blinded by the errors of the "dark 
ages." The people rely upon the ministers 
and elders, who publicly confess the 
same to be their candid views of the real 
meaning of God's Word and who solemnly 
vow before God and men that they 
will give diligence in the instructing of 
others in those doctrines. Yet probably 



a large majority of these elders and 
ministers have never even read doctrines 
which were so momentous that it required 
years to decide upon and formulate them. 
But then these same ministers felt so sure 
that the Confession was true that they 
could swear to believe it without even 
reading it. We trust that the elders of 
"Dr. John Hall's Church" above referred 
to may prove honest enough, now 
that they are awake, to be worthy to come 
to a knowledge of the truth as it is revealed 
in the only true Standard— the 
Bible— and that making this good confession 
in truth and earnestly, they may 
be counted worthy the name of pillars 
and elders in the "Church of Christ," to 
which (and not to "Dr. Hall's Church") 
belongs the promise of glory, honor and 
immortality, in God's due time. 

Yes, indeed, the controversy on the 
subject of Calvinism, the basis of the 
Presbyterian creed, is destined to wake 
up a great many long asleep; and it will 
surely in the end separate and divide that 
system, that the true "wheat" may be 
gathered out into the one Church of 
Christ. And the same influence is at 
work, preparing trouble for all the various 
Protestant systems— because there are 
some of God's elect in each of them. 
The overflowing scourge and the hail shall 
be upon all and shall sweep away all the 
refuges of error.— Isa. 28:17-20 .— 
Z.W.T. EDITOR.] 



R1197 : page 6 

A NEW AND IMPORTANT MOVEMENT. 

FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT CHURCHES. 
PRESBYTERIAN COMMITTEE ON 
CHURCH UNITY. 

The following was written to the Cincinnati 
Commercial Gazette by a gentleman 
present at the meeting described. 

"It is not generally known, yet nevertheless 
one of the most important religious 
movements of the century is now taking 
definite shape, through the work of committees 
appointed by the different evangelical 
churches of the United States. 
The movement is in the direction of 



church unity, or, at least, federal union 
of evangelical bodies. The committee 
of the Presbyterian Church convened at 
the Executive Mansion in Harrisburg, 
Pa., on Tuesday evening at 8 o'clock, 
continuing through Wednesday. There 
were present Rev. Drs. Joseph T. Smith, 
of Baltimore; R. M. Patterson, of Philadelphia; 
D. C. Marquis, of Chicago McCormick 
Theological Seminary; W. H. 
Green, of Princeton Theological Seminary; 
W. H. Roberts, of Lane Theological 
Seminary, Cincinnati; Francis Brown, 
of Union Theological Seminary, New 
York; Hon. James A. Beaver, Governor 
of Pennsylvania; Hon. Cyrus L. Pershing, 
of Johnstown, Pa.; Judge Robert N. 
Wilson, of Philadelphia; Hon. W. E. 
Dodge, of New York, and E. R. Monfort, 
of Cincinnati. 

"The committee were royally entertained 
by Governor and Mrs. Beaver at 
the Executive Mansion. This committee 
have had under consideration for over 
two years the questions raised in the declaration 
of the House of Bishops of the 
Episcopal Church addressed to the Protestant 
denominations of the country in 
which they set forth:— 

"1. Their earnest desire for the closer 
union of all Christians in the sense of the 
Savior's prayer that 'we all may be one.' 

"2. Their belief that all who have been 
baptized in the name of the Father, Son 
and Holy Spirit are members of the Holy 
Catholic Church. 

"3. That in all things of human ordering 
relating to modes of worship and discipline 
or to traditional customs this 
Church is ready, in the spirit of love and 
humility, to forego preferences of her own. 

"These principles which the Episcopal 
Church regards as essential to restoration 
of unity among divided branches are as 
follows:— 

"1. The Holy Scriptures of the Old 
and New Testaments as revealed in the 
Word of God. 

"2. The Nicene Creed as the sufficient 
statement of Christian faith. 

"3. The two Sacraments, baptism and 
the Lord's supper, are administered with 
unfailing use of Christ's words of institution, 
and of the elements ordained by Him. 

"4. The Historic Episcopate, locally 
adapted in the method of its administration 



to the varying needs of the nations 
and peoples called of God into the unity 
of his Church. 

"To carry out the declaration of which 
the above is an abstract, a commission 
was appointed, consisting of Rt. Revs. 
Alfred Lee, D.D., LL.D., Bishop of 
Delaware; John Williams, LL.D., Bishop 
of Connecticut; Richard H. Wilmer, 
D.D., LL.D., Bishop of Alabama; 
Abram Newkirk Littlejohn, D.D., LL.D., 
Bishop of Long Island; Mark Antony 
De Wolfe, D.D., LL.D., Bishop of Central 
Pennsylvania, with five distinguished 
ministers and five laymen. 

"The Presbyterian General Assembly 
met these advances towards practical unity 
with cordial sympathy and a desire for 
co-operation in Christian work, and directed 
the following reply to be made:— 

"To the Commission of Conference on 
Church Unity of the House of Bishops 
and of the House of Deputies of the 
Protestant Episcopal Church: — 

"DEAR BRETHREN:-The General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church in the 
United States of America... have received 
with sincere gratification the 'declaration' 
of your House of Bishops, 
and your request under it for a brotherly 
conference with us and with other branches 
of the Church of Christ, 'seeking the 
restoration of the organic unity of the 
Church of Christ, with a view to the earnest 
study of the conditions under which 
so priceless a blessing might happily be 
brought to pass.' The General Assembly 
are in cordial sympathy with the growing 
desire among the Evangelical Christian 
Churches for practical unity and co-operation 
in the work of spreading the gospel 
of our Lord Jesus Christ throughout all 
the earth. They respond to your invitation 
with the sincere desire that the conference 
asked for may lead, if not to a 
formal oneness of organization, yet to 
such a vital and essential unity of faith 
and spirit and co-operation as will bring 
all the followers of our common Lord into 
hearty fellowship and mutual recognition 
and reciprocity as members of one visible 
Church of Christ, and workers together 
with Him in advancing his kingdom on 
earth. 



"Without discussing the principles set 
forth by the House of Bishops, this letter 
announces the appointment of a committee 
to confer with such commission and 
any similar commissions or committees 
appointed by any of the Christian Churches 
for conference on the subject. 

"The committee have held several meetings 
and conferences with closed doors, 
and thus far the result of their deliberations 
has not been given to the public, 
and will not until their is mutual consent. 
The correspondence, when published, will 
create a decided sensation, and be at the 
same time a source of great gratification 
to those who desire the restoration of unity 
among the divided branches of Christendom. 
As may be readily seen, their 
is substantial agreement now upon the first 
three articles, viz.: The Scriptures, the 
Sacraments and the Nicene creed; and as 
to the fourth there has been a most sincere 
and generous Christian spirit— and I 
may say desire— upon the part of the 

R1198 : page 6 

Episcopal Bishops to come nearer to the 
Presbyterian Church and bring the Church 
nearer to them, and find some basis, if 
not of organic union, of federal union 
and co-operation. Dr. John De Witt, of 
Chicago, not a member of the committee, 
furnished some articles for The Churchman, 
in which he clearly set forth to the 
satisfaction of many Episcopal readers 
that 'reciprocity would not contravene 
any principle of Protestant Episcopacy,' 
and we suppose that the facts set forth by 
him are substantially those that influence 
the Bishops in their opinion that there are 
no serious obstacles in their way to the 
recognition of the Presbyterian and other 
Protestant ministry, and vice versa. 

"The Presbyterian General Assembly 
at a late session made the following catholic 
and rational statement of what it considers 
the grounds upon which 'practical 
Church unity can be realized and 
maintained:' 

'"1. All believers in Christ constitute 
one body, mystical, yet real, destined to 
grow into the fulness of Him who filleth 
all in all. 

'"2. The universal visible Church consists 
of all those throughout the world 



who profess the true religion, together 
with their children. 

'"3. Mutual recognition and reciprocity 
between the different bodies that profess 
the true religion is the first and essential 
step towards practical Church unity.' 

"It is manifest that the spirit of federal 
or co-operative unity has taken deep root 
in the minds and hearts of the leaders of 
evangelical bodies, and that the time is 
not far distant when co-operation and comity, 
if not more, of all or nearly all evangelical 
bodies will be realized. The correspondence 
with the Commission of the 
Congregational Churches has strengthened 
this belief, and after a lengthy discussion 
of a paper by Dr. Patterson, of Philadelphia, 
on 'The Federation of Evangelical 
Churches,' the committee unanimously 
agreed to recommend the General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church to express 
its approval of the idea of federation 
of Evangelical Churches, and invite 
the evangelical Churches, of the United 
States to enter into a federal union. 
Such a federation will not require any 
sacrifice of doctrinal belief nor the granting 
of authority by evangelical bodies 
that would require constitutional changes 
nor an abandonment of historic beliefs. 
In the Episcopal Church, for instance, 
there is no real reason for denying the ordination 
of other Protestant ministry. 
Their view of the episcopate involving 
three orders of the ministry is not held as 
a dogma or Article of Faith binding on 
the conscience, for their Standards do not 
make it such, but merely as a historical 
fact accepted in their Church, but open 
to investigation and revision, and so 
furnishing no obstacle to recognition, co-operation 
or federation. 

"The Federation proposed has not been 
clearly outlined, but it will be formulated 
by a Convention composed of delegates 
from all evangelical bodies who enter into 
it, and will have limited powers delegated 
consistent with the constitutions of 
existing bodies. It will not be an Evangelical 
Alliance with only advisory powers, 
but a Federal Alliance for combining 
general powers and promoting harmony, 
removing causes of friction, establishing 
comity and uniting AGAINST THE 
GREAT ENEMIES of Christianity and progress, 
and in all possible ways lifting up 



the standard of the Cross and keeping it 
unfurled over the allied armies of the 
King of kings and Lord of lords, that the 
establishment of His kingdom may be 
hastened and the world emancipated from 
the damnation of sin."-E. R. MONFORT. 
HARRISBURG, PA. 



The fact that the gentlemen engaged 
in this federation or union of the various 
sects into one (much as the several states 
are federated in the one government of 
the United States) have no intention of 
doing evil, but quite the contrary— to do 
good— is no guarantee that the work when 
done will not prove to be an evil, and a 
stupendous one, as the Scriptures clearly 
show. 

Old readers of the TOWER will remember 
that nine years ago we pointed out 
from the Book of Revelation that such a 
union would take place; and that then and 
thus Protestantism would become the peer 
and fellow of Roman Catholicism, and 
that the two great bodies would co-operate 
in the great work of strangling every 
advance in thought on religious subjects. 
Thus Protestants are making of themselves 
a system which when perfected will be a 
veritable likeness or image of the Papal 
system. We say making because the work 
of construction began in 1846 in the organization 
of the Evangelical Alliance. 
It will reach a still further development 
in the proposed Evangelical Federation 
or Union. And it will receive life or vitality 
as a system and feel its authority 
later, when it shall accept from the Episcopalians 
the doctrine of apostolic succession 
and the laying on of hands. It 
will then claim that only such as have 
these holy (?) hands and the authority (?) 
thus given to teach have any right to 
teach on religious subjects. And finally 
it will, figuratively speaking, behead all 
who will not bow to its dictum; and such 
shall neither buy nor sell (communicate, 
trade in the Truth) any more. 

Then the Word of God will be relegated 
to a back seat, as it was during the 
dark ages, when Papacy claimed to be 
the only church and that her decrees were 
to be received and obeyed as God's Word 
instead of the Bible, whose day, it was 



claimed, had passed by. This will be attempted 

again by the Evangelical Union 

and the Roman Catholics with some success. 

But it shall not succeed as before, for general 

intelligence and the spirit of liberty 

will not admit their claims nor permit the 

carrying out of the project. General infidelity 

among the masses will pave the 

way for socialism and finally for anarchy, 

which as the fire of the great day of God 

Almighty shall sweep all before it into the 

greatest time of trouble the world has 

ever known ( Dan. 12:1 ), overthrowing 

all sects and isms and giant systems and 

the governments associated with them. 

The formation of such a federation as is 
projected means a fourfold political influence. 
It means the formulation of laws 
upon religion. At first these will be conservative, 
touching and attempting to curb 
only the grosser immoralities; but each 
success will embolden and finally bring 
the mailed hand of power to the throat of 
individual liberty— gradually curtailing and 
strangling freedom of speech upon religion 
as well as upon politics. This at first 
will be by laws regulating the observance 
of Sunday— compelling abstinence from 
business on that day. 

Our friends, the Seventh Day Adventists, 
affect to see in such a law a terrible 
blow at them and against their liberty of 
conscience to worship God according to 
their ideas of the teachings of his Word. 
But they are deceiving themselves. Such 
a law would not interfere at all with their 
observance of Saturday (the day which 
they, thinking themselves under the Law 
given to Israel, feel bound to observe, and 
on which they abstain from labor). 
Should such a law pass, as we have no 
doubt it will, it will interfere with no 
man's conscience, as each may observe as 
many and which ever days he pleases in 
addition to Sunday. The Seventh Day 
Adventists, in crying out that such a Sunday 
law would be a great crime against 
their liberty of conscience, evidently delude 
themselves. Surely they will not 
claim that God commanded them to do 
labor on Sunday. And, this being true, 
they should have no conscientious scruples 
against resting from labor on Sunday if 
the majority of their fellow-citizens insist 
upon it. We surely see no good objection 
to such a law as a movement for rest 



from labor, though we believe it unwise 
from a religious standpoint to try to legislate 
faith or worship to any degree. 
We merely point out the fact that such 
harmless legislation will prove an entering 
wedge for other not so harmless. For 
if the right of the majority to decide 
upon such questions be admitted at all, 
it will be easy to carry the principle 
further and decide what God shall 

R1198 : page 7 

be worshipped on that day and what 
one belief shall be held and taught, and to 
tax all for the support of that one system 
of belief. 

Already we have an intimation of how 
the matter may be expected to work. In 
Chicago after the haymarket riots, etc., 
certain police orders were given with a 
view to the suppression of Anarchistic 
meetings for the promulgation of their 
wild theories, as against the interests of 
the public welfare. Thereupon the Anarchists 
organized their meetings and held 
them on Sundays and called them Anarchist 
Sunday Schools; and there being 
no laws against Sunday Schools the police 
have been baffled and the Chief of Police 
of Chicago is credited with the remark 
that the law must stipulate what shall be 
recognized as a Sunday School. The 
next step evidently would be to limit and 
define what are Christian doctrines and 
what are heresies. And it requires no 
great stretch of imagination to see that 
when the Evangelical Federation or Union 
has been formed and its creed defined 
that creed will gradually come to be recognized 
as the standard of orthodoxy; 
and then any out of harmony with such 
majority will have very limited rights and 
privileges indeed. It is not only possible 
but highly probable that not only Anarchists 
and the Seventh Day Adventists 
and ourselves, but others of God's children 
more or less free from sectarianism 
and its hoary errors will be hindered 
in the spread of the truth— strangled. 
And it will not at all surprise us if 
this condition of things may come to 
pass by the year 1900— or sooner. To all 
of the dear fellow-laborers in the harvest 
work we say then, fervently, Labor on 
faint not; "Labor while it is called day 



for a night cometh wherein no man can 
work." 



R1199 : page 7 

HONEST SKEPTICISM AND ITS REMEDY. 

Although we do not endorse the teachings 
of Prof. Huxley on the nature and 
destiny of man, we must acknowledge 
that he is one of the great thinkers of our 
day, though we see that like many other 
thinkers not submitted fully to the direction 
of the Word of God, he has stumbled 
into many foolish and illogical errors 
as viewed from the standpoint of divine 
enlightenment. 

A recent article from his pen shows clearly 
that sectarianism, with its false teachings, 
claiming to be the teachings of God's 
Word, is responsible, to a large degree, for 
Mr. Huxley's infidelity, as doubtless the 
same cause is responsible for very much of 
the prevalent and growing agnosticism. 

Nothing but the truth will reach and 
satisfy the candid, discriminating minds 
of honest men of really strong minds. 
The nominal church in rejecting the simplicity 
of Christ's gospel and manufacturing 
various schemes and theories instead, 
has indeed invented what will rule the 
ignorant and superstitious; but in so doing 
she has lost the only thing which could 
reach or influence intelligent men. As a 
consequence, now, that superstition is giving 
way and intelligence is becoming 
more general, skepticism is rife on every 
hand and is fast blooming into open infidelity 
—an infidelity, too, not only against 
sectarianism (which would, indeed, be a 
blessing), but infidelity toward God's 
Word, too; for it is generally, though very 
erroneously supposed that the "Creeds of 
Christendom" represent the teachings of 
the Bible. Prof. Huxley's article referred 
to, however, we are glad to see, indicates 
that his eyes are opening to discern between 
the teachings of sects and the teachings 
of God's Word. He writes as follows: 

PROF. HUXLEY ON BIBLE READING. 

"Greatly to the surprise of many of 
my friends, I have always advocated the 



reading of the Bible, and the diffusion of 

the study of that most remarkable collection 

of books among the people. Its 

teachings are so infinitely superior to 

those of the sects, who are just as busy 

now as the Pharisees were eighteen hundred 

years ago, in smothering them under 

"the precepts of men;" it is so certain 

to my mind, that the Bible contains within 

itself the refutation of nine-tenths of 

the mixture of sophistical metaphysics and 

old-world superstitions which have been 

piled round it by the so-called Christians 

of later times; it is so clear that the only 

immediate and ready antidote of the 

poison which has been mixed with Christianity, 

to the intoxication and delusion 

of mankind, lies in copious draughts from 

the undefiled spring, that I exercise the 

right and duty of free judgment on the 

part of every man, mainly for the purpose 

of inducing other laymen to follow my 

example. If the New Testament is translated 

into Zulu by Protestant missionaries, 

it must be assumed that a Zulu convert is 

competent to draw from its contents all 

the truths which it is necessary for him to 

believe. I trust that I may, without immodesty, 

claim to be put on the same 

footing as the Zulu." 

Good, clear logic that! If the Bible is 
the standard of truth, if it is God's Revelation 
of himself, his will and his plan, 
why not grant to each the fullest liberty to 
read and believe it for himself? Why not 
merely point out to such the external and 
internal evidences of its truth, and leave 
them free from bondage to creeds to grow 
in the knowledge and understanding of 
it? Why should Christians separate into 
sects and adopt other "standards" for 
each sect? Why teach the precepts of 
Calvin and Knox and Luther and Wesley, 
and others, when we have better, purer 
doctrines than theirs in the words of 
Christ and his inspired apostles and prophets? 
Why teach the traditions of men just 
emerging from the dark ages with the eyes 
of their understandings semi-blinded with 
the smoke of Papacy's errors? Why not 
destroy all creeds and confessions and 
merely confess the fountain source of all 
truth to be God and his Word, and go 
daily to that fountain? 

It is encouraging to see Prof. Huxley 
at the Fountain, even though yet incredulously 



sipping, and to hear his testimony 

that the waters thereof are much sweeter 

and purer than those of the various befouled 

streams flowing through the jungles 

of the dark ages. 

We note a still more interesting and remarkable 
yet similar case here in Allegheny, 
recently: A gentleman of culture 
and a thinker recently called upon the 
editor and producing a clipping from one 
of the daily papers of about a year ago, 
inquired as to its authorship. It proved 
to be an article written by the editor 
of this journal to his fellow-citizens 
explaining briefly our views of the divine 
plan, intended to be a contradiction of 
certain misunderstandings and public misstatements 
of our views. The caller then 
continued the conversation somewhat as 
follows:— 

"That I clipped over a year ago and 
have kept it ever since. I consider the 
views there presented the most reasonable 
and in fact I may say, the only reasonable 
views on religion that I ever met with. 
I was brought up a United Presbyterian, 
a Calvinist of the strictest sort. I was 
earnest, honest and zealous. I united 
with that sect when I was about eighteen 
years of age. But, though always moral 
and rather sedate, I never could feel sure 
that I was one of the elect, and I had 
great distress of mind continually which 
I was rather ashamed to confess, even to 
my spiritual advisors, though I was forced 
to do so finally to, if possible, get relief. 
I was through the civil war, and before 
every battle I was harassed with the 
thought that it might be my last and that 
dying might prove that I was not one of 
God's elect. 

"I finally came to the conclusion that 
all such ideas were false— contrary to 
common sense, and contrary to the character 
which God must have to be God. 
Knowing well the passages upon which 
the doctrines of my church were rested, I 
finally concluded that the Bible was not 
God's revelation and rejected it and all 
religious beliefs built upon it. I became 
thus a free-thinker— an infidel, a disciple 
of Thomas Paine; with him believing in 
a supreme Creator, but denying that his 
character and plan are represented in the 
doctrines of the various associations calling 
themselves his church. I have been 



in this condition, satisfied with infidelity, 
for over ten years, but I have been skeptical 
for twenty or more. 

"But from your article, here, clipped 
from the Press, I get some new thoughts 
on the Election of the Church, what it is 
elected to, and the object of this election. 
I want, if you please, to have you appoint 
some evening, when I can call upon you 
and learn more of the details of this 
which you term God's Plan of the Ages. 
I did not willingly renounce the Bible; 
I never was one of the blatant blasphemous 
sort of infidels; I am too conscientious, 
however, to quietly profess what I do 
not believe, though there are many church 
members who believe no more than I do. 
If now, as you intimate, you can show 
me that all the various sects draw their 
conflicting and unreasonable doctrines, 
not from the Bible, but from the Church 
of Rome, and that the Church of Rome 
drew them from the vagaries of the Grecian 
Philosophy at a time when she was 
intent upon building up her system and 
gaining political power; and if then you 
can show me that the Bible contains the 
grand philosophy which this little article 
from the Press outlines, I shall be a convert 
most willingly. But I want clear, 
reasonable evidence and not mere 
hypothesis." 

We assured the gentleman that we 
should be most pleased to discuss the subject 
as requested, except that we wanted 
to begin with the examination of the Bible, 
and then come to an examination of 
how the various errors and misapplications 
of Scripture came to be received so commonly 
as Truth. But we requested that 
first of all he should read very candidly 
the first volume of DAWN-- "The Plan 
of the Ages" —after which we would 
have the proposed meeting for questions 
and a general discussion. This plan was 
followed; we had several private meetings 
as well as the public Sunday services, 
with the result that in three weeks this 
friend saw clearly, and confessed heartily, 
the great Redeemer and the glorious plan. 
In another week it was time for him to leave 
the city, but before he went he procured 
and sent out many copies of DAWN for 
his U.P. friends as well as for those whom 
he regarded as the more honest among 
his Infidel friends. And to us he said,— 



"I feel like the prodigal returned to 
Father's house; some nights I can scarcely 
sleep for thinking of the wonderful 
plan, so suddenly seen from out of such 
darkness. I never knew such joy and 
heavenly peace but once before, and that 
was when as a soldier during the Civil 
War, I was lying near death's door in a 
hospital in Philadelphia. I want to tell 
you of that experience and ask you, how 
you would account for it. It was before 
I became an Infidel, while I was yet a believer 
in the horrible U.P. doctrines 
which you so aptly term a nightmare. I 
was fearful of death, fearful of the future, 
and though I had always been a moral 
man, I had no assurance that I was one 
of the elect, but on the contrary believed 
as I had been taught that my morality 
had nothing whatever to do with my election. 
I was in a terrible state of mind, 
but knew that to confer with others would 
be useless as none could alter God's decrees. 
My mental torture was aggravating 
my physical ailments, and I was becoming 
daily weaker, spending my weary 
hours in prayer and thought which seemed 
to find no response, until one morning I 
awoke after a most refreshing sleep entirely 
changed. My fears were gone, my 
hopes were bright, my communion with 
the Lord was close; the grass looked differently 
from ever grass seemed before, 
the birds had cheerful notes to my ear- 
in fact the whole world had changed in 
that night. 

"This joy continued for some time, 
but gradually faded. I, at that time considered 
it a manifestation from God that 
I was accepted with him, but after I became 
an infidel, I tried to account for it 

R1200 : page 7 

upon some scientific basis; but now, since 

this joy has returned to my heart, I am 

wondering, whether I should not count 

that hospital experience as a sort of conversion. 

I want your opinion of it, 

anyhow." 

We told him that to consider his first 
experience as his conversion would be a 
great mistake, one nevertheless very common 
among our Methodist friends. We 
pointed out that conversion is a change 
of mind, a change of will— from sin toward 



righteousness, from self and the 
world to God's control, and pointed out 
that his will at that time, and for years 
previous, had been to serve the Lord, 
and was not in opposition to righteousness, 
and that the only hindrance to full 
harmony with God and full joy and peace 
before, had arisen from his being misinformed 
regarding the plan of salvation. 
Had he known the truth then, the truth 
would have made him free then, as it 
makes him free now— free from the doubts 
and fears which terrorized and prevented 
the joy and peace which belong to and 
must always accompany the knowledge 
of the truth, the knowledge of the facts 
of God's good plan. And, we continued, 
we account for your remarkable experience 
of a change of feelings in that night as 
we account for many of the remarkable 
instances of sudden joy and peace found 
at Methodist mourners'-benches— we believe 
that the Lord took pity upon you in 
your heart-broken condition, and seeing 
that your distress, if not relieved, would 
kill you, and that your mind was so prejudiced 
by the traditions of men that the 
truths of his revelation could not reach 
you to give the proper relief, he graciously 
lifted the load in a miraculous manner. 

But, Brother, what led to the loss of 
that first joy and peace? If you had been 
faithful, it would have continued— though 
not as an unaccountable joy without any 
foundation in reason. Had you confessed 
the Lord and sought his will and plan in 
his Word and consecrated yourself to the 
service of spreading it as you found it, 
you would surely have gotten a firm foundation 
for a brighter and enduring hope. 

"Ah! I see now," said he, "I was content 
to have the joy and peace, and neglected 

R1200 : page 8 

to build under it the firm foundation 
of God's Word. I was so glad to 
be rid of those doubts and fears regarding 
my election, that I let reason go and did 
not seek to learn of the truth concerning 
the great divine election, nor did I ever 
tell of my joy and peace. I put my joy 
under a bushel instead of reasoning and 
searching out the truth. I was then unworthy 
of the favor and lost it." 
We pointed out, however, to the brother's 



comfort, that while not blameless in 
the matter, he was not so blameworthy as 
though the clear light had shone brightly 
around him. We showed how he had 
merely followed in the footprints of the 
entire nominal church, including the 
ministers and elders and deacons, as sheep 
follow one another. Yet we pointed out 
that as his heart was honest, God never 
forsook him, but now, after allowing him 
to learn to reason and to follow unguided 
reason into the wilderness of infidelity, and 
after allowing him to taste and to fill himself 
with the husks of unbelief which only 
the swinish can really relish, had led him 
back home, and was now setting before 
him a royal feast of truth which his whetted 
appetite enabled him to relish far 
more than if he had never been led by 
his honesty of mind to doubt and deny 
the sectarian fallacies. 

How many infidels are such honestly- 
driven from God and his Word by the 
errors of sectarianism, none can tell but 
God. The case of Brother Caldwell just 
related, the words of Prof. Huxley 
above quoted and the writer's own case 
and others known to us, lead us to believe 
that some of the most honest are outside 
Babylon's walls. The truth gives the 
foundation for faith, which consecrated 
and exercised reason demands; and when 
creeds and confessions of men, which sadly 
(though unintentionally) pervert and 
misapply God's Word, have been shaken 
to pieces and consumed in the dreadful 

"fire" of infidelity, revolution and anarchism 
shortly to come upon Christendom, 
it will stand. And finally, in the 
times of restitution of all things, men shall 
learn to distinguish between God's church 
built upon the rock of truth, and the sects 
of human organization built upon human 
traditions. 



R1200 : page 8 

THE SPIRIT OF TRUE REFORM. 

"There is nothing more essential to the 
success of any work of reform than that 
it be conducted in a manner which will 
recommend it to those whom it is seeking 
to influence. In other words, those who 



engage in such a work must do so with a 
proper spirit, in order to reap the result 
which is desired. This consideration is 
an important one, and especially so to us, 
engaged as we are in a great reform work 
which so vitally concerns the welfare of 
the human race. 

What should be the spirit which should 
accompany the efforts of those engaged 
in the promulgation of the truths of the 
Plan of the Ages? From the nature of 
things, this work involves one in perpetual 
controversy with the ideas and forms of 
the theological world around him. It requires 
some discrimination and forbearance 
to confine the controversy to the 
ideas, and prevent its involving the persons 
who hold them. There is a strong 
tendency to forget that we are not combating 
persons, but the false beliefs which 
they teach. How easy under such circumstances 
to be led by the natural promptings 
of human nature, and fall into the 
error of the two disciples who wished to 
call down fire upon the ungrateful Samaritans, 
and to whom Christ rebukingly 
said, "Ye know not what spirit ye are of." 

The true reform spirit is never anything 
but a Christian spirit, leading its possessor 
to ever take an inoffensive attitude toward 
those whose erroneous opinions he 
feels called upon to oppose. It does not 
lead him to make use of ridicule and contempt, 
or to indulge in sharp drives at an 
opponent for the mere sake of showing 
his acuteness. It never leads him to show 
a lack of respect for those in positions of 
authority, albeit their characters may not 
be of the best, nor to forget that degree 
of deference which is due those in every 
position of eminence; but with all men 
to render "honor to whom honor is due." 
Firm and uncompromising in its zeal for 
the truth, it combines with this a proper 
humility of self, and charity toward all. 
It is, in short, that spirit the possession of 
which will lead one to manifest "the 
fruits of the Spirit," among which are, 
"long-suffering, gentleness, ...meekness." 

It is a mistake to suppose, as many 
people evidently do, that absence of moral 
principle in an individual, however conspicuous 
and fraught with evil results, 
renders him a proper subject of hatred, 
ridicule and contempt. There is a certain 
respect which is due to all in positions 



of earthly eminence, regardless even 

of character. It may be seriously questioned 

whether Satan himself should ever 

be alluded to in other than terms of respect. 

Certainly if, as Jude has recorded, 

even "Michael the archangel, when contending 

with the Devil he disputed concerning 

the body of Moses, durst not 

bring against him a railing accusation, 

but said, The Lord rebuke thee," no mortal 

should venture to use language of such 

a nature in alluding to the same being; 

nor can it be proper to bring any railing 

accusation against an earthly opponent, 

whose motives we cannot judge, and with 

whom we stand upon a level as the recipients 

of God's unmerited favor. Such a 

course is not in keeping with Christian 

dignity and integrity of character, and 

the cause of truth has no need of such 

doubtful aids to its advancement. 

The study of the spirit and methods of 
the Lord and the Apostles would doubtless 
be profitable to those who are actively 
engaged in an important work of reform 
at the present time. In their forbearance 
under great provocations and persecution, 
the moderate and respectful language in 
which they addressed those in positions 
of authority, their strict regard for the 
truth, and their carefulness against giving 
needless offense, they have left an example 
worthy of our imitation. With an 
uncompromising zeal for the truth, they 
combined that Christian charity which 
led them to abstain from judging the 
characters and motives even of their bitterest 
opponents. It is by such a spirit 
and by such methods that the truth can 
be best commended to thinking minds. 
--L. A. S. 



R1201 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., APRIL, 1890. NO. 5. 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

You will all be anxiously waiting to 
know about the anniversary meetings, 
and nothing would give us more pleasure 
or be more to your profit, possibly, 
than a full report of the session. But this 
is impossible. We can only give you a 
brief, summary view. 

It seemed to be conceded that though 
former meetings of the sort had been 
seasons of wonderful blessing, this one was 
the most blessed in many respects. One 
very marked feature was the spirit of full 
consecration which seemed to be manifested 
by all in the evident brotherly 
love, patience and sympathy which pervaded 
the meetings and the social chats 
between meetings. 

As announced, the session opened on 
Thursday morning, April 3rd, and we 
might say continued as one meeting until 
Sunday night (though some stayed 
until Wednesday night following and continued 
the meeting after the formal close). 
The only intermissions were for food and 
sleep. One aged brother, who had been 
in the U.P. ministry for years and attended 
many of their conventions, declared that 
he never saw the like. He said that since 
his arrival in the city— whether in the 
meetings, on the streets going and coming, 
at the table, or even in the bed-chamber, 
late and early, where seven 
brethren were lodged with him— he had 
heard nothing discussed from first to last 
but God's word. It was the first thing 
on waking and the last thing on retiring, 
and talked of between bites at every meal. 
Thank God that this was true. Can you 
wonder that with such a company of God's 
children gathered together, the Lord's 
blessing and spirit would be felt and manifested? 
It was, in a most marked degree; 
and this was attested by the joyful 
faces of all; and by the tongues of 
those who spoke at the first meeting, 
which was one of general introduction of 
the visiting brethren and sisters, and also 
at the Sunday night meeting, which was 



one for general testimony. 

There were about seventy-five in attendance 
from outside the city, and many of 
them came long distances. Four were from 
Wisconsin; one from Nebraska; two from 
Minnesota; four from Manitoba; some 
from New England, quite a number from 
New York, Ohio, Virginia, West Virginia, 
Maryland, Indiana and Illinois, and 
of course most of all from Pennsylvania. 

About two hundred of God's ministers 
were in attendance, all told— for all are 
ministers, servants of the truth, from our 
standpoint and from the standpoint of 
God's word; in which all are recognized 
as priests —of the royal priesthood— who, 
justified by the precious blood, have offered 
themselves living sacrifices to God and 
his truth. Among these two hundred 
were some who had been public pastors in 
various human organizations and who had 
been formerly accustomed to the title of 
Reverend, etc., but here all of God's 
priests stood on a common footing and recognized 
the one Chief Priest of our order, 
Christ Jesus, and each other as brethren. 
Among these ex-Reverends were some who 
had served the Lutherans, Presbyterians, 
United Presbyterians, Baptists, Methodists, 
Protestant Methodists, and United 
Brethren. It was a glorious sight to see 
these all confessing only the one Church, 
whose names are written in heaven, and 
the one creed, God's Word, and the one 
Lord and Teacher, Christ Jesus, and the 
one title of brethren, and the one holy order, 
the Royal Priesthood. It reminded us 
of the Pentecost occasion when Parthians, 
Medes, Elamites and dwellers in Mesopotamia 
and beyond Jordan ( Acts 2:8-12 ), 
united together in praising God; for all 
these were of one heart and one mind to 
know and serve the truth. 

All in all, it was good to be here, and 
we trust that every soul received a blessing. 
And more, we trust that a great 
blessing may extend to all quarters of the 
vineyard; as those who were present and 
filled their vessels with the holy oil of 
God's spirit of truth go forth to water 
and bless others with the same. We 
learned of some indeed who, being too poor 
to pay their way, were assisted by others, 
who said, Go to the meeting, and returning 
bring some of the overflow blessing to 
us. 



And the dear scattered ones who were 
not permitted to be present with us 
were not forgotten in the words and prayers 
of those present. They were tenderly 
and fervently remembered, both those 
known to us to be already free from much 
of the sectarian error and misconception, 
and those yet in bondage who are really 
and truly God's saints, and whose names 
are written, we trust, with ours, in the 
Lamb's book of life. The general sentiment 
of those who departed was, that 
they would be all the more diligent hereafter 
to pass the pleasant bread of truth 
to the hungering sheep of the Lord, both 
in and out of Babylon; and be all the more 
wise in reaching it to them, not to be 
unmindful of the weaknesses, prejudices 
and fears which so interfere with their receiving 
the good tidings of great joy. On 
the contrary, all seemed to purpose to be 
yet more tenderly affectionate and loving 
in the presentation of the message of 
the love of God, which so far surpasses 
men's understandings. 

Water baptism and its symbolic import 
was the subject of one discourse, in which 
it was scripturally shown that the real 
baptism is the full consecration of a believer 
—his burial to the world and every 
worldly ambition— into the will and name 
of Christ; and that the immersion in 
water, enjoined and practiced by our Lord 
and the apostles, was merely a symbol of 
that reality. Thirty-one availed themselves 
of the opportunity offered and were 
thus symbolically buried and raised in illustration 
of the reality begun in them, 
which it so beautifully expresses. A few 
of these were new beginners in the 
Christian pathway, but mostly, they were 
such as had long been buried with Christ 
in the real baptism of consecration to death 
with him; and who only now had come 
to see the beauty and propriety of the 
water symbol of that death. 

As we parted, singing that beautiful 
hymn, "Blest be the tie that binds," it was 
with the thought that now, free from all 
fetters of sectarian union, we have, thank 
God, reached the perfection of union- 
union in Christ, union of heart, union in 
the truth. 



page 1 

BROTHER ADAMSON'S LATEST. 

[Brother Adamson sends us the following 
as his view and report of the Memorial 
Meetings, and says he hopes we will 
let him have his "say" in full— without 
any editorial trimming. We have, therefore, 
handed his letter to the type-setters 
without even reading it.— EDITOR.] 

With much pleasure I give a few of my 
impressions regarding the late Memorial 
Supper and succeeding meetings to the 
household of faith scattered abroad. The 
feast began on April 2nd when brethren 
and sisters of like precious faith began to 
assemble and greet each other in joy and 
love most fervent, but followed quickly by 
the opening and study of Bibles. 

There was a formal close of the various 
meetings on the following Sunday night, 
but the full close was not until one full 
week was spent in joyous feasting on our 
Lamb and the truth now due. 

As repentant Israel kept "other seven 
days," so those now "scattered abroad" 
kept the feast seven days, but with the 
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. 
- 2 Chron. 30:1-23 ; 1 Cor. 5:8 . 

I cannot here report the numerous questions 
asked and answered, or even name 
the topics taken up, during the sessions 
which filled almost the whole days. One 
after the other testified that Brother R. is 
"apt to teach" and agreed that they 
would return home with all their questions 
answered and all shadow of doubt 
removed. 

But in a general way we can note that 
on Thursday forenoon a number of quiet 
but thrilling testimonies were given as to 
how the truth reached the speakers, and 
concerning their bitter experiences after 
having eaten the "little book," and yet 
how faithful God is to all those not 
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. 

In the afternoon Bro. Russell gave a 
most clear and forcible sermon on baptism, 
preparatory to the baptism service 
which followed. 

Of the following glorious six days we 
can say no more than name some of the 
topics discussed, viz.: Tabernacle Teachings; 
The Wages of Sin; Faith Cure, as 



seen from the standpoint of God's Plan; 

The Unpardonable Sin; The Seven Millennial 

Views of Rev. 20 and 21 ; etc., etc. 

On Sunday night another series of testimonies 
to God's favor and faithfulness 
were given. Bro. Louder was specially 
"loud" in expressions of joy and thankfulness 
to God for the knowledge gained 
and the richness of the spiritual food, and 
this he could do with much more reason 
from the standpoint of God's loving 
plan than when shouting as a "pillar" 
of Methodism under its limited, confusing 
view. Another, but a few months ago a 
champion of Presbyterianism, was almost 
as "loud" as any, stating that during this 
one meeting he had learned more about 
God's love and wisdom as expressed in 
his holy word than in all the Presbytery 
meetings he had ever attended. 

In large attendance, ability, earnestness 
and love of those who either spoke 
publicly (we regard all as preachers) or 
heard, we believe each succeeding Passover 
meeting is more successful than the preceding, 
and this just held has filled all 
its participants with joy and peace confidence 
and love, faith and hope. Who 
can doubt that still more desirable results 
will follow than from previous quickenings? 
The harvest is surely riper than it 
was a year ago, while Satan with his delusive 
seductions and in garments of (new) 
light (another gospel) is busy. It becomes 
us then to know and hold firmly the one 
gospel— the ransom— and thus clothed in 
the panoply of Christ's righteousness we 
shall be able to stand in the faith and in 
love. J. B. ADAMSON. 



page 1 

A SEASON OF REFRESHING. 

Brother Rogers writes as follows, to 
the TOWER readers in general, concerning 
the Anniversary Meeting, etc. 

"The Memorial Meeting confirms the 
thought that the time has come for the 
gathering together of the saints in oneness 
and expectation. Though many members, 
there seems to be but one spirit; 
many diversities, but one desire to know 



page 2 

the Lord and his will concerning us as 
individuals. 

"The meeting also helped us to realize that 
the secrets of the Lord are with those that 
love and reverence him. A few days communing 
with saints is better than 
a whole year with the world. Such a 
manifestation of the influence of the spirit 
of Christ among his followers, now, 
makes us long for the time when all things 
will be in blessed harmony with the Creator. 
And if we are given such things 
now, what will be given to those who are 
found in his likeness. 

"To suffer and live for our Saviour in this 
life is worthy to be compared with the 
privilege of reigning with him in the 
future." S. D. ROGERS. 



page 2 

TO THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 
SCATTERED ABROAD-- 

GREETINGS! 

Being permitted to attend the Allegheny 
meeting in which our Lord's death was 
commemorated, as well as the subsequent 
meetings of the week, I was especially impressed 
with the truth that it was the 
Lord's death which, through justification, 
opens up the way for consecration in this 
and the Millennial ages; and that it is now 
the particular privilege of the saints to be 
consecrated into his death. We read, 
"This is he that came by water and blood, 
even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but 
by water and blood." Our Lord's way 
was not by consecration (water) only, but 
through consecration carried to entire 
completion during a reign of evil and 
ending in death. Through this utter 
self-abnegation and its lesson of complete 
obedience to the Father's will, our 
Lord was prepared for the great work 
he will complete, and in which we are invited 
to join. Only by following humbly 
and willingly on the same rough road, 
can we be fitted for joint-heirship with 
him in the restitution work now beginning. 
It is written "Though he were a son, yet 



learned he obedience by the things which 
he suffered; and being made perfect [as a 
new creature], he became the author of 
eternal salvation unto all them that obey 
him." 

When once fully grasped, the opportunity 
of becoming "heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ" assumes so 
glorious an aspect that we begin to rejoice 
in the hope that we may "suffer with him." 

The entire meeting furnished "meat in 
due season" both in "things new and 
old," and I rejoice that I was permitted 
once more to join so many brethren and 
sisters in worship and study before the 
"night cometh," and thus to be strengthened 
and encouraged to work more faithfully 
while the day lasts. W. E. PAGE. 



[A brother who until recently has been 
a minister in the United Presbyterian 
ranks, and who only within the past few 
months came to a knowledge of God's 
plan of the ages, and who was present at 
the Memorial Supper and subsequent 
meetings, writes as follows:— 

DEARLY BELOVED BRETHREN:--! cannot 
express in language the sweet peace in 
my soul since I returned from the meeting. 
I feel like singing all the time. 
Those sweet Songs of the Bride still ring 
in my ears, and I expect they will until 
Christ reveals to us his glory. I was not 
ashamed to come home and tell my family 
and neighbors what a blessed meeting we 
had in Allegheny, and when I would describe 
to them the workings of the meeting, 
they would say, What church was it 
in, I replied, in the church of the first 
born, whose names are written in heaven. 
Blessing and glory and honor and dominion 
and power be unto God and the Lamb 
forever and ever. The veil of predestination 
is rent, and my soul is free. I am 
trusting that the Lord will show me what 
he would have me do, and rain or shine, 
late or early, night or day, I am happy in 
Jesus. Lord, let thy will be done in me. 
I must now close trusting that the Redeemer's 
presence may ever be ours to 
enjoy. J. R. B. 



DEAR TOWER READERS: --We want to 
testify to you all that the meeting of the 
past week in Allegheny has been a season 
of spiritual refreshment to us. We have 
been drawn into closer sympathy and fellowship 
with the brethren and sisters of 
like precious faith, not only those present, 
but all that in every place call upon the 
name of our Lord and Master. 

Our hearts have overflown with love to 
Bro. Russell as we witnessed his patient 
labor for the edification of the household 
of faith. We have been stimulated more 
and more to henceforth know nothing save 
Jesus Christ and Him crucified; to be 
broken and emptied vessels for the Master's 
use made meet. Yours in fellowship, 
BROTHER AND SISTER WEBB. 



R1201 : page 2 
ISRAEL'S DOUBLE. 



It has been suggested that the period 
of Israel's history from the death of Jacob 
to the death of Christ was not a period 
of favor to that people; that the very beginning 
of it was a period of affliction in 
Egypt. Hence it is suggested that our 
treatment of the subject in Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. II., Chapter VII., is correspondingly 
weakened. 

Our readers must learn to be more discriminating 
they should not hastily suppose 
that because some one says thus and 
so, that therefore it is thus and so. Remember 
that some good men jump at 
conclusions hastily, and some who are not 
so good would no more hesitate to twist 
our words on this subject than they would 
to twist the words of Scripture on the doctrine 
of the ransom,— and for the same 
reason, that they might sustain their theory. 
Beloved, believe not every spirit that 
even says, Lord, Lord, but try the spirits 
(doctrines), whether they be of God. 

In the question now before us, notice 
that we never referred to that period of 
Israel's history, from the death of Jacob to 
the death of our Lord, as a period of great 
worldly prosperity to Israel; nor do the 
Scriptures so refer to it. It was, however, 
a period of favor, nevertheless; for it is 



always a favor to be under divine direction 
and supervision. What Christian 
has not learned that God's care is blessed, 
even when that care is exerted in our 
correction and chastisement, or in discipline 
and experiences which tend to bring 
us into a humbler, closer walk with God, 
into a condition where we can the better 
enjoy present privileges and growth in 
grace? And so it was with Israel during 
the period named. They had special 
favor, in that God was leading them as 
a nation through a varied experience for 
their humbling and discipline; an experience 
most favorable for them, as fitting 
them for that place which God had called 
them to fill as a people, under the 
promise made to Abraham, that his 
seed should bless all nations. As a preparation 
for that work of blessing, as God 
intended it, their discipline was indispensable, 
and it was therefore a part of their 
favor to have just the discipline which 
they passed through. 

And let it never be forgotten that 
though Israel as a nation failed to make 
full use of these disciplines, and failed 
consequently to be in readiness for the 
chief blessing when God's time for it 
came, and was consequently rejected as 
a nation until after the selection of the 
Kingdom class from all nations, yet that 
period of disciplinary favor was not 
fruitless; for it did make ready "a remnant" 
of Israel ( Rom. 9:27 ), prepared, 
instructed and adapted to receive and 
transmit to the world the good news of 
the New Covenant, sealed with the Blood 
of Christ. And their period of disciplinary 

R1202 : page 2 

favor, all the way down, developed 
noble characters "of whom the world was 
not worthy" ( Heb. 1 1:38 ), who will yet 
occupy honorable positions as chiefs 
among men, under the Kingdom, when it 
is fully set up and the times of restitution 
have begun. 

With this all in mind, recall our statements 
and the Scripture testimonies on 
the subject of Israel's double;— that the 
first part, from the beginning of the nation 
at the death of Jacob to the rejection 
of the nation at the death of Christ, was 
a period of 1845 years of waiting for the 



promised kingdom, during which they 
had divine favor and supervision (discipline, 
etc.); and that when they then rejected 
and crucified the Redeemer, they 
were sentenced to a "double" or repetition 
of their already long period of waiting 
—during which God would show them 
no favor, manifest no interest in them. 
Every Jew of intelligence and piety is 
able to recognize the fulfilment of these 
predictions of the prophets.— Zech. 9:12 ; 
Jer. 16:18 ; Isa. 40:2 . 

And note the fact so pointedly marked 
—that where their double of waiting for 

the Kingdom expired, the kingdom did 
come in 1878; which we think MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., clearly proves from 
the Scriptures. 



R1202 : page 2 

JAPAN TO BECOME RELIGIOUS. 

The enclosed clipping from the London 
Times is interesting, but proves that 
Japan is becoming Agnostic rather than 
Christian. 

If these Japanese understood that the 
Christian religion inculcates sacrifice, 
would they for a moment consider its 
national adoption? No. The very reverse 
of the truth seems to have been presented 
to them in the name of Christ, 
though in opposition to his words in 
Matt. 10:33-39 . 
Your brother in Christ. 
W. M. WRIGHT. 

THE EXTRACT IS AS FOLLOWS: 

The Japan Weekly Mail, in a recent 
issue, summarizes a discussion now being 
carried on in Japan by eminent publicists 
respecting the advisability of the people 
of that country embracing the Christian 
religion. "A movement supported by 
some very prominent men is on foot to 
give an impetus to the spread of Christianity 
by laying stress on the secondary 
benefits its acceptance insures." Those 
connected with the movement say that 
Christian dogmas are a bitter pill to 
swallow, but advise that it be swallowed 
promptly for the sake of the after effects. 



Mr. Fukuzawa, a well known writer, 
urges this course, although he says he 
takes no personal interest whatever in religion 
and knows nothing of the teaching 
of Christianity; but he sees that it is the 
creed of the most highly civilized nations. 
To him religion is only a garment, to be 
put on or taken off at pleasure; but he 
thinks it prudent that Japan should wear 
the same dress as her neighbors, with 
whom she desires to stand well. Prof. 
Toyama of the Imperial University has 
published a work to support this view. He 
holds that Chinese ethics must be replaced 
by Christian ethics, and that the benefits 
to be derived from the introduction 
of Christianity are: first, the improvement 
of music; second, union of sentiment 
and feeling, leading to harmonious 
co-operation; and, third, the furnishing a 
medium of intercourse between men and 
women. Mr. Kato, the late president of 
the Imperial University, who says that religion 
is not needed for the educated and 
confesses his dislike for all religions 
equally, urges the introduction of religious 
teaching into the government schools, 
on the ground that the unlearned in 
Japan have had their faith in old moral 
standards shaken and that there is now a 
serious lack of moral sentiment among 
the masses. Among the replies to this is 
one by a Mr. Sugiura, who is described as 
"a diligent student of western philosophy 
for many years." He speaks of the specially 
marked lack of religious feeling and 
sentiment in his countrymen; the Japanese, 
he says, have no taste for religion 
whatever, and it is impossible that they 
should ever become a religious people. 
The youth of Japan, he argues, being free 
from the thraldom of creeds and free to 
act according to reason, are so far in advance 
of Europeans; and instead of talking 
about adopting a foreign religion, 
Japanese should go abroad and preach 
their religion of reason to foreign countries. 
Other writers urge the same views. 
The writer in the Yokohama newspaper 
says that those who urge the teaching of 
Christianity represent an influential section 
of educated Japanese opinion; they 
are signs of the times. "To Japan, in an 
emphatically agnostic mood, came western 
science with all its marvelous revelations 
and attractions. At the shrine of 



that science she is worshiping now." 

R1202 : page 2 

NEW VIEWS IN PLYMOUTH CHURCH. 

January 16, Lyman Abbott, D.D., 
was installed pastor of the Plymouth 
church, Brooklyn, N.Y., as the successor 
of Henry Ward Beecher. In the 
presence of the Council of Installation 
he made a lengthy statement of his religious 
belief, which was published in 
full in the Independent of January 23. 
On the subjects of the immortality of the 
soul, and the final disposal of the wicked, 
his views were not only quite pronounced, 
but of such a nature as to render his installation 
something of a surprise from 
the standpoint of the popular theology. 
On the subject of the immortality of the 
soul, he said:— 

"On this and on every other spiritual 
theme, I more and more distrust the 
vaunted 'scientific method,' and more 
and more rest upon personal faith in the 
Christ of God, bearing a witness confirmed 
by the experience of God in my 
own soul. And I more and more incline 
to believe that immortality is not the universal 
attribute of humanity— that God 
alone hath immortality; and that we have 
it only as here or hereafter we are made 
partakers of the divine nature. 

"And when that glad day comes, the 
song of rejoicing will rise from every 
creature in heaven, and on earth and 
under the earth, and such as are in the 
sea. If there are then any voices not 
joining in that choral of redeeming love, 
I believe it will be because they are silent 
in that second death from which there is 
no resurrection." 



"IF a man cannot be a Christian in the 
place where he is, he cannot be a Christian 
anywhere." 



"PERFECT freedom is perfect obedience 
to perfect law." 



R1202 : page 3 

GOD IS GOOD. 

-BY J. G. WHITTIER.- 

friends ! with whom my feet have trod 
The quiet aisles of prayer, 

Glad witness to your zeal for God, 
And love of man, I bear. 

1 trace your lines of argument; 
Your logic, linked and strong, 

I weigh as one who dreads dissent, 
And fears a doubt as wrong. 

But still my human hands are weak 

To hold your iron creeds; 
Against the words ye bid me speak 

My heart within me pleads. 

Who fathoms, the Eternal Thought? 

Who talks of scheme and plan? 
The Lord is God! He needeth not 

The poor device of man. 

I walk with bare, hushed feet the ground 
Ye tread with boldness shod; 

I dare not fix with mete and bound 
The love and power of God. 

Ye praise his justice; even such 

His pitying love I deem: 
Ye seek a king; I fain would touch 

The robe without a seam. 

Ye see the curse which overbroods 

A world of pain and loss; 
I hear our Lord's beatitudes 

And prayer upon the cross. 

More than your schoolmen teach, within 

Myself, alas! I know; 
Too dark ye cannot paint the sin, 

Too small the merit show. 

R1203 : page 3 

I bow my forehead in the dust, 

I veil my eyes for shame, 
And urge, in trembling self-distrust, 

A prayer without a claim. 



I see the wrong that round me lies; 

I feel the guilt within; 
I hear, with groan and travail cries, 

The world confess its sin. 

Yet in the maddening maze of things, 
And tossed by storm and flood, 

To one fixed stake my spirit clings: 
I know that God is good! 

Not mine to look where cherubim 

And seraphs may not see; 
But nothing can be good in him 

Which evil is in me. 

The wrong that pains my soul below 

I dare not throne above: 
I know not of his hate— I know 

His goodness and his love. 

I dimly guess, from blessings known, 

Of greater out of sight, 
And, with the chastened Psalmist, own 

His judgments, too, are right. 

I long for household voices gone, 

For vanished smiles I long, 
But God hath led my dear ones on, 

And he can do no wrong. 

I know not what the future hath 

Of marvel or surprise, 
Assured alone that life and death 

His mercy underlies. 

And if my heart and flesh are weak 

To bear an untried pain, 
The bruised reed he will not break, 

But strengthen and sustain. 

No offering of my own I have, 
Nor works, my faith to prove; 

I can but give the gifts he gave, 
And plead his love for love. 

And so beside the silent sea 

I wait the muffled oar; 
No harm from him can come to me 

On ocean or on shore. 

I know not where his islands lift 

Their fronded palms in air; 
I only know I cannot drift 

Beyond his love and care. 

O brothers! if my faith is vain, 



If hopes like these betray, 
Pray for me, that my feet may gain 
The safe and surer way. 

And thou, O Lord! by whom are seen 

Thy creatures as they be, 
Forgive me, if too close I lean 

My human heart on thee. 

REPLY. 

-BY MRS. C. T. RUSSELL.- 

Ho! weary, longing, fainting souls 
Who thus in darkness grope, 

And drift amidst the dang'rous shoals- 
Steer by yon star of hope! 

That star of hope, our risen Lord, 

Jesus, the crucified, 
Will guide you safely into port, 

Beyond this stormy tide. 

I, too, have drifted on that sea, 
Its rocks and shoals have feared; 

But, praise the Lord who leadeth me! 
The shores of rest I've neared. 

And to-day I'm in the harbor, 
And the dawn of earth's new age 

Is brightly beaming on me 
Through the blessed, sacred page. 

O! midst "the maddening maze of things, 
And tossed by storm and flood," 

I'm glad thy faith with patience clings 
To hope that God is good. 

Indeed he is both good and wise, 

A Friend and Helper true. 
His plan, discovered to our eyes, 

To hope gives courage new. 

Thou sayest, "Who talks of scheme and plan, 
Or fathoms God's deep thought? 

He needeth not device of man." 
O! hast thou not forgot— 

That in his Word the promise lies, 

"The wise shall understand," 
That all its hidden mysteries 

In "due time" shall be scanned?— 

And that "the pathway of the just 

Is as the shining light," 
And that it "shineth more," and must, 



Till faith is lost in sight? 

True, none hath been God's counselor, 
And none could trace his thought, 

Till the divine Instructor, 
The truth to light had brought. 

Thou needest not to "dimly guess" 
That God some good will bring, 

For lo! in pow'r and righteousness, 
Behold earth's coming King! 

Do the Scriptures not declare it? 

Hast thou not clearly read 
That which all the holy prophets 

From dawn of time have said?— 

O! "the time of glad refreshing 

From presence of the Lord" 
Is the blissful hope of blessing 

We have from his sure Word. 

Give o'er the clashing creeds of men, 

And vain tradition's lore; 
Trust not to reason's feeble ken, 

But search the Scriptures more. 

Keep the bright star of hope in sight, 
And past the dang'rous shoal, 

Into the port of rest and light, 
'Twill guide thy weary soul. 

And yet before thou comest down 

To the dark and "silent sea," 
The blessings of God's truth shall crown 

Thy four-score years and three. 

Thy love and rev'rence, faith and hope, 

Are precious in God's sight, 
While in the darkness thou dost grope 

And hope and pray for light. 

Behold One standeth at thy side, 

All glorious and fair! 
'Tis earth's new King, thy risen Lord, 

Who marks and heeds thy prayer. 

Far out upon the stormy tide 

To thee he comes, O see! 
And reaches out a "Helping Hand," 

To cheer and comfort thee. 

Nor canst thou lean too heavily 
Upon his might and strength; 

His arm is strong, his grace is free; 
Here thou mayst rest at length. 



page 3 

Wilder waves may lash in fury 
About thine anchored soul; 

God's truth will hold thee steady, 
Storms must yield to his control. 

His truth, thy shield and buckler too, 
Thy strong support must be, 

And every line both old and new 
Be meat and drink for thee. 



R1204 : page 3 
"THEN THE END." 
- 1 COR. 15:24-28 .-- 

A few words upon this topic are requested 
by several readers. We will be brief, 
as the subject has already been touched upon 
in "The Plan of The Ages" and in the 
TOWER, and will be thoroughly dealt with 
under the topic of "The Resurrection" in 
Vol. IV. of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

The Apostle's theme is the resurrection 
of the dead. He declares the resurrection 
to be the very essence of the Gospel 
(good-tidings)— the great result which 
our Lord Jesus died to secure; the great 
object for which he has promised to come 
a second time. He declares that the 
resurrection of Jesus from the dead is itself 
a first-fruit and a pledge of the resurrection 
of those whose resurrection God 
has promised. He shows ( verse 21 ) that 
since by a man (came) death, by a man 
also (is to come) the resurrection of the 
dead; that as in Adam all die, even so in 
Christ shall all be made alive; God having 
arranged, through the ransom which Christ 
Jesus gave for all, that all who come into 
relationship with Christ the Redeemer 
may inherit lasting life, even as all by 
relationship with Adam the transgressor 
inherited his condemnation to death. 

But, the Apostle explains, while all 
those who come into relationship with 
Christ shall receive lasting life, all will 
not receive it at the same time. There is to 
be an order in Christ's work of life-giving. 
And ( verse 23 ) every man who receives 
life from the Life-giver will belong to one 



or another of these orders. As our Lord 
himself is head and chief of all, so those 
of the little flock counted worthy to constitute 
the body of Christ will have preeminence 
over others and will constitute 
the first order or rank in resurrection 
—"The Resurrection"— "the first resurrection" 
(Phil. 3:10-11 ; Rev. 20:6 ). And 
after Christ and his little flock have thus 
been resurrected as a first-fruits, the work 
of resurrecting men shall continue— every 
man in his own order, until ALL WHO 
ARE CHRIST'S at (or during) his presence, 
during his Millennial reign, until all who 
under the full light and privilege of the 
Millennial age come into him by faith and 
become inheritors of the life which he gives 
shall have availed themselves of the privilege. 
This will be at the close of the 
Millennial Age; for he shall reign a 
thousand years. ( Rev. 20:6 ). "Then 
the end, when he shall have delivered over 
the Kingdom to God, even the Father." 
- 1 Cor. 2:24 . 

The thought is this: The earth as a 
province of God's Kingdom got into a 
state of rebellion and alienation from 
God through the disloyalty of its first 
king, Adam. The entire province was 
therefore justly placed under interdict of 
the King, and its prince, Adam, and all 
his house, sentenced to death— destruction. 

Yet the great King, Jehovah, was full 
of compassion for such of the culprits 
as were repentant and who desired to return 
to harmony and obedience. He therefore 
arranged a gracious plan for the recovery 
of such: a plan by which his justice and 
the original law of his empire— death to all 
unholy traitors— should remain, and yet 
these repentant ones be released from the 
penalty of this one transgression. He 
gave his Son to be their Redeemer. 

The redeeming of some meant the redeeming 
of all; for all were under the one 
sentence through the one king's rebellion; 
hence he redeemed all and proposed 
to give an equal opportunity to all, to return 
to the Lord and be abundantly pardoned, 
by arranging that the Son who 
performed the redemptive work should 
establish a Provisional Government 
among the degraded rebels, in and under 
which all should be compelled for a time 
to witness and share the operation of 
laws of righteousness and love, and be 



made aware of the cause of their degradation 
and of the plan of reconciliation 
held out. This reign will be so ordered 
as to give to all the fullest knowledge and 
opportunity of reconciliation, and each 
one who accepts the conditions obediently, 
and proves his fellowship with this kingdom 
of God, shall receive its blessing, and be 
enabled to progress onward to the full 
perfection of life and manhood lost by 
Adam. This new king of earth, deputized 
for this very purpose, shall effectually 
put down all misrule, and all authority 
and power opposed to the law of the 
great Jehovah. Every enemy shall be 
trodden under foot,— destroyed. Even 
death, the penalty or wages of sin, in the 
sense that it is an enemy, when it would 
destroy those under its power, who have 
come back into the family of God 
through the Redeemer, is to be "rendered 
powerless." It shall no longer 
have any power as an enemy, to triumph 
over those whom Christ has redeemed 
and reconciled. But death as an enemy 
will be the last enemy to be set aside or 
rendered powerless. The Redeemer and 
King will subdue the various other enemies 
of his ransomed people first; and even those 
who fully return to allegiance to God 
during that Millennial reign will be subject 
or liable to this enemy's power in a 
limited degree, down until the full close 
of his reign, when evil doers shall all have 
been "cut off" from all hope of life in 
"the second death," the penalty of 
their own wilful sins. And when the 
Lord's redeemed ones shall have been 
brought to full perfection, moral and 
physical, under his care and tuition, the 
death which came upon all through 
Adam's disobedience— which was the 
enemy or opponent of such as desired 
harmony with God, the enemy from 
whose dominion and power Christ died 
to redeem such —shall no longer exist in 
any degree. 

The rebellious province having thus 
been redeemed and conquered by the 
Prince and Savior, in the Father's name 
and as his representative, establishing his 
laws and obedience thereto (every enemy 
to righteousness and truth having been 
either corrected by a fuller knowledge of 
the truth or "destroyed from among the 
people" ( Acts 3:23 ), the Lord Jesus 



will deliver up the then rectified and 
peaceful province, henceforth to be a 
portion of the one kingdom of God 
under the one Sovereign— Jehovah— that 
God may be the recognized head over all 
—the All over all. 

What the Lord Jesus and the glorified 
"body," his "bride" and "joint-heir," 
are to do, after the Millennial reign, is 
not clearly revealed. But of this we 
may rest well assured, that the Almighty 
Jehovah's plan, hitherto so grand and so 
far above all that we could have asked or 
thought of, has with equal bounty arranged 
for our future work in his service. 

Continuing his argument ( v. 27 ), the 
Apostle recapitulates the case thus:— 

"For he [Jehovah] hath [promised to] 
put down all things under his [Christ's] 
feet [to make him Lord of all], yet, when 
he [Jehovah] saith [of Christ] that all 
things are put under him [or are to be 
subject to him], it is manifest [that Jehovah 
did not mean by that promise of 
the high exaltation of Christ that he 
would exalt him and his authority superior 
to himself and his own authority] 
that he [Jehovah] is excepted which [by 
his plan and power, by promise gave to 

R1204 : page 4 

Christ this high station and] did put all 
things under him." 

"And [hence] when [i.e. after] all 
things shall be subjugated unto him 
[Christ], then shall [Christ] the Son also, 
himself be subject unto him [Jehovah] 
that [by promise as well as by delegated 
authority and power] did put all things 
under him [Christ], so that * the God 
[Jehovah] may be the All in all— [the 
supreme over all]." 



*See the Greek text. 

R1204 : page 4 

"PROVE ALL THINGS." 

"Prove all things; hold fast that which 
is good."— 1 Thes. 5:21 . 



A wise suggestion, Paul, says one, but 
not altogether practicable in my case. 
I am a plain man with little education and 
many pressing cares which leave but little 
time or mental vigor to grapple with the 
theological questions which exercise the 
minds of many, or to prove or disprove the 
leading dogmas which characterize the 
various religious factions. Why, it seems 
to me it would require a life-time given 
exclusively to the work, to prove all 
things. There are the scores and hundreds 
of sectarian creeds of Christendom 
with their great and multiplied volumes of 
theology and fine-spun theories, each 
pushing its claims to the front. And in 
these days the new factions and theories 
coming up are legion. Indeed, every 
day's mail carries thousands of religious 
journals advocating the claims of some 
theories, claiming to be truth; and if a 
man were to do nothing else, he could not 
possibly read the thousandth part of such 
literature. 

Now what is a plain man like me to 
do? I want the truth, but how shall I 

find it and prove it? I believe the Bible 
to be indeed the Word of God given to 
us through his inspired apostles and prophets. 
I believe in the God of the Bible 
and have long trusted in the salvation 
provided through the sacrifice of his dear 
Son. But while I hold these precious 
old doctrines and will not relinquish my 
interest in them, my Bible teaches me 
to expect an increase of light, and specially 
in the last days of the age, in 
which all Christians admit we are living. 

Daniel (12:4,9,10 ) says that in the time of 
the end, the wise shall understand, and 
that knowledge shall be increased. I am 
looking for this promised increase of 
knowledge, for the light "shining more 
and more unto the perfect day;" but how 

R1205 : page 4 

shall I prove which is advanced truth and 
which the error, against which the 
Apostle forewarns us, saying, "In the last 
days perilous times shall come," etc.? 
Is it possible, I ask, for a plain, common 
sense Christian man, without any special 
learning, to comply with the Apostle's 
injunction and prove all things? and if 



so, how shall I go about it? 

Yes, we reply, it is possible. If the 
desire for truth is paramount to every 
other desire, so that the inquirer will so 
bend his circumstances as to make opportunities 
for study and investigation of the 
truth, as it becomes due, he shall find 
and rejoice in it. And though at a cursory 
glance the wide field of investigation 
is indeed formidable, there is a short and 
feasible process, by which both the 
learned and the unlearned, if simple-hearted 
and sincere, may arrive at clear 
and positive convictions, and henceforth 
be able to give to every man that asketh a 
reason for the hope that is in them. 

We find our infallible rule, for measuring 
and proving all things, in the Bible. 
By its testimony every doctrine having 
any claim upon our attention must be 
measured. If any system presented to us 
finds its main support outside the Bible, 
it must at once be labeled, suspicious, 
even though it call in occasional scripture 
texts to support its theories; for we well 
know that almost every pernicious doctrine 
that could be conceived of has 
claimed Bible support by quoting passages 
and perverting them. 

Bear in mind that the doctrine of the 
Lord and the apostles clearly accepted the 
account in Genesis— of man's creation in 
the likeness of God, pure and sinless, 
"very good;" of his fall into sin and the 
consequent penalty of death, entailed not 
only upon himself, but also upon all his 
posterity, whom he represented in trial. 
Then it set forth the remedy for sin and 
its consequences, showing that the death 
of Christ on Calvary was the appointed 
means for the world's redemption. And to 
this fact all the Old Testament prophets 
also testify, showing that without the 
shedding of blood there could be no remission 
of sins. 

This doctrine was first enunciated in 
the promise of deliverance given in Eden 
and typified in the clothing for Adam and 
Eve provided by the shedding of blood. It 
was foreshadowed in the sacrifices of Abel 
and all the early Patriarchs, and by all 
the blood of bulls and goats and rams 
that for centuries flowed around the typical 
altars of the typical tabernacle. It 
was foretold by the prophets who prophesied 
of the coming One as the lamb for 



the slaughter, and foretold all the painful 
circumstances of his sacrificial death. (See 
Isa. 53 ;Zech. 11:12 ; Psa. 27:12; 35:11 ; 

109:2 ; Zech. 13:7 ; Psa. 22:14,17 ; 

89:45 ; 102:24 ; 69:21 ; 34:20 ; 

22:18 ; Isa. 53:9,12 ; Zech. 14:4,6 ; 
Amos 5:20 . 

Then, the accomplished fact was recorded 
by the Evangelists who were his disciples, 
the companions of his ministry, and 
eye-witnesses of his sufferings and death. 
This was the grand foundation stone upon 
which the whole superstructure of the 
apostles' doctrine was systematically built 
up. Paul, the great builder of the Christian 
system, gathering the data of his 
arguments from the law and the prophets 
and the notable events of the ministry 
and sacrifice of the Lord in his own day, 
weaves the whole into a grand and logical 
system of faith, of which Christ crucified 
is the foundation stone, and Christ glorified, 
the hope of the world's restitution, 
is the crowning feature. Then, so confident 
is his faith in this divinely attested 
truth, that he adds, "Though we, or an 
angel from heaven, preach any other 
doctrine, let him be accursed;"— for he 
should know better in view of all the 
divine testimony herein furnished.— 
Gal. 1:9 . 

This foundation doctrine, therefore, is 
the first measure by which we must test 
every religious system presented to us 
which is at all worthy of our consideration. 
If it is not built squarely upon 
this foundation, it is utterly unworthy of 
further investigation, whatever may be its 
claims; but if built upon this foundation, 
it is worthy of at least some further 
attention. 

In applying this first rule, the work of 
proving all things is quickly simplified. 
We do not need to examine into all the intricacies 
of every elaborate system concocted 
by diseased human imaginations, 
which would be a worse than useless waste 
of time. Simply looking at the foundation 
will decide the matter in very many 
cases. If they are wrong here, further 
examination is unnecessary: they cannot 
be true, and however plausible they may 
appear, they can only be the efforts of 
thieves and robbers who attempt to show 
men how to climb up some other way into 
the sheep-fold. And only idle curiosity, 



to see what human ingenuity can suggest 

as another way of salvation, can be interested 

in such investigation. Bear in mind 

that fundamental principle of all sound 

reasoning, that the superstructure of any 

system can only be brought to the same 

level of credibility as the premise or 

foundation with which it starts, and upon 

which it is built. If, therefore, the foundation 

is wrong, the whole superstructure 

is erroneous; and every moment of precious 

time spent in studying the fine-spun 

theories of such a system, which you have 

thus already proved to be erroneous, is 

time taken from the study of the truth, 

from putting on the armor of God, and 

is filling the mind with the subtle sophistries 

of the adversary, instead of the 

sound logic of divine truth, and thus preparing 

the way for the overthrow of faith, 

instead of establishing it in sound doctrine. 

By promptly applying this rule you can 
quickly determine what is of God and 
what of man, prompted by the seductive 
spirit of our great adversary. It may 
come to you even from the hands of an 
angel of light— a messenger of truth, a 
brother in Christ who has not discerned 
the sophistry of error and who therefore 
needs your assistance to discern it. It 
may come clothed in the garments of 
light— with smooth and pious phrases 
about the wonderful love of God and the 
spirit of his word, and the glorious hope 
of the world; but all these are often merely 
the cloaks of that pernicious no-ransom, 
evolution doctrine, which denies that man 
was created in the image of God; that he 
fell from that high estate, and that 
through the fall of that representative one 
sentence came upon all men to condemnation, 
as Paul declares ( Rom. 5:18 ); 
which consequently goes further and denies 
the necessity of a redeemer, or that 
Christ came for any such purpose; which 
claims therefore that Christ was the Savior 
of the world merely by setting a good 
example for men to copy, and not by giving 
his life a ransom. Then they laud this 
Savior of the world (who saves them by 
his good example only, but whose precious 
blood availed nothing for them); 
and they talk loudly of the wonderful 
love of God, while they kick from under 
his love the firm support of his justice, 
which the Scriptures declare could by no 



means clear the guilty, until the handwriting 
of the law, which was against us, 
condemning us to death, was canceled 
by the "precious blood of Christ." 
( Col. 2:14 ). And in their zeal to magnify 
his love and make their theories look 
plausible, they run to an excess which denies 
man's free agency and God's expressed 
purpose of destroying the wilfully 
disobedient ones in the second death. 
Thus they misrepresent the love of God 
as a weak and fickle element of the divine 
character, falsify the real spirit of 
his word and build up a false and delusive 
hope for the world— a hope founded 
upon a supposed weakness of the divine 
character. 

Some who advocate these doctrines 
once enjoyed the clearer light of present 
truth, having escaped from many of the 
errors of the great nominal churches, and 
consequently they are able to weave in 
with the error some of the beautiful features 
of present truth and therefore they 
are all the more able ministers of error, 
all the more calculated to lead astray 
and again entangle those who had clean 
escaped from the errors of great Babylon. 

They talk of the doctrine of Restitution 
(restoration), but seem not to notice its 
utter incompatibility with their evolution 
theory. If man never was perfect 
and in the image of God and never fell, 
but has been coming nearer to perfection, 
to restore him would only be 
to degrade him. 

Beware of such doctrines, even though 
they come clothed in garments of light. 
They are revolutionary of the whole 
Christian faith: their reasoning is the 
subtle sophistry of the adversary, voiced 
by his deceived and deluded ministers, 
and their hope is vain and delusive. It 
is these stumbling-blocks and snares 
which constitute a large part of the peril 
of this evil day; but how quickly and 
promptly they may be dispatched if we 
apply the infallible Bible rule above referred 
to. And as you value your privilege 
of building up your brother in the 
"most holy faith," beware how you place 
in his way any of these stumbling-stones. 
Remember Paul's injunction, "If any 
man speak, let him speak as the oracle of 
God." Let his words be "words of truth 
and soberness," and let him lead on in the 



pathway of light, strengthening the weak 
hands and confirming the feeble knees. 

But, says our inquirer, are there not 
some systems right at the foundation and 
far astray from truth in the superstructure? 
and how shall we prove them? Yes, 
very true. Such is the case with the various 
Protestant systems. They all hold 
the foundation doctrine of the apostles 
and prophets, and they have always made 
prominent the vicarious atonement, but 
on this foundation O! how recklessly they 
have built. Finding them right here, we 
have proceeded further, only to find the 
buildings each and all miserably constructed 
of the wood and hay and stubble of 
human imaginations and traditions, evidently 
put together in a most haphazard 
way, without plan or design or square or 

R1206 : page 4 

compass; yet each has in it some valuable 
elements of truth, vaguely perceived and 
often greatly mixed and confounded with 
errors and gross absurdities. None of 
them, however, present that system of 
truth for which our inquirer is in search. 

Indeed, after nearly two centuries spent 
in building these various Protestant structures, 
though they stand as nearly complete 
as human ingenuity has been able to 
make them, propped at the corners by the 
great piles of theological works of 
Watson, Calvin, Hodge, Clarke, 
Benson, et al., in the light of the present 
day of intellectual awakening, what 
a ludicrous spectacle they present. Indeed, 
they begin to look so even to those 
inside. The thoughtful among them are 
actually getting ashamed of them and 
talking about revision; but in all probability 
before they are fully waked up to the 
necessity for revision, the winds and the 
storms of the coming trouble of this day 
of the Lord will accomplish the work 
most thoroughly by razing them to the 
foundation. 

While we see that by first examining the 
foundation principles, to discover if they 
are sound and scriptural, we dispose of a 
large class of this latter-day teaching 
quickly and promptly, and without danger 
of contamination, we will also see 
that it will be no Herculean task to dispose 
of the many wood, hay and stubble superstructures 



which reckless builders have 
erected on the true foundation. "To 
the law and to the testimony;" says the 
prophet, "if they speak not according to 
this word, it is because there is no light 
in them." ( Isa. 8:20 .) Every doctrine, 
therefore, which has any claims upon our 
faith, should, from the foundation up, 
(as far as it seems worthy of investigation) 
step by step, be brought to the test of the 
word and the testimony; and all for which 

R1206 : page 5 

there cannot be found a "Thus saith the 
Lord," must be promptly rejected, and 
all to which his word testifies as truth, 

"held fast" and not allowed to slip. — 
Heb. 4:14 ; 2:1 ; Rev. 3:11 . 

Thus the stones of our faith-building 
may be received through whatsoever channels 
the Lord may be pleased to send 
them. They must all have been quarried 
out of the Bible mine, but God may send 
one or another of his blessed angels (ministers, 
servants) to point them out to you 
or to help you to place them. He may be 
a very humble servant and one through 
whom you would least have expected the 
enlightenment of God's truth; but no 
matter if he be ever so insignificant 
in the estimation of men, remember that 
God hath chosen the things which in the 
world's estimation are foolish and weak 
to confound the things which are mighty, 
and the things which the world counts 
mean and despises as unworthy of notice, 
to bring to nought the things that are— 
the great and long established systems of 
error.- 1 Cor. 1:26-29 . 

Thus systematically built up, stone by 
stone, proved and carefully fitted together 
and founded on the solid Rock of ages, 
your faith will be a symmetrical, harmonious 
structure, strong, secure and beautiful, 
which the winds and the floods cannot 
damage or overturn. "My sheep hear 
my voice," said our Master, "and they 
follow me, and a stranger they will not 
follow, for they know not the voice of 
strangers." ( John 10:1-5,27 .) They 
shun all profane babblings of science, 
falsely so-called ( 2 Tim. 2:16 ; 1 Tim. 6:20 ), 
and being close students of the 
divine word— living very close to that 
fountain of truth and drinking deep of 



its spirit— they are prepared to quickly detect 
error, even though it lurk behind a 
very plausible semblance of truth. And 
the Lord who puts forth his sheep and 
goeth before them, and calleth them all 
by name, will not leave his obedient ones 
in doubt and fear. And they will ever 
beware of the thieves and robbers who 
attempt to climb into the fold in any other 
than the appointed way which God hath 
ordained. 

A very great mistake which some have 
made, in view of the conflicting ideas as 
to what is truth, has been to discard every 
human instrumentality and expect God's 
guidance through the Bible alone. Such 
forget that God gave some apostles, and 
some prophets, and some evangelists, and 
some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting 
of the saints, for the work of the ministry, 
for the edifying of the body of 
Christ;" that we are exhorted to build 
one another up in the holy faith and to 
esteem the servants of God for their 
work's sake. Ever since the church has 
had an existence God has raised up some 
from its midst, as special servants of the 
body, some who had special teaching ability. 
And blessed is that servant who at 
the Master's appearing is found giving 
the meat in due season to the household of 
faith. ( Matt. 24:46 .) And no less blessed 
is the faithful household, who, like the 
"noble Bereans" of old, search the Scriptures 
daily to see if these things be so— 
who prove all things, as the apostle exhorts, 
and hold fast that which is good. 

In both searching for truth ourselves, and 
in giving it to others, we need to take heed 
to the methods and instrumentalities which 
God is making use of. Thus, for instance, 
in the days of the early church oral teaching, 
with gifts of tongues and interpretation 
of tongues, and miracles, etc., were 
the principle instrumentalities for the edification 
of the church, because books and 
general education were not the privileges 
of the masses of the people, and the 
New Testament Scriptures were not completed 
and compiled until about the 
close of the first century of the Christian 
era. In the days of the great 
Reformation, while oral teaching was most 
largely used, the newly invented printing 
presses came in for a large share of the 
work, in placing in the hands of the people, 



not only the Bible, but also the stirring 

exhortations and teachings and various 

helps of brethren in the faith. And 

in the present time by far the largest part 

of the work of disseminating present truth 

is through the agency of the press, and 

comparatively little oral teaching of present 

truth is found expedient, since God 

has raised up very few with the talent for 

public speaking; and to the few who possess 

it, the opportunities for using it are 

remarkably limited, as it is found by experience 

that very many more can be induced 

to read than to attend public lectures 

on present truth. And God is honoring 

this method by bringing very many 

of his consecrated children into this line 

of service as traveling colporteurs and 

blessing their work to the awakening and 

sealing of his own elect, wheresoever they 

may be scattered. 

Thus, through humble instruments, 
who as the angels of God quickly and 
quietly do their work and disappear, God 
himself is honored, and they await his appearing 
and kingdom for their exaltation 
and reward. The proud and unworthy 
ones esteem them not and will not hear 
their message, but those who hunger and 
thirst after truth and righteousness are 
filled. God bless his faithful messengers 
and all the elect who are being sealed 
through their ministrations. 



R1206 : page 5 

JERUSALEM AWAKING. 

(To the Editor of the Christian World.) 

SIR,— Anything indicative of an awakening 
and a revival of energy in the 
Holy Land, especially at Jerusalem, must 
prove of especial interest to every Christian 
who is watching the signs of the 
times. Being now on a visit to the 
Holy City for the seventh time, after a 
considerable interval, I find the changes 
that have recently occurred so marked 
and suggestive that I am induced to indicate 
some of the most prominent for the 
information of your large circle of readers, 
many of whom, I feel sure, are deeply 
interested in the future of this land of 



sacred memories. 

On approaching the city from the west, 
in former years, there were scarcely any 
buildings except the Russian Convent and 
the Montefiore Almshouses to intercept 
the view of the city walls; now the whole 
plain is covered with private residences 
and colonies of Jews, whilst near to the 
Jaffa Gate are large numbers of shops 
already tenanted, and numerous others in 
course of construction. This extension 
beyond the walls has become necessary, 
on account of the rapid increase of the 
population. I am informed by Mr. 
Moore, British consul here, that within 
the last three or four years about 20,000 
Jews have come to Jerusalem for permanent 
residence in and around the city, 
and that of the entire population of about 
70,000, it is estimated that nearly 40,000 
are Jews. He also stated that the influx 
of Jews into other parts of Palestine 
during recent years has been entirely 
without precedent. The principal streets, 
which, but a few years since, were almost 
impassable in rainy weather, have been 
paved with stone, a new wide street has 
been opened up through a densely-populated 
quarter, and five hotels are now open 
for the reception of the annually-increasing 
number of visitors and traders from all 
lands. Public works of importance have 
been erected, and others are in progress. 
The road from Jaffa to Jerusalem, at one 
time all but impracticable, has been reconstructed 
by an eminent engineer, and over 
it our own and other carriage services are 
in full operation. A good road has been 
formed from Jerusalem to Bethlehem, and 
another from Jerusalem to Hebron; several 
others are rapidly approaching completion 
—from Jaffa to Nablous (Shechem), 
40 miles; Jerusalem to Jericho 20 miles; 
Caipha to Nazareth 20 miles; and Nazareth 
to Tiberias 18 miles. Jerusalem 
has hitherto been almost wholly dependent 

R1207 : page 5 

for its water supply upon its large underground 

cisterns for the reception of 

rain water, which, after a summer's 

drought, often proves insufficient in quantity, 

and almost unfit for use. The Government 

is now about to introduce an unfailing 

supply from a spring of pure water 



beyond Solomon's Pools— about nine 
miles distant. A large flour mill, established 
by the Messrs. Bergheim, has 
proved both a great benefit and a financial 
success, and others with large steam 
power are in progress of erection; soap 
factories have commenced operations, and 
at Jaffa steam saw-mills have been established. 
Colonies of Jews following agricultural 
pursuits, stated to be successful, 
are located, one about five miles from 
Jaffa, and a larger one at Limerin, near 
Caesarea, originated and assisted by the 
Rothschild family. The before-named 
road to Jericho is being constructed by the 
Government, which has taken up all the 
land available in the best parts of the 
Valley for the development of an extensive 
scheme of agricultural operations, 
which, with such a temperature, so fertile 
a soil, and well watered by the copious 
stream from Elisha's fountain, should 
promise abundant and remunerative crops. 
Grapes, bananas, sugar-cane, cotton and 
various fruits and vegetables have for some 
time past been cultivated here with much 
success. The increased amount of rain 
which has fallen the last few years in Palestine 
has had a most marked effect in 
larger and more abundant harvests than 
hitherto known. 

The most important results, however, 
of all may be anticipated from the railway 
about to be constructed between Jaffa 
and Jerusalem. As rumors in former 
years have prevailed which have never 
been realized, I called upon Mr. Frutiger, 
the banker, to whom the concession has 
been granted by the Turkish Government, 
and was assured by him that the necessary 
capital has been subscribed, and that the 
work would commence immediately 
upon the close of the rainy season in the 
early spring, and pushed on urgently to 
completion. The influence such a line of 
communication between Jerusalem and 
the coast may be expected to exert is incalculable, 
for as a natural sequence the 

harbor, which is now inaccessible to Mediterranean 
steamers, must be deepened 
and enlarged, and the rocky barrier which 
prevents ingress removed. It is contemplated 
to subsequently extend this line 
via Gaza and El-Arish over the Short 
desert to Port Said and Ismaila on the 
Maritime Canal, thus connecting with the 



railway system of Lower Egypt for Cairo, 
Alexandria, and Suez, and to the Fayoum 
and Upper Egypt. Such important action 
for the improvement of the Holy 
City and the development of the resources 
of Palestine, and opening up the 
country to commerce, is without precedent 
in modern times. These facts must 
encourage every lover of God's ancient 
people to hope that His set time to favor 
Zion is fast approaching. Yours 
faithfully, HENRY GAZE. 
Jerusalem, December 5, 1889. 



R1207 : page 5 

MODERN ENGLISH JEWS. 



In London, November 9th, with exceptional 
pomp and ceremonies, a new 
Lord Mayor was inducted to office, and for 
the third time in the past twenty years 
this dignitary is a Jew. 

Cable dispatches have pointed out the 
most interesting fact that his election completes 
the seventh century of the title's 
existence, and that in the year when history 
first mentions it— that is in 1 189— 
there was a most furious and relentless 
persecution of the Jews in London, 
and, for that matter, throughout England, 
when it was thought a specially clever 
and fitting thing to wring out of the Hebrews 
the expenses for an expedition to 
rescue the Holy Sepulchre. The fatuity of 
those crusades, which so occupied succeeding 
generations of Europe's strongest 
manhood, is almost grotesquely apparent 
when we reflect that, while seven 
hundred years later the Paynim infidel is 
still the master of Jerusalem, a Jew holds 
the office which Richard invented as a 
part of his general plan of exterminating 
Moslem and Jew alike. History contains 
no grimmer sarcasm on race hatreds and 
religious idiocy. 

The triumph of the Jew is quite a recent 
thing in England, but it is none the 
less complete. Of course, the barriers 
remained against his religion long after 
those reared against his nationality had 
been swept away. The Christianized 
Disraelis were able for more than one 
decade to look over the fence at the Isaacs 



and Cohens and Levys huddled forlornly 

outside the pale. It is now barely over 

thirty years since the first Jew, Baron 

Lionel Nathan de Rothschild, was allowed 

to take his seat in the House of Commons. 

And up to 1830 they were rigorously 

shut out of not only municipal public 

life but out of many professional avocations. 

The Jew, sixty years ago, in 

England, could not enter the army or 

navy; he could not be a barrister or solicitor, 

or even a solicitor's clerk; he could 

not even be a schoolmaster or usher at a 

school. He had no right to vote, even, 

if any one chose to challenge him. 



To-day there are some fifteen orthodox 
Hebrews in the House of Commons, and 
as many more, perhaps, who are wholly 
or in part of the ancient Hebraic blood. 
Baron de Worms, Rothschild, Mundella, 
Goldsmid, Montagu, Jacoby, Samuelson, 
and many other equally obvious and familiar 
names appear now on the roll 
which could not be signed thirty-one 
years ago save "on my true faith as a 
Christian." There are numerous other 
most Christian-looking names which 
mask Jewish identity. 

Commercially the Jew is, of course, at 
his very strongest in London, but only 
because London is his largest field. He 
is scarcely stronger here, relatively, I 
should think, than in New York, Paris, 
Berlin, Frankfort, or Vienna. But socially 
and professionally he has a position 
in England immeasurably superior to that 
which he has been able to win elsewhere. 
He is in the peerage here in his own 
male right, as well as by proxy through 
daughters married to nobles like Lord 
Rosebery. He blossoms luxuriantly all 
over the baronetage and the list of knights. 
In science, art, literature, music, politics, 
the law, the stage, and latterly even in 
the army, he flourishes like a green-bay 
tree. In every circle which talent or 

R1207 : page 6 

culture, or even mere liking for these, 

makes for itself, you find admirable representatives 

of the race at its best. For 

here it is at its best. 



One proof— a signal proof— of this is 
that practically no disposition exists to 
evade or deny the historic descent from 
Israel. The London Jew is now proud 
of his race, and of its achievements and 
astonishing virility, and likes to talk about 
them with people who are interested. 

To the contrary, there has always elsewhere 
been a certain constraint in touching 
upon this subject of race, much as if 
there had been a recent death in the family. 
This was ten or a dozen years ago 
as true of London, but that is all changed 
now. 



R1207 : page 6 

HOW PROTESTANT (?) MINISTERS 

WELCOMED A ROMAN CARDINAL. 

As a straw indicating what we have 
for some time pointed out— the tendency 
of Protestantism to fraternize with Roman 
Catholicism— we note the fact that 
when Cardinal Gibbons visited Charleston, 
S.C., recently to lay the cornerstone 
of a new Cathedral, he was given a 
public reception, and a number of Protestant 
ministers and a Jewish rabbi occupied 
seats upon the platform beside the Cardinal 
and his under bishops during the 
services. Only one protestant, W.T. 
Thompson, pastor of the Scotch Presbyterian 
Church, was found, and his protest 
reads thus:— 

"The presence of these Protestants was 
doubtless intended only as a courtesy, but 
it was more— it was a virtual endorsement 
of those proceedings, and a godspeed to 
the gigantic ecclesiastical organization 
that conducted them. It is the boast of 
that church that it is the only church of 
God. The Cardinal said as much yesterday. 
It brands all others as heretics. A 
former bishop of Charleston declared, 
'Within thirty years the Protestant heresy 
will come to an end.' It claims for itself 
temporal and spiritual supremacy. It tolerates 
those who differ from it, only where 
it has not the power to enforce its claims. 
Its spirit has undergone no change since 
those days when it gave its order for, and 
sang its Te Deum over, the wholesale, indiscriminate 



slaughter of helpless 
Protestants. 

"Its fundamental principles are antagonistic 
to our government and its most 
cherished institutions. Its growth in this 
country menaces some of our dearest rights 
and privileges. Notes of warning have 
come to us from many of the foremost 

R1208 : page 6 

statesmen and thinkers as to what we may 

expect, should it ever gain the ascendancy; 

and yet we have the spectacle of Protestant 

preachers and laymen, some of 

them the descendants of Huguenots, glorifying 

a Romish Cardinal and encouraging 

the extension of the spiritual despotism 

here presents. Had the circumstances 

been reversed, Romanists would have 

been conspicuous by their absence. 

"I contend that Protestants are sacrificing 
their history and are putting contempt 
upon their martyr dead, are stultifying 
their former testimony and are sweeping 
the ground from under their feet as to 
mission work in Romish lands, and are imperiling 
the future of their country by favoring 
Romish pretension and progress." 
— W. T. Thompson, Pastor. 

Is it not quite evident that the world is 
rapidly getting ready for a Religious-Union-Trust, 
in which Protestants will 
unite, and then join hands with Rome to 
carry forward their plans and schemes 
which have so much in common, and to 
oppose the development and promulgation 
of any further light upon God's plan? 
God's word clearly indicates this outcome, 
and we see the signs of it increasing daily. 

If this desire for union were upon a 
proper basis, if all were willing to abandon 
sectarian names and bonds and confessions 
to come together voluntarily as one 
company, recognizing all who love the 
Redeemer and desire to serve him and to 
secure and preserve to themselves and to 
each other the freedom which God designed 
for each, and desiring each one to 
study God's Word to learn his will without 
prejudice— that would be a proper 
union, a union such as our Lord designed 
and every true Christian should rejoice in 
and co-operate with. But we all know that 
such a union without bondage is not contemplated 
and no such suggestion would 



for a moment be entertained by any of 
the various sects. 

The union they desire and are striving 
for will be an additional bond and not a 
dissolving of present sectarian shackles. 
They propose that each sect shall still 
fetter thought among its own people and 
preserve its own peculiarities, traditions, 
customs, names, doctrines, etc., but that 
in addition another robe be thrown around 
all, which will merely conceal the factions 
and make the really many and discordant 
factions of the nominal Church appear as 
one before the world for the sake of the 
influence. But the patching of the old 
garment will be in vain: the rent will be 
made worse. The Lord's plan is to dissolve 
the old, worn-out system which has 
for so long misrepresented his word and 
his plan and deceived many into bondage 
and error. 

The Lord will organize and establish 
his Church in glory and power very soon, 
and it will be found to contain all the 
faithful believers who in their day were 
"overcomers" and valiant for the Truth 
—one church under one head— Christ. 



R1208 : page 6 
UNFAITHFUL PASTORS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-From a recent 
newspaper I have clipped the 
following: ~ 

"HE STOPPED THE DISCUSSION. 

"A discussion on card-playing and theater-going 
before the Ministers' Association 
to-day was suddenly ended by the forcible 
remarks of the Rev. S. Halsey, pastor of 
the Grand Avenue M.E. Church. 'A 
minister of the Gospel in Milwaukee 
might as well pack up and prepare to 
leave town if he intends to go to a prominent 
society woman in his church and 
inform her that she shall not play cards,' 
he said, and then inquired: 'What minister 
is there in this city with backbone 
enough to go to a man worth $100,000 or 
more, a member of his church, and say, 
Here, I understand you were at the theater 
last night or at a card-party. Now if 



that happens again there will be trouble? 
Where is the minister who has the backbone 
to do it?' The thirty or forty 
ministers present were silent, and the entire 
question was dropped with a suddenness 
that seemed enough to cause the ministerial 
head to swim." 

If these human ministers' lives, or their 
all which they would give in exchange 
for their lives, were wholly consecrated 
to the Master, would they hesitate to carry 
a message or admonition from the 
Master? Would the fact that the member 
might be a leader in the church, paying 
a large proportion of the expenses 
and of large influence, make any difference 
with the pastor who has nothing at 
stake? Would the frown of the society 
lady frighten him whose only object in 
this life is to obey his Master's will? 

Does it not appear that these ministers, 
who are frightened from their self-imposed 
task by the mere mention of opposition 
from the acknowledged worldlings of 
their respective flocks, show that they, who 
are so easily influenced by the effects of these 
worldly desires in others, are themselves 
largely tinctured with worldliness?— that 
they are time-servers? And is it an evidence 
of good judgment to follow leaders tinctured 
with cowardice? What confidence 
can be placed in a general who weakly 
yields to the enemy without a word of remonstrance? 
Yet this is exactly what these 
alleged "ministers" or servants of our 
Lord and Master have most ignominiously 
done. 

Mind, we are not discussing the propriety 
or impropriety of card-playing or 
of theater-going. Their impropriety was 
an accepted premise in their argument. 
It was assumed by them to be in violation 
of His commands (though we have thus 
far failed to find the prohibitory clauses 
in His word), yet they dared not remonstrate. 
These modern Jonah's dare not 
speak in the streets of Nineveh. Does 
Jonah's experience symbolize that which 
must sooner or later happen to them? 

When any class of people, in any imaginable 
association, by virtue of its position, 
or circumstances, exercises a dominating 
influence, does not the whole association 
partake thereof? If worldly— confessedly 
worldly— influences predominate 
in the Grand Avenue M.E. Church, is it 



not a worldly association? No matter 

what its members may call it, is not such 

the fact? Is not its "Minister" the chief 

servant of a worldly organization, instead 

of a faithful minister of "the Church of 

the living God, the pillar and ground of 

the truth?" The trouble with these double-minded 

servants is that they permit their 

own selfish personal interests to come in 

between them and the fulfilment of their 

duty to the Master. Complete consecration 

to Christ would at once result in the 

loss of their positions as leaders of, and 

of their emoluments from these worldly 

organizations, miscalled Churches. 

Does it not indeed seem due time that 
these chilly, scarcely luke-warm, systems 
should be "spewed out of His mouth?" 
See Rev. 3 . W. M. WRIGHT. 

The above is from the pen of the dear 
Brother whose letter in defense of the Episcopal 
Church was published in the TOWER 
of November, 1887. We rejoice that he 
now sees clearly which is the one 
true Church founded by our Lord and 
which are the imitation systems organized 
since by men. Yet let us always 
remember to "speak the truth in 
love." Let us remember that still there 
are true sheep in Babylon's bondage as we 
ourselves once were. Thanks be to God 
for the light of truth which has made us 
free in Christ and yet his bond-servants. 
-EDITOR. 



R1208 : page 6 

A FEDERATION OF CHURCHES. 

DR. M'COSH OUTLINES A PLAN. 

To the Editor of the N.Y. Tribune. 
SIR: I cannot tell how glad I am in 
reading in the Tribune of to-day of the 
unanimous decision of the Presbytery of 
New York in regard to the revision of the 
Confession. When I uttered my opinion 
on the subject, in my Presbytery on October 
1, 1 had no clear idea as to how 
Presbyterian sentiment was tending, and 
it was with considerable anxiety that I 
uttered my views as to what was right and 
wise in opposition to the majority of the 



brethren. How pleased I am that the 

Presbytery of New York has come to the 

same conclusion that I did. It is clear 

that we are to have the obnoxious passages 

in the Confession withdrawn in the 

course of a year or two, and that there is 

to be no new Confession sanctioned till the 

subject has been carefully weighed. It is 

now seen clearly by the public that there 

is to be no revolution or fundamental 

change in the Presbyterian Church. In 

the attempt to adjust our Standards I see 

the means of bringing about a Pan-Presbyterian 

Union. 

But this is not all I look for. I hope 
that the Presbyterian churches, as they 
view the substantial agreement of the 
creed, will look with more favor on other 
evangelical churches, such as the Episcopalian, 
Reformed, Methodist and Baptist. 
If this does not issue immediately in a 
union, it may end in a federation like 
that of the United States. Let a federation 
be made, to secure that the whole 
country be divided into parishes or districts, 
and that each be provided with a 
Gospel minister, with a lay agency put 

R1209 : page 6 

under obligations to have the Gospel 
preached to every creature, young and 
old. To remove difficulties, it should be 
allowed to every minister to visit his people 
and do good in his neighbor's district 
as well as his own. I will be glad to correspond 
with those who are ready to carry 
out this view. JAMES McCOSH. 
Princeton, N.J. 



Here we see a fresh proof of the general 
and increasing tendency of the leaders 
of thought and action, among all the 
great sects of "Christendom," toward the 
very union so clearly pointed out in 
Prophecy. 



R1209 : page 6 

REVISION NOT A NEW THING. 
In the recent interview with Professor 



Schaff, of the Union Theological Seminary, 
on the revision of the Creed, he 
advanced the argument that the defenders 
of the symbols were unduly exercised 
about the proposed changes, as though 
revision were a new thing, when, as a 
matter of fact, the Presbyterian Church 
of to-day is only moving along in the 
lines marked out by the fathers soon after 
the American Revolution. He said: 

"A century ago there was an important 
change made in regard to the union of 
the Church and State. The old confession 
is based on such a union, and assigns 
to civil magistrates the power and the 
duty of protecting and supporting orthodoxy 
and of punishing heresy. The 
Westminster Assembly was itself the creature 
of the Long Parliament, and ejected 
2,000 ministers from their benefices for 
non-conformity. The Westminster divines 
regarded toleration as a most dangerous 
error, and would have looked upon the 
separation of Church and State as down-right 
political atheism. The articles relating 
to the State had to be radically 
changed after the American Revolution. 
In the old Confession we find this section: 

"The civil magistrate may not assume 
to himself the administration of the Word 
and sacraments, or the power of the keys 
of the Kingdom of Heaven; yet he hath 
authority, and it is his duty to take order, 
that unity and peace be preserved in the 
Church, that the truth of God be kept 
pure and entire, that all blasphemies and 
heresies be suppressed, all corruptions and 
abuses in worship and discipline prevented 
or reformed, and all ordinances of God 
duly settled, administered and observed. 
For the better effecting whereof, he hath 
power to call synods, to be present at 
them, and to provide that whatsoever is 
transacted in them be according to the 
mind of God.' 

R1209 : page 7 

"In my 'Creeds of Christendom' I 
print this version of the Confession just 
quoted in a column parallel with that of 
the revised version [which reads thus]:— 

'"Civil magistrates may not assume to 
themselves the administration of the Word 
and sacraments, or the power of the keys 
of the Kingdom of Heaven, or in the 



least interfere in matters of faith. Yet, 
as nursing fathers, it is the duty of the 
civil magistrate to protect the Church of 
our common Lord, without giving the 
preference to any denomination of Christians 
above the rest, in such a manner 
that all ecclesiastical persons whatever 
shall enjoy the full, free and unquestioned 
liberty of discharging every part of their 
functions, without violence or danger. 
And as Jesus Christ hath appointed a regular 
government and discipline in his 
Church, no law of any Commonwealth 
should interfere with, let or hinder the 
due exercise thereof among the voluntary 
members of any denomination of Christians, 
according to their own profession 
and belief,'" etc. 



R1209 : page 7 
CORPORATE GREED. 



HOW IT IS KILLING AND MAIMING 27,000 
MEN EACH YEAR. 

The following, which we clip from the 
editorial columns of the Philadelphia 
Public Ledger of March 27th, 1890, furnishes 
a marked illustration of how human 
life and limb are often sacrificed to mammon. 
The responsibility is readily seen 
when we reflect that there is a patent 
"frog," the use of which would obviate 
largely if not wholly this terrible yearly 
sacrifice, and that the only reason it is 
not adopted by railroads is that it would 
cost a few dollars to make the change, 
and because prominent railroad men are 
interested financially in the manufacture 
of the death dealing frog. The world 
sadly needs the strong government of the 
Millennial age to enforce the use of every 
means which will protect fellow beings. 
The clipping referred to is as follows:— 

"A Railroad Employe writes to the 
New York Tribune: It actually requires 
an act of congress to compel railway 
companies to do anything for the protection 
of their employes. The 'Railroad 
Gazette' and 'The Scientific American,' 
two excellent authorities, have 
stated in recent issues that there will be 
legislation by Congress this winter on 



this important subject, in response to a 
suggestion in the President's message that 
a stringent law is really necessary for the 
protection of railway employes, many of 
whom have been killed or seriously injured 
by accidents that could be easily 
prevented by proper safety appliances. 
In making this suggestion the President 
has made a move in the right direction, 
as the following facts will illustrate the 
imperative necessity for speedy legislation. 
The Iowa Railroad Commission 
of 1 886 reported that there were over 
450 brakemen killed annually, 4,088 
crippled for life, and 13,770 seriously injured, 
that is, bones or limbs broken, or 
part of the hand or foot taken off, 
making it a total of 18,308 victims. At 
the conference of the State Railroad 
Commissioners of Iowa, held last March, 
ex-Railroad Commissioner Coffin stated: 
In the last ten years we have killed 
and maimed 2,429 men in this State, and 
last year there were 349 employes killed 
or crippled in Iowa.' In the third annual 
report of the Inter-State Commerce 
Commission we find it stated that 2,070 
railway employes were killed, and 20,148 
injured or crippled for life last year. 
But these reports, alarming as they are, 
do not cover the total railroad mileage 
of the United States. If the accident 
rate was the same on the roads not reported, 
it would swell up the grand total 
to over 27,000. These facts present a 
deplorable state of things in connection 
with railway life, neither creditable to the 
companies or the Government, who have 
it in their power to reduce this immense 
sacrifice of life to a minimum by proper 
legislation. In the reports quoted the 
blame of all this slaughter is charged to 
the old hand brake and link-coupler, and 
not a word about the murderous railroad 
frog. Any yard hand or brakesman will 
tell you that the frog is the cause of more 
fatal accidents than the other two combined. 
The life of a railroad employe is 
a hard, laborious one, working day and 
night in rain or storm; hard enough without 
the constant dread of these two deadly 
traps— the old link-coupler, ready to snap 
off hand or arm, while under foot is the 
cruel frog, out of which there is no escape 
from a horrible death. If President Harrison 
will get a protective act passed, 



which will relieve the employes from the 
dangers referred to, which hourly confront 
them in their duties, he will have 
done much in the interest of humanity 
that will cause his name to go down to 
posterity as the workingman's friend." 



R1209 : page 7 

THE DISPUTED CLAUSE. 



We are requested to re-examine the 
first clause of Rev. 20:5 , by some who 
feel that a great weight rests upon that 
passage; that if that clause be a part of the 
inspired record it would flatly contradict 
all hopes of a probation during the Millennial 
age for those who have died. 

This is a great mistake. If the doctrine 
of a trial of all the world of mankind during 
the Millennial age were dependent for 
proof upon any clause in the symbolic 
Book of Revelations we would decline to 
preach it. And those who oppose us 
should likewise determine that if this one 
verse of a symbolic book is the only objection 
they can find, they have practically 
no opposition to offer, and should confess 
it. But let us review the subject. 

(1.) Our original statement relative to 
the clause— "The rest of the dead lived 
not again until the thousand years were 
finished" —stands uncontradicted, undisputed. 
Some, in attempting to resist the 

R1210 : page 7 

statement and its force, have indeed succeeded 
in raising a dust that has confused 
and blinded some of their followers for a 
time, and led them to suppose that 
our statements were untrue, but it was 
only a deceptive use of language; for when 
their words are sifted it will be seen that 
they do not deny our position— which 
indeed cannot be gainsaid. 

Our statement therefore stands undisputed, 
and it was and still is —That the 
above quoted words are not only not found 
in the very ancient Syriac and Coptic 
MSS., but neither are they found in any 
Greek MS. written earlier than the fifth 
century. And we may add, they are 
lacking in many Greek MSS. of later date; 



and among these are some of the admittedly 

most exact and careful MSS., 

such as Codex Cantabujiensis of the seventh 

century and Vatican MS. No. 1 160 

of the eleventh century. 

The above are plain, unvarnished facts, 
they are indisputable, and they can be verified 
in the library of any scholar. 

But an opponent, recently, after a rambling 
article upon the old MSS. in which, 
instead of stating facts clearly, as we have 
done above, he confused his readers, so 
that they should not understand the facts, 
then proceeded to make the statement 
that the passage in dispute had been 
quoted by one of the so-called "Fathers" 
in the first century. But he took care 
not to cite the reader to volume and page 
where this statement might be verified or 
disproved. And while we very much dislike 
to question any man's veracity, we 
shall feel justified in discrediting this unsupported 
statement regarding the quotation 
of this passage by one of the Fathers 
until some evidence is offered— especially so 
in view of the equivocal handling of the 
subject as it relates to the Old MSS. in the 
same article. 

But here let us make the suggestion, 
that the "writings of the Fathers" have 
been more liable to interpolations, etc., 
than the Scriptures; for it would appear 
that the expression of Rev. 22:18,19 has 
always more or less deterred men from 
falsifying the canonical books. We believe 
that very few interpolations into the 
text of the Bible have been made intentionally 
(that of 1 John 5:7 being a bold 
and notable exception). Other interpolations 
were, we believe generally the result 
of accident— usually the copying of a 
marginal comment into the text, at a time 
when all copying was done by pen. 

But having repeated our statement of 
the facts regarding the first clause of Rev. 20:5 
let us see that even if it were proved, 
either by the finding of another and yet 
older Greek MS. or in any other way, 
to be a genuine part of what John 
the Revelator wrote, it would in no way 
conflict with the plan of the ages, which 
provides that after the Jewish age had selected 
and proved an earthly class of rulers 
and this Gospel age has selected and 
tried the heavenly class of joint-heirs, 
God's Kingdom under Christ as King shall 



be established; which will rale and bless 
the world and put down all insubordination 
and sin in every form, lifting 
out of evil and degradation to perfection 
and life all the willing and obedient ones 
and destroying as part of evil all who 
love sin and who refuse to abandon it when 
every opportunity to do so is offered;— a 
work which, we are specifically informed, 
will be accomplished in a thousand years. 
Let us see this in the articles on the third 
page and the one following:— 

THE REST OF THE DEAD LIVED NOT UNTIL 
THE THOUSAND YEARS 
WERE FINISHED. 

Give the words lived and died their 
full meaning. We speak correctly of our 
father Adam, who was made a perfect man 
and possessed of life in full, perfect sense, 
when we say that from the moment he 
was cast out of divine favor and out of 
Eden he began to be a dying man, and 
this dying process continued for 930 years 
until it was finished— Adam died. And if we 
would think and speak correctly of the 
world of mankind during the Millennial 
age, "the times of restitution," we would 
think and speak of their gradually living, 
—getting more and more perfect 
and more and more alive in all their 
qualities and powers, mental, physical 
and moral, until perfection of life and of 
being should be attained at the close of 
the Millennium. There all mankind desirous 
of LIFE— under the terms of the New 
Covenant— perfect life such as Adam possessed, 
and lost for himself and all his race 
—shall have attained to all that was lost, 
and all that was redeemed through the precious 
blood; while others will by that time 
have been cut off from life entirely in 
the destruction of the second death. 

It is then very easy to see, regardless 
of this passage, that though the little 
flock— the body of Christ, whose trial 
ends with this age— will be raised out of 
death fully and completely, to the perfection 
of life (but as spirit beings), by a sudden 
resurrection change, "in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye" at the beginning 
of the Millennium, the contrary will 
be true of the world in general. They are 
to stand trial for life during that thousand-year -judgment-day, 
and who in God's 



plan are to get LIFE step by step as a reward 
for obedience. And in the end of 
that, their trial-day, the fully obedient 
shall in the fullest sense of the word live 
again. Such will then be like unto 
Adam, perfect, and the earth will then 
be like unto Eden— a paradise of God. 



R1210 : page 7 
COME UP HITHER. 



"Come up hither, I will show thee the 
bride, the Lamb's wife. And he carried 
me away in the spirit to a great and high 
mountain, and showed me that great city, 
the holy Jerusalem, descending out of 
heaven from God, having the glory of 
God."- Rev. 21:9-11 . 

All along through the Gospel age the 
saints have realized the blessedness of 
walking with God and the sweetness of 
fellowship with Christ in enduring hardness 
as good soldiers for his dear sake. 
With many obstacles to surmount in the 
way of perils to faith, a few walked humbly 
and lovingly apart from the world, 
guided by the great Shepherd of the 
sheep, feeding upon his precious promises, 
comforted in the darkest hours by 
his loving voice, and cheered and made 
glad by his approval. In hearkening to 
and obeying his voice, they felt that there 
was not only present but also future reward, 
though they little realized to what 
heights of glory they were called. Having 
walked with God in the midst of a 
crooked and perverse generation, and having 
kept their garments unspotted from the 
world to the end of their pilgrimage, they 
sweetly fell asleep in Jesus. Ever precious 
in the sight of the Lord has been 
the death of his saints; and such at his 
coming are raised in his likeness.— Psa. 116:15 ; 

1 Thes. 4:14,15 . 

Some such, of hallowed memory, do 
the saints of the present time remember, 
whose words and acts were blessed testimonies 
to the efficacy of divine grace, and loving 
exhortations to others to be faithful 
unto death. And yet those dear ones did 
not enjoy the glorious outlook which is 
now our privilege. Ours is a time of 



special favor, as well as special trial. 
The church being now so near the 
consummation of its glorious hope, she is 
permitted an inspiring view of her future 
glory, such as has never before been 
enjoyed. 

Like Moses, before we drop this earthen 
vessel, we are summoned to Pisgah's 
height to view the promised inheritance. 
We are carried hither "in spirit" (mentally) 
and showed (mentally, by faith in 
God's Word) the bride of Christ in her 
future glory. 

Let us for a moment take as wide a 
view as is possible to human vision, aided 
by the divine telescope, the Word of 
God. By faith we see the bride of Christ 
"having the glory of God"— the divine 
nature, of which she was promised to be 
made partaker with her Lord. ( Rev. 21:11 ; 

2 Pet. 1:4 .) We see her "made like 
him," "the express image of the Father's 
person." ( 1 John 3:2 ; Col. 1:15 ; 2 Cor. 4:4 ; 
Heb. 1:3 .) We see her shining forth 
as the sun in the Father's kingdom. ( Matt. 13:43 .) 
She is caught up to heaven and 
actually seated with Christ in the heavenly 
place— at the Father's right hand. 
( Eph. 2:6 ; Heb. 1:3 .) She beholds her 
Father face to face, and sees her Lord 
"as he is." ( 1 John 3:2 .) She is endued 
with power and covered with 
glory. She is exalted far above angels. 
And as she followed the Lamb whithersoever 
he went when here, so she accompanies 
him withersoever he goeth there: Is 
he seated at the Father's right hand— in 
the highest position of his favor? so is 
she; is he at home in all the vast realm of 
the universe, which in ages past he was 
privileged of the Father to create ( John 1:10,3 )? 
so is she. 

While perfect human minds with telescope 
and scientific investigation will delight 

R1210 : page 8 

light to trace the wonderful works of 
God, his bride shall be conducted hither 
and thither through the boundless realms 
of space in company with her Lord. 
And as she views his works of ancient 
time, she glories in the privilege of 
henceforth being an efficient co-worker 
together with him in all that the Father's 
plans mark out for the ages to come. 



Is he commissioned to reign on earth a 
thousand years, and during that time to 
bring all things in heaven and in earth 
into perfect harmony with the will of 
God, judging both angels and men? she 

R1211 : page 8 

also shall reign with him. ( 2 Tim. 2:12 ; 

1 Cor. 6:2,3 .) And when that blessed, 
benevolent enterprise is accomplished, and 
the restored sons of God are presented to 
the Father without spot, or blemish, she 
still accompanies her Lord in the yet 
unrevealed enterprises for the blessing 
of all his creatures in the ages of 
glory to follow. And together they receive 
the love and praise and adoration 
of all creatures in heaven and in earth, 
who with united hearts ascribe glory and 
honor and blessing unto him who sitteth 
upon the throne (Jehovah), and to the 
Lamb, forever and ever.— 
Rev. 19:6,7; 5:12,13 . 

Eternal life, immortal vigor, perennial 
bloom of youth, unfading glory, perpetual 
peace, cloudless joy,— all these are 
elements in her cup of rejoicing. 

And truly she is a glorious bride— 
"without spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing." ( Eph. 5:27 .) Once she was a 
sinner under condemnation of death, but 
she was justified, washed and made white 
in the blood of the Lamb— redeemed by 
her beloved Lord and sanctified by his 
truth. And this fact that she was so 
loved and sought for at such cost, while 
a sinner, fills her heart with a love that 
shall never grow cold while the years of 
eternity roll. And the faithfulness of her 
Lord in waiting for her two thousand 
years, while the painful, tedious process of 
making her ready progressed; and his 
preferment of her in passing by angels, 
of nobler birth and higher standing, and 
condescending to her low estate, that 
in her might be shown forth the exceeding 
riches of divine grace, while it clothes 
her with humility, inspires her with a loving 
zeal to reverence him, and to find her 
chief delight in doing his will. 

Such is the view of the Bride of Christ 
as seen from Pisgah's mountain. Thus 
"in spirit" (mentally) we may by faith 
behold her glory; but let us not forget 
that we have not yet fully proved our 



worthiness. "Faithful is he that has 

called us" ( 1 Thes. 5:24 ; 1 Cor. 1:9 ; 10:13 .), 

but faithfulness on our part is 

also required. If our Lord could wait 

two thousand years for his bride, we must 

show our appreciation of his love by faithfulness 

during our brief three-score and 

ten, or during the briefer period since 

brought to the knowledge of the call. 

If neither angels, nor principalities, nor 
powers, nor things present, nor things 
to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any 
creature, can separate us from the love of 
Christ, shall we let any earthly thing 
come between our hearts and him? or shall 
any earthly love, or any tie of nature, 
however strong, separate us from this marvelous 
love of Christ? This love of Christ 
rightfully expects love in return; and he 
therefore says, "If any man love father, 
or mother, or wife, or children, or houses, 
or lands, or anything more than me, he is 
not worthy of me." Love— pure, holy, 
unwavering and true— is the one requirement 
of the bride of Christ. If the love 
of God dwells richly in our hearts we 
shall be approved. Love fulfills the law. 

Some of the saints, particularly young 
mothers, who have not sufficiently contemplated 
the love of Christ to realize it 
clearly, find it difficult to prefer Christ 
before the tender tie of motherhood. And 
when they realize that their children will 
be on the human plane of existence while 
they may be on the spiritual, such a separation 
looks like a great obstacle. But 
why should it? Take a little wider range 
of vision, and you will see that time will 
bring changes anyhow. This strong, parental 
love was given you by the same loving 
God who calls you to set your supreme 
affections on something still higher. Your 
patient care and service for the little ones 
around your feet you feel is amply compensated 
for by their winning, endearing 
ways and your natural love for them. For 
this you should thank God, who so ordained 
it for your comfort and their good. 
But observe that years will bring a change 
in the character of your love. Though 
it will be no less strong, it will be less 
parental. You will not feel that care over 
them, nor they that dependence upon you. 
You will be willing and glad to see them 
in happy homes of their own, and with 
other partners in life. You cannot and 



would not keep them together always under 
your roof and serve them always; and 
the now winning, childish ways, if never 
outgrown, would become actually painful 
to you. 

Thus you see what years will do even in 
the present life. Now carry the thought 
further; remember that we are to live 
eternally, and you will see that our sphere 
must be greatly enlarged. As the race 
matures— for it is now only in its infancy— 
and as it reaches perfection, love will be 
based more upon character than blood-relationship; 
and the loves thus based on 
a surer and firmer foundation will never 
be disappointed or grow cold, but will intensify 
as the ages pass. 

We should therefore remember that we 
are planning and building for eternity— 
for a life that is to outgrow the fitful feelings 
produced by present circumstances. 
And therefore we should enlarge our range 
of thought; we should contemplate the 
wonderful length and breadth and height 
and depth of the love of God, and endeavor 
to view things from the standpoint 
to which we are called. 

From the standpoint of the divine nature, 
know that parental affection will 
have its widest scope, as well as its greatest 
power to bless. The affection that now 
goes out so strongly to the one or two or 
half-dozen that nestle around you, will 
then go out with greater intensity to all 
your children; for know you not that the 
Christ (head and body) is to be the 
"Everlasting Father?" With your present 
capacity you may think this impossible, 
but we cannot compare the capacity 
of the divine nature with the human. 
Think of God's love for us, not only as a 
race, but also as individuals— "Can a 
woman forget her sucking child? Yea, 
they may forget, yet will not I." ( Isa. 49:15 .) 
And he so loved us, even while 
yet sinners, as to give his only begotten 
Son to redeem us. 

What we need, then, is to contemplate 
the character and plan of God more constantly; 
let it be our meditation as continually 
as possible. Let us endeavor to 
take God's standpoint of observation, to 
think as he thinks, and to act as he acts, 
remembering that our life is not spanned 
by the brief space of three-score years and 
ten, but that it stretches on into eternity. 



Let the strongest earthly ties augment 
the heavenly, but in no case let them 
triumph over it. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R1211 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., MAY, 1890. NO. 6. 



page 1 

ARP TRACTS— free— in any quantity you 
think you can use judiciously. We have 
these both in English and German. 



THE SUPPLY of Old Theology Tracts is 
for the present exhausted. But orders will 
not long be delayed, for over ten millions 
of pages of these are now on the 
press. Orders will be filled in rotation 
as received. Many are joining in the 
good work of scattering this hail of truth. 
-Isa. 28:17 . 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES.-The price of 
these is reduced to 25 cents per hundred, 
or $2.00 per thousand. (This includes 
expressage or mail charges of delivering 
them to you.) We want these messengers 
to go everywhere, bearing testimony 
to the Truth, and calling attention to 
God's gracious Plan of the Ages. 



R1211 :page 1 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

Believing that a further study of Dawn, 
Vols. I. and II., would be very profitable 
to you all, we have not pushed Vol. 
III. as rapidly as we might. You need 
not expect it until late in the Summer. 

But we have something else which we 
trust will be a pleasant surprise for you all 
—a volume of poems and hymns, which, 
we believe you will all agree, well represent 
our glorious hopes and grateful sentiments. 
Some of these are from the pens 
and hearts of God's children long since 
dead, and some from the living. Some 
of them are altered in some points of theology 
to bring them into closer union with 
God's Word, and some are as we found 



them. The harmony of heart sentiment 
between the Lord's consecrated ones now, 
and in the past, is made very noticeable by 
this collection from the writings of many. 

We cannot hope that we have found all 
the gems, or only gems, but we assure you 
that we are well pleased with what we have 
here collected. We know of no collection 
which will compare with this one. We 
can speak the more positively our opinion, 
because we praise not our own efforts to 
serve the Lord and the truth, nor our own 
writings, but those of God's saints of the 
past, as well as of the present time— though 
among the latter you will be pleased to 
know are some from the pen of our beloved 
helpmate, Sister Russell. 

Just such a book is greatly needed, by 
us all. It is not sufficient that we delve 
into God's great plan, study the ages and 
their work and the times and seasons for 
the accomplishment of all his gracious 
promises; but while doing this we need 
to digest it, and to meditate upon the 
goodness of God, recounting his mercies 
and blessings past, present and future, 
and to praise him in our hearts and also 
with our voices. We believe that this 
volume of poems and hymns will assist 
you to thus cultivate the spirit of devotion. 
May God richly bless it to this 
desirable end. 

We believe, therefore, that as a spiritual 
feast and blessing, it will be equally 
as profitable to us all as the volumes of 
the Millennial Dawn series. There are 
indeed many collections of poems and 
hymns which contain features of truth, 
but how often we have all found that 
theological errors marred the pleasure and 
profit, as dead flies in precious ointment. 
( Eccl. 10:1 .) Here we trust you will 
find naught to mar your pleasurable communion, 
but much to stimulate the fragrant 

R1212 :page 1 

odor of worship and praise as it arises 
from your own hearts, a grateful incense 
to God, acceptable through Christ Jesus, 
our Lord and Redeemer. 

The book will contain poems representing 
the beginning, the progress and 
the culmination of Christian growth and 
experience. These are followed by 333 
hymns, of worship and praise, covering 



not the experiences and hopes of sinners 
coming to God for pardon, but the 
experiences, hopes and thanksgivings of 
those who have found the Lord precious 
to their souls. It will be a book of over 
450 pages, clear types, neatly bound in 
cloth. We want you all to possess and 
use and enjoy with us this additional 
means of grace and helping hand toward 
Christian development and perfection. 
And knowing that most of you are poor in 
this world's goods, the price is accordingly 
put at the very lowest notch— 50 cents 
per copy, postage prepaid by us, or 40 
cents per copy if sent by express at your 
charges. And all readers of the TOWER 
for the past year on the Poor List, crippled, 
aged, or for any other reason unable 
to pay the above price, or any price, 
yet appreciative of the subject and anxious 
for this helping hand, can have a 
copy free— a gift of Jesus' love. 



page 1 



"Love not the world, neither the things 
that are in the world. If any man love the 
world, the love of the Father is not in him. 



R1212 :page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



The eyes of the civilized world are at 
present turned toward Saratoga, N.Y., 
where the General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church is now in session. Over one-half 
of all the Presbyteries having voted 
for a revision of the Confession of Faith, 
those who object to revision are now claiming 
that it should not be altered without 
the approval of two-thirds of them. Two-thirds 
of the vote would be one hundred 
and twenty-six Presbyteries, and about one 
hundred and twenty-two have already 
voted in favor of revision. 

The views of the conservative party, 
opposed to revision, are expressed by one 
of them who is a delegate in attendance- 
Rev. G. N. Johnston— thus: 

"The conservatives are afraid of the 
movement because it establishes the principle 



of revision. I am one of them. We 
are willing to have some of the particulars 
in the Confession changed, but we are 
afraid that it will be followed next year by 
another tidal wave. 

"The decision of the question will have 
far-reaching results. It may, quite possibly, 
end in the splitting of the Presbyterian 
Church. The question of the session of 
the present Cumberland branch of our 
Church will be involved. Possibly we 
have been wrong during all these fifty 
years? If a revision is decided upon, the 
Cumberland church was right in separating 
from the main body, and is, therefore, 
at perfect liberty to come back into the 
fold. If it is decided against a revision, 
two factions will be formed. One, the 
revisionists, will join the Cumberland 
Church; the other, the anti-revisionists, 
will join the United Presbyterians." 

At this writing the Assembly has not 
reached the question of Revision, but is 
hearing reports on other subjects. Concerning 
some of the subjects already discussed 
a journal of this city makes the 
following report and comment:— 

AN INTERESTING MEETING. 

"One of the reports presented to the 
Presbyterian Assembly, which is in session 
at Saratoga, makes the statement that 
nearly one-fifth of all the Presbyterian 
churches have vacant pulpits; and that 
1,100 churches have died in twenty years. 
In another report the statement is made 
that almost two-thirds of the Presbyteries 
have expressed a desire for a revision of 
the Confession of Faith. The ordinary 
mind among Presbyterians— to say nothing 
of the world at large— associates these 
two statements in some sort as cause 
and effect. The vacant pulpits and the 
death of churches are pointed to as the 
result of a Confession of Faith which 
not more than one-third of the Presbyterians 
believe in, so that we hear 
the cry raised: revision or death,— 
that is, without revision death is certain. 
A confession that holds persons to what 
they do not believe can be said to have 
but one vital element, and that is self-destruction. 
Two-thirds to-day, say the revisionists, 
will grow into one solid whole, 
and they are right. Call it what you will, 



explain it as you can, this is the situation 
under which the General Assembly has 
met and is debating the question of faith 
revision at Saratoga." 



THE TABERNACLE TEACHINGS we will 
republish in TOWER form in June or July. 



R1212 :page 1 

SENATOR BLAIR'S VIEW. 



Senator Blair, under date of April 18th, 
gives to the press a statement of his views 
on religion and education. We agree 
with him as to the generally growing sentiment 
against full religious liberty, but 
we disagree with him in his supposition 
that Romanism is about to be crushed out. 
In the troublous times coming, Papacy 
will convince the people, for a time at 
least, that her strong arm is needful to the 
bridling and restraining of the people. 
However, the Scriptures indicate that this 
return to influence on Papacy's part will 
be of short duration, and will be followed 
by its complete overthrow and destruction 
as a system. Mr. Blair says:— 

It is becoming more and more evident 
that the forms and methods of education 
are the subjects of increasing interest 
among the people in all parts of the country. 
The heterogeneous composition of 
our population and the vast space over 
which it is scattered, combined with the 
strong tendency to local independence 
which is characteristic of our form of government, 
are sure to result in the segregation 
of this continental mass into sections 
and non-affiliating and perhaps antagonistic 
communities unless there be 
some general system of education and 
training extending to the whole during 
the formative period of life, and reaching 
all parts of our vast domain. 

Three centuries since our continent was 
substantially as vacant as the spaces between 
the planets. The scattering savages, 
who did not constitute a population 
of more than one person to five square 
miles of territory, were so few that it could 
hardly be said that the surface constituting 



what now are the United States and Canada 
was inhabited at all. Instead of being the 
arena for the gradual development of savage 
tribes into civilized nations through 
periods of almost interminable time, our 
country has been filled, as it were, in a day, 
historically speaking, by conflicting races, 
nations and civilizations, so that we exhibit 
all the elements of both life and destruction 
in full and contemporaneous action. 
Now the American people behold 
and are beginning to comprehend their 
own condition. They are admonished 
by the lessons of history. They realize 
that their existence in any desirable sense 
depends upon the nature of the religion 
and of the education which shall prevail 
among them and fashion the generations 
as they play their part and replace each 
other upon the soil. 

BUT ONE FAITH CAN PREVAIL. 

Only a homogeneous people can be 
great. No nation can exist with more 
than one language, more than one religion, 
more than one general form of education 
for the masses of the people. There 
may be change, modification, improvement 
in all these, but community of 
language, of religion and of educational 
forces are indispensable to the development 
of nationality, and there is no hope 

R1212 : page 2 

of prolonged existence in great communities 
where there is not either already 
complete unification in all these respects, 
or a strong increasing tendency to the 
same. The American people instinctively 
feel and know these things to be so. 
Hence it is that everywhere we now find 
the public mind arousing itself and grappling 
with the adverse and hostile elements 
which are almost everywhere to 
be found in our physical, mental and spiritual 
life. 

I do not believe that it is possible that 
the American nation will develop in the 
direction of toleration of all religions— that 
is, so-called religions. Whether the general 
public conviction shall be right or 
wrong, I yet believe that instead of selecting 
and finally tolerating all so-called 
religions, the American people will, by 



constant and irresistible pressure, gradually 

expel from our geographical boundaries 

every religion except the Christian 

in its varied forms. I do not expect to 

see the pagan and other forms existing 

side by side with the former, both peaceably 

acquiesced in for any considerable 

length of time. I do not think that experience 

will satisfy the American people 

that the inculcation of any positive religious 

belief hostile to the Christian faith 

or the practice of the forms of any other 

worship is conducive to the good order 

of society and the general welfare. There 

may not be an exhibition of bigotry in 

this. I believe that religious toleration 

will yet come to be considered to be an 

intelligent discrimination between the true 

and the false, and the selection of the 

former by such universal consent as shall 

exclude by general reprobation the recognition 

and practice of the latter. 

R1213 : page 2 

ROMANISM'S BALEFUL INFLUENCES. 

No religion which interposes any agency 
between man and God is Christianity. 
No other religion than Christianity— and 
Christianity as I have thus defined it— is 
consistent with the existence of human 
liberty and republican institutions. This 
country will not long exist as a free country 
if any other religious teaching comes 
generally to prevail. No one human being 
is the superior of any other human being 
in kind, however much we may differ 
in the extent of our several endowments, 
and no religion which finds space for an 
authority between the creature and the 
Creator can prevail without destroying 
the republic. Now, religious belief is a 
matter of education, and hence no free 
people will, or at least can, safely permit 
a system or a practice of education which 
sets up any human master of the human 
soul— save only the supremacy of each 
soul over itself. 

This does not imply that the people 
will undertake to teach affirmatively the 
dogmas of religion in the sectarian sense, 
or perhaps, even, in the most general and 
fundamental sense. But it does imply 
that the people of the Republic shall see 
to it that certain things are not taught to 



the American child. The people will not 
rest until they have subverted all schools 
and teachers who create in the soul of a 
child a belief in a power greater than the 
right of public judgment and less than 
the authority of God— an allegiance to 
any spiritual power except the highest, or 
any prince, potentate or power, save only 
the Eternal King, which can inflict pains 
and penalties of a spiritual nature, or in 
any other life than this on earth. 

FALSE RELIGIONS MUST GO. 

The people will not rest in their study 
of the subject, nor in the regulation of the 
educational forces of the land, until they 
have compelled all citizens to be the masters 
of the English tongue— until they 
have secured the eradication of all religious 
teaching which enslaves the soul of 
the child to any other master than its Supreme 
Father, or which clothes a mere 
man with powers which partake of the 
prerogatives of God. 

The people are studying these subjects 
anew. They are questioning as to whether 
there be not some mistake in theories of 
religious liberty which permit the inculcation 
of the most destructive errors in the 
name of toleration, and the spread of pestilence 
under the name of that liberty 
which despises the quarantine. 



R1213 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: -Sister Page 

and myself have much sweet joy in our 
study, which seems to grow more and 
more precious to her. I am sure our Lord 
will enable her to grow more and more 
in favor and knowledge. I can hardly 
express how precious it is to me to be thus 
joined by my wife in pursuing that "holiness 
without which no man shall see 
God." 

Now, dear Brother, do not think it necessary 
to write me, because I insist on writing 
you. Save your time and energies 
for the glorious work you are permitted 
to do. You know I love to hear from 
you, but I will be satisfied by "Tower" 



talk, until we commune in the kingdom, 
if so be I am accounted worthy to join 
you there. Even in this I thank God I 
can leave the result in His hands, daily 
trusting Him for strength to fulfil my consecration. 
Much love to Sister Russell, 
and all the saints. Yours in Christ, 
W. E. PAGE. 

P.S.— I enclose copy of letter to Bellamy, 
author of "Looking Backward," 
that may interest you. 

MR. EDWARD BELLAMY.-DEAR SIR:- 
Having given your "Looking Backward" 
a careful reading, and believing with you 
that a "Golden Age" is coming, when 
men will act from the principle of love 
which Paul applies in his exhortation, 
"Look not every man on his own things, 
but every man also on the things of 
others" ( Phil. 2:4 ), instead of from the 
principle of avarice which finds its expression 
in the maxim, "Every man for himself 
and the Devil take the hindmost," I 
am led to send you a copy of the work 
entitled, "The Plan of the Ages," which 
elaborates the same idea from a Bible 
standpoint, and which I commend to your 
earnest consideration. If you will pardon 
a humble reader's boldness, I will say 
that it appears to me that "Looking Backward" 
is most defective in that it leaves 
Christ and His Ransom entirely out of 
consideration. 

Adam had the entire race in his loins 
when he sinned, and so the entire race 
died because of his sin. God made Christ 
a sinless and perfect man by transmitting 
an untainted life principle. Thus 
Christ was able to, and did, keep God's 
perfect law of love ( 1 Cor., 13 chap.), 
and by thus remaining a perfect human 
being was not subject to death. So Jesus 
says, "No man taketh my life from me. 
I have power (authority) to lay it down, 
and I have power to take it again."— 
John 10:18 . 

Otherwise his death would have been 
contrary to God's will, and thus a suicide 
and a sin. But in laying down his life, 
"the just for the unjust," he simply assumed 
Adam's penalty, or debt, and paid 
it, giving his life a ransom— corresponding 
price— for the life of the world 
( Matt. 20:28 and 1 Tim. 2:6 ), and had 
become heir (through his resurrection 
from the dead by God) to all that Adam 



was originally heir to and lost: which 
was perfect life, under perfect conditions 
and surrounded by a perfect family. 
And in "due time" he will lead forth, 
through a resurrection, the entire human 
race ( John 5:28-29 and Acts 24:15 ), 
give them a full knowledge of the truth 
and full ability to live up to it. Only 
those who wilfully sin will be cut off 
( Heb. 10:26 .) Thus will be fulfilled 
Paul's prophecy, "As in Adam all die, 
even so, in Christ shall all be made alive." 
( 1 Cor. 15:22 .) Witness also Paul's statement, 
"As by the offence of one, judgment 
came upon all men to condemnation; 
even so by the righteousness of one, 
the free gift came upon all men unto justification 
of life." (Heb. 5:18). "Indue 
time," God's kingdom, founded on equity 
and justice, must fill the entire earth 
( Jer. 23:5 ; Psa. 72:2 ; Isa. 32:1,18 ), 
and then men will not only live eighty-five 
years in happiness, but will never die, 
so long as they obey God's law of love 
and life which they will fully know and 
keep ( Isa. 11:9 and Hab. 2:14 ). But 
the foundation of this Kingdom is Jesus 
Christ and His Ransom ( 1 Cor. 3:11 ), 
and it cannot be built on human development 
or education merely. The brighter 
men's minds become while their hearts 
remain evil, the more perfectly they will 
put into execution the evil principle of 
avarice before quoted. All classes of society 
are now forming into organizations 
of different kinds to enforce this hideous 
teaching, their main lines being seen in 
Capital and Labor agitation and trouble. 
As I view it, it is an "irrepressible conflict," 
and will not down, until the various 
forces have spent themselves. Then, 
when men give up the contest, God will 
exalt Himself and fully set up his government 
(Psa. 46:9-10 ; Isa. 2:11 ), and all 
men will flow into it— Isa. 2:2 . 

Thus briefly have I set forth the central 
thought of "The Plan of the Ages," hoping 
that my effort will interest you and 
cause you to give the book careful consideration, 
Bible in hand. The great 
importance of the subject under consideration 
is, I am sure, ample apology for this 
lengthy communication from a stranger. 

Very sincerely yours, W. E. PAGE. 



R1214 : page 2 

MR. MOODY ON THE BIBLE. 

At one of his recent meetings in New 
York, Mr. Moody quoted this sentiment 
in beginning his address: "The Bible is 
a lamp to direct us; a guide to conduct 
us; a bit to restrain us; a sword to defend 
us; water to wash us; fire to inflame us; 
salt to season us; milk to nourish us; rain 
to refresh us; treasures to enrich us; and 
a key to unlock for us heaven's gate." 
All this it is, he added, and much more. 
The man who came to a meeting to get 
an anointing that would last a lifetime 
was compared to the man who ate a 
breakfast to last a lifetime. Daily, hourly 
feeding on the Word is necessary, if the 
soul would grow. 

The higher critic and the scientific 
skeptic would not receive much encouragement 
at these meetings. From cover 
to cover Mr. Moody believes the Bible. A 
man brought a difficult passage to him 
with this question: 

"How do you explain that, Mr. 
Moody?" 

"I don't explain it." 

"Well, how do you interpret it?" 

"I don't interpret it." 

"How do you understand it?" 

"I don't understand it." 

"Well, what do you do with it?" 

"I don't do anything with it." 

"You don't believe it, do you?" 

"Certainly, I believe it. There are 
lots of things I believe that I don't understand. 
There are a good many things 
in astronomy, a good many things about 
my own system that I don't understand, 
yet I believe them. I am glad there are 
heights in that Book which I haven't 
been able to climb. I am glad there are 
depths I haven't been able to fathom. It 
is the best proof that the Book came from 
God." 

"But you don't believe in the old Testament 
just as you do in the New 
Testament?" 

"Yes, I do. We have one Bible, not 
two. The very things in the Old Testament 
that men cavil at the most to-day 
are the things the Son of Man set his seal 
to when he was down here, and it isn't 



good policy for a servant to be above his 
master. The Master believed these things." 

The stories of the Deluge, the Destruction 
of the Cities of the Plain, Balaam's 
Ass, and Jonah and the Whale, were next 
taken up, the objections to them considered, 
and Christ's own references to these 
very matters given. Mr. Moody advised 
every one of his hearers to buy a concordance 
before luncheon, and then to 
take up the study of the Bible systematically, 
prayerfully. He commended highly 
a study of prophecy, especially those 
given by the so-called Minor Prophets. 
Glancing hastily at the prophecies concerning 
Babylon, Nineveh and Tyre, he 
showed how one after another had been 
fulfilled, and added: 

"The best way to convert an infidel is 
to take him to the prophecies fulfilled. 
Look at the prophecies concerning Christ. 
There are over two hundred about him in 
the Old Testament. Think of those which 
concern his life on earth: His miraculous 
birth, not at Nazareth, but in Bethlehem, 
'that the Scriptures might be fulfilled;' 
his dwelling at Nazareth, in Egypt, 
his riding into Jerusalem, his cruel treatment, 
his death. The Bible is not worn 
out, any more than the sun is worn out. 
Let us study the Book more and ourselves 
less." 



We rejoice that many of God's children 
are able to stand firmly on the Bible and 
realize its superhuman wisdom who cannot 
understand it to any great degree. 
We are glad that this is, and during 
all the past of this age has been true. It is 
a fresh illustration of the Lord's words— 
"Blessed is he that readeth, and they 
that hear (understand) the sayings of this 
book." ( Rev. 1:3 .) And now that we 
are living in "the time of the end," when 
the knowledge of God's plan, as well as 
general knowledge, was to be and is being 
increased, the greater blessing of understanding 
is daily being realized by larger 
and larger numbers. 

Therefore, while commending Brother 
Moody's faith in things not yet understood, 
we believe that he would endorse 
our statement, that none should be satisfied 
with saying, I don't understand and 



cannot explain certain parts of God's 
Word; but, knowing that we are in the 
time of the uncovering of God's truth, 
each child of God should earnestly seek 
to grow in knowledge as well as in the 
grace of the Lord. Alas! too many of the 
teachers, as well as the church in general, 
are in the condition mentioned with reproof 
in Isa. 29:10,18 . --EDITOR. 



R1214 : page 3 

THE SEVENTH TRUMPET. 

"Blow ye the Trumpet, blow 
The gladly solemn sound; 

Let all the nations know, 
To earth's remotest bound, 

The Jubilee of Earth is come, 

Returning ransomed sinners home. 

"Jesus, our great High-Priest, 
Hath full atonement made; 

Ye weary spirits, rest; 
Ye mournful souls, be glad. 

The Jubilee of Earth is come, 

Returning ransomed sinners home. 

"Extol the Lamb of God, 

The all-atoning Lamb; 
Redemption through his blood 

To all the world proclaim. 
The Jubilee of Earth is come, 
Returning ransomed sinners home. 

"Ye who were sold for nought, 
Whose heritage was lost, 

May have all back unbought, 
A gift at Jesus' cost. 

The Jubilee of Earth is come, 

Returning ransomed sinners home. 

"The Seventh Trumpet hear, 
The news of heavenly grace; 

Salvation now is near; 
Seek ye the Savior's face. 

The Jubilee of Earth is come, 

Returning ransomed sinners home. 



R1214 : page 3 

PERILS AMONG FALSE BRETHREN. 



-2 COR. 11:26.- 

Our Christian experiences differ; no 
two have exactly the same: because our 
temperaments and talents differ as well as 
our surroundings. But we may rely upon 
it that no real son of God is exempted 
from the needed trials of patience, faith 
and love. No matter how strong the 
character or how seemingly impregnable to 
the ordinary besetments, we may rely upon 
it that such have as great trials and 
crosses as others— perhaps greater— perhaps 
such as would prostrate weaker ones, 
whom the Lord will therefore in love and 
mercy not suffer to be tempted above that 
they are able to bear. 

Even our blessed Lord Jesus, though 
perfect, had to pass through an experience 
to test and prove his complete submission 
to the Father's will. Looking at our 
Lord's testing, we cannot doubt that 
his strong character was measurably unmoved 
by the sarcastic, bitter words and 
threats of the Scribes and Pharisees, and 
that likewise he speedily and firmly settled 
Satan's temptations negatively. And none 
of these things which would have been 
the greatest temptations to others seemed 
to move or even to greatly annoy him. 
He answered coolly and often sarcastically 
and ironically the attacks of open 
enemies. 

It was when those who "dipped in 
the dish with him, lifted up the heel 
against him" and left him, that his heart 
was troubled;— wounded by professed 
friends. The only discouraged expression 
recorded, relative to his work, was 
toward the close of his ministry when 
the test became more and more severe 
and "many went back and walked 
no more in his company," saying of his 
doctrines, "This is a hard saying; who 
can hear it?" His unreproachful but sorrowful 
words, then expressed to the twelve 
specially staunch, were full of pathos and 
disappointed grief: "Will ye also go 
away?" The prompt response of Peter— 
"Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast 
the words of lasting life"— must certainly 
have come as a comforting balm to that 
noble, loving heart whose only impulse 
was to do good and bless others. 

And yet, as it came to the close of his 



ministry, the time came that he must still 

further suffer wounds from those he most 

loved. And catching a clear view of how 

his sacrifice was to be completed, how all 

his bosom disciples would forsake and disown 

him, and how one of them would 

betray him with a kiss, no wonder that 

was one of his most sorrowful trials and 

disappointments. He was sorrowful, troubled 

in spirit, and testified, "Verily, verily, 

I say unto you, that one of you shall betray 

me." And when Peter courageously 

said, "Though I should die with thee, 

yet will I not deny thee"— and so said 

they all— Jesus saw that all would be scattered, 

forsaking him in his most trying 

hour, and that courageous Peter would be 

so terribly sifted of Satan and prove so weak 

that he would even swear that he had never 

known him. Truly these trials from 

"brethren," some of whom were only 

weak, and some false at heart, must have 

been among the sorest of our Lord's experiences, 

during his period of trial. Yet 

none of these things moved him or 

for a moment influenced him to choose another 

course. He cheerfully followed the 

narrow path and left it for God, in his 

own time, to bring forth his righteousness 

as the light of noonday. He was obedient 

to God, and faithful to the truth, 

and it was thus that he suffered not 

only at the hands of evil men but also 

from the misunderstandings of his closest 

friends, who did not clearly understand 

the situation, nor see how needful it was 

that he should first be Redeemer before 

he could become Restorer and King. 



The same lesson of perils among false 
brethren, and among brethren who had 
not so fully as himself grasped the Truth, 
was the Apostle Paul's experience too. 

We never hear from him a complaint 
about the way the world rejected his message 
and spoke evil of him and maltreated 
him as the leading exponent of the 
unpopular doctrine of the cross of Christ, 
which was opposed both by the stumbling, 
blinded Jews and by the worldly-wise philosophies 
of the Gentiles. Indeed, instead of 
being downcast or discouraged at his past 
experiences and in the future prospect 
that bonds and imprisonments awaited 



him, he boldly and cheerfully declared, 
"But none of these things move me, neither 
count I my life dear unto myself."— 
Acts 20:19-24. 

But, like the Lord Jesus, Paul had 
his severest trials from "false brethren;" 
who, instead of being faithful yoke-fellows 
and co-workers with Paul as good 
soldiers of the cross, became puffed up, 
heady, anxious to be leaders. These, being 
unwilling or unable to see the truth as 
fully and clearly as did Paul, because of 
their wrong condition of heart, and being 
envious of his success, and the results of his 
zeal and labor, followed after him in the 
various cities where he had labored, and by 
misrepresentation of his character as well 
as of his teachings sought to lower him 
in the esteem of the household of faith, 
and to thus open the way for various sophistical 
theories which would reflect 
honor upon them as teachers of what they 
claimed were advanced truths, though actually 
subverting the real truth in the 
minds of many. 

The only annoyance ever manifested by 
the Apostle Paul, in any of his letters, 
was upon this subject of his misrepresentation 
by false brethren. Referring to these 
false apostles by name, that they might 
be known and recognized as such (See 

1 Tim. 1:19,20 ; 2 Tim. 4:10,14-17 ; 

2 Cor. 11:2-23 ), he clearly exposed their 
unholy motives, of pride, ambition and 
envy, which scrupled not to make havoc 
of the church and of the truth. Especially 
did he point out that in their attempt 

to be leaders, they had manufactured 
a different gospel, built upon a different 
foundation than the only true foundation— 
the death of Christ as man's 
ransom-price. 

Paul was zealous for the truth's sake, 
lest these false apostles should, by smooth 
words and by misrepresentations of his 
character and the truth, use that as a lever 
to turn men aside from the true gospel. 

He warns them against those teachers, 
not to keep himself uppermost in their 
hearts, but to put them on their guard, 
lest receiving the new teachers they should 
be injured by the false teachings they presented, 
and lest in rejecting him and losing 
confidence in him as an honest and true 
man and teacher they should discard his 
teachings which were the truth. Hence 



his reference to himself was not a self-defence 
and self-laudation but a defence of 
the truth and an endeavor to have them see 
that his character and career as a true 
teacher comported well with the true message 
he bore to them. 

And he fearlessly pointed out that men 
might claim to present the same Jesus, 
the same spirit and the same gospel, and 
yet be false teachers and deceitful workers 
transforming themselves into apostles 
of Christ. And he says, marvel not at 
such a thing as that men should be great 
workers in the name of Christ from ambitious 
motives: "No marvel, for Satan 
himself fashioneth himself into an angel 
of light. It is no great thing, therefore, 
if his ministers also transform themselves 
as ministers of righteousness." 

Paul's letter to the Galatians, too, 
was written evidently to counteract the 
false representations of false brethren. 
(See Gal. 1:6 ; 3:1 .) To re-establish 
confidence in the gospel message he 
had delivered, it was needful that he 
should rehearse to them something of 
his history. In doing so it was necessary 
to again refer to the false brethren 
( Gal. 2:4 ), who claimed to be of the 
same body and who yet in opposition 
to the truth brought again upon God's 
children the bondage of errors already 
escaped from. 



R1214 : page 3 

HARVEST GATHERING AND SIFTINGS. 

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT 
OF PRESENT TRUTH. 

Many are the inquiries relative to the 
truths presented in the TOWER and MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, as to whence they came 
and how they developed to their present 
symmetrical and beautiful proportions.— 
Were they the results of visions? Did God 
in any supernatural way grant the solution 
of these, hitherto, mysteries of his plan? 
Are the writers more than ordinary beings? 
Do they claim any supernatural 
wisdom or power? or how comes this revelation 
of God's truth, any how? 

No, dear friends, we claim nothing of 



superiority, nor of supernatural power, 
dignity or authority; nor do we aspire to 
exalt ourselves in the estimation of our 
brethren of the household of faith, except 
in the sense that the Master urged it, saying, 
"Let him who would be great among 
you be your servant." ( Matt. 20:27 .) 
And our position among men of the 
world and of the nominal church is certainly 
far from exalted, being everywhere 
spoken against. We are fully contented, 
however, to wait for exaltation until the 
Lord's due time. ( 1 Pet. 5:6 .) In the 
apostle's words, we therefore answer, 
"Why look ye upon us, as though by 
our own power we had done these things?" 
We also are men of like passions with 
yourselves— of like infirmities and frailties, 
earnestly striving, by overcoming many 
besetments, discouragements, etc., to 
press along the line toward the mark of 
the prize of our high calling, and claiming 
only, as faithful students of the Word of 
God, to be simply index fingers, as we 
have previously expressed it, to help you to 
trace for yourselves, on the sacred page, 
the wonderful plan of God— no less wonderful 
to us, we assure you, than to you, 
dearly beloved sharers of our faith and joy. 

No, the truths we present, as God's 
mouthpieces, were not revealed in visions 
or dreams, nor by God's audible voice, 
nor all at once, but gradually, especially 
since 1870, and particularly since 1880, 
a period of about twenty years. And this 
present clear unfolding of truth is not 
due to any human ingenuity or acuteness 
of perception, but to the simple fact that 
God's due time has come, and if we did 
not speak and no other agent could be 
found, the very stones would cry out. 

We give the following history not only 
because we have been urged to give a review 
of God's leadings in the path of 
light, but specially because we believe 
it to be needful that the truth be modestly 
told, that misapprehensions and prejudicial 
mis-statements may be disarmed, and that 
our readers may see how hitherto the 
Lord hath helped and guided us. In so 
far as the names and views of others, who 
have parted company with us, may be 
associated with this history, we shall endeavor 
to bring forward only such points 
as are necessary to an understanding of 
our position and of the Lord's leadings. 



Nor can we name all the little points of 
divine favor in which faith was tested, 
prayers were answered, etc., remembering 
that our Master and the early church left 
no such example of boasting of faith, but 
rather admonished otherwise, saying, 
"Hast thou faith, have it to thyself." 
Some of the most precious experiences of 
faith and prayer are those which are too 
sacred for public display. 



We will not go back to tell how the 
light began to break through the clouds 
of prejudice and superstition which enveloped 
the world under Papacy's rule in 
the dark ages. The reformation movement, 
or rather movements, from then 
until now, has each done its share in 
bringing light out of darkness. But confining 
ourselves to the consideration of 
the harvest truths set forth in Millennial 
Dawn and Zion's Watch Tower, we begin 
the narrative at the year 1868, when the 
editor, having been a consecrated child 
of God for some years, and a member of the 
Congregational Church and of the Y.M.C.A., 
began to be shaken in faith regarding 
many long-accepted doctrines. Brought up 
a Presbyterian and indoctrinated from the 
Catechism, and being naturally of an inquiring 
mind, I fell a ready prey to the 
logic of Infidelity as soon as I began to 
think for myself. But that which at first 
threatened to be the utter shipwreck of 
faith in God and the Bible, was, under 
God's providence, overruled for good, and 
merely wrecked my confidence in human 
creeds and systems of misinterpretation 
of the Bible. 

Gradually I was led to see that though each 
of the creeds contained some elements of 
truth, they were, on the whole, misleading 
and contradictory of God's Word. Among 
other theories, I stumbled upon Adventism. 
Seemingly by accident, one evening I dropped 
into a dusty, dingy hall, where I had 
heard religious services were held, to see 
if the handful who met there had anything 
more sensible to offer than the creeds of 
the great churches. There, for the first 
time, I heard something of the views of 
Second Adventists from the preacher, Mr. 
Jonas Wendell, long since deceased. 



R1214 : page 4 

Though his Scripture exposition was not 
entirely clear, and though it was very far 
from what we now rejoice in, it was sufficient, 
under God, to re-establish my wavering 
faith in the divine inspiration of 
the Bible, and to show that the records of 
the apostles and prophets are indissolubly 
linked. What I heard sent me to my 
Bible to study with more zeal and care 
than ever before, and I shall ever thank the 
Lord for that leading; for though Adventism 
helped me to no single truth, it did 
help me greatly in the unlearning of errors, 
and thus prepared me for the truth. 

I soon began to see that we were living 
somewhere near the close of the Gospel 
age, and near the time when the Lord had 
declared that the wise, watching ones of 
his children should come to a clear knowledge 
of his plan. At this time, myself 
and a few other truth-seekers in Pittsburgh 
and Allegheny formed a class for Bible 
study, and from 1870 to 1875 was a time 
of constant growth in grace and knowledge 
and love of God and his plan. We 
came to see something of the love of 
God, how it had made provision for all 
mankind and how all must be awakened 
from the tomb in order that God's loving 
plan might be testified to them, and that 
they might then, by knowledge and help, 
through obedience— as a result of Christ's 
redemptive work— be brought back into 
harmony with God. This we saw to be 
the Restitution work foretold in Acts 3:21 . 
But though seeing that the Church 
was called to joint-heirship with the Lord 
in the Millennial Kingdom, up to that 
time we had failed to see clearly the 
great distinction between the reward of 
the Church now on trial and the reward 
of the world after its trial, at the close 
of the Millennial age— that the reward of 
the former is to be the glory of the spiritual, 
divine nature, while that of the latter 
is to be the glory of restitution— restoration, 
to the perfection of human nature 
once enjoyed by their representative and 
head, Adam, in Eden. 

However, we were then merely getting 
the general outlines of God's plan, and 
unlearning many long-cherished errors, the 
time for a clear discernment of the minutiae 
having not yet fully come. And here 



we should and do gratefully mention assistance 
rendered by Brothers George 
Stetson and George Storrs, both now deceased, 
the latter the editor of The Bible 

Examiner. The study of the Word of 
God with these dear brethren led, step by 
step, into greener pastures and brighter 
hopes for the world, though it was not until 
1872, when I gained a clear view of 
our Lord's work as our ransom price, that 
I found the strength and foundation of all 
hope of restitution to lie in that doctrine. 
Up to that time, when I read the testimony 
that all in their graves shall come 
forth, etc., I yet doubted the full provision— 
whether it should be understood to 
include idiots or infants who had died 
without reaching any degree of understanding, 
beings to whom the present life 
and its experiences would seem to be of 
little or no advantage. But when, in 1873, 
I came to examine the subject of restitution 
from the standpoint of the ransom 
price given by our Lord Jesus for Adam, 
and consequently for all lost in Adam, it 
settled the matter of restitution completely, 
and gave fullest assurance that ALL 
must come forth from Adamic death and 
be brought to a clear knowledge of the 
truth and to fullest opportunity of everlasting 
life in Christ. 

Thus passed the years 1869-1872, and 
the years following, to 1876, were years of 
continued growth in grace and knowledge 
on the part of the handful of Bible students 
with whom I met regularly in Allegheny. 
We progressed from our first 
crude and indefinite ideas of restitution 
to clearer understanding of the details, 
God's due time for clearer light not having 
come until 1874. 

During this time, too, we came to recognize 
the difference between our Lord 
as "the man who gave himself," and as the 
Lord who would come again, a spirit being. 
We saw that spirit-beings can be 
present, and yet invisible to men, just as 
we still hold and have set forth in Millennial 

Dawn, Vol. II., Chap. x. And we felt 
greatly grieved at the error of Second 
Adventists who were expecting Christ in 
the flesh, and teaching that the world and 
all in it except Second Adventists would 
be burned up in 1873 or 1874, whose time-settings 
and disappointments and crude 
ideas generally of the object and manner 



of his coming brought more or less reproach 

upon us and upon all who longed 

for and proclaimed his coming Kingdom. 

These wrong views of both the object 
and manner of the Lord's return led me 
to write the pamphlet— "The Object and 
Manner of The Lord's Return," of 
which some 50,000 copies were published. 

It was about January 1876 that my attention 
was specially drawn to the subject 
of prophetic time, as it relates to these 
doctrines and hopes. It came about in this 
way: I received a paper called The Herald 
of The Morning, sent by its editor, 
Mr. N. H. Barbour. When I opened it 
I at once identified it with Adventism 
from the picture on its cover, and examined 
it with some curiosity to see what 
time they would set next for the burning 
of the world. But judge of my surprise 
and gratification, when I learned from its 
contents that the editor was beginning to 
get his eyes open on the subjects that for 
some years had so greatly rejoiced our 
hearts here in Allegheny— that the object of 
our Lord's return is not to destroy, but 
to bless all the families of the earth, and 
that his coming would be thief-like, not 
in flesh, but as a spirit-being invisible to 
men, and that the gathering of his Church 
and separating of the wheat from the 
tares would progress in the end of this 
age without the world's being aware of it. 
I rejoiced to find others coming to the 
same advanced position, but was astonished 
to find a further statement very 
cautiously made, that the editor believed 
the prophecies to indicate that the Lord 
was already present in the world (unseen 
and invisible) and that the harvest work 
of gathering the wheat was already due. 

Here was a new thought: Could it be 
that the time prophecies which I had so 
long despised, because of their misuse by 
Adventists, were really meant for us —to 
indicate when the Lord would be invisibly 
present to set up his Kingdom— a 
thing which we clearly saw could be 
known in no other way? It seemed, to 
say the least, a reasonable, very reasonable 
thing, to expect that the Lord would 
inform his people on the subject— especially 
as he had promised that the faithful 
should not be left in darkness with the 
world, and that though the day of the 
Lord would come upon all others as a thief 



in the night (stealthily, unawares), it 
should not be so to the watching, earnest 
saints.— 1 Thes. 5:4 . 

I recalled certain arguments used by the 
Adventists to prove that 1 873 would witness 
the burning of the world, etc.— the 
chronology of the world showing that the 
six thousand years from Adam ended with 
the beginning of 1873, and other arguments 
drawn from the Scriptures and supposed 
to coincide. Could it be that these, 
which we had passed by as unworthy of 
attention, really contained an important 
truth which they had misapplied? 

Anxious to learn, from any quarter, whatever 
God had to teach, I at once wrote to 
Mr. Barbour, informing him of our harmony 
on other points and desiring to 
know particularly why, and upon what 
Scriptural evidences, he held that Christ's 
presence and the harvesting of the Gospel 
age dated from the Autumn of 1874. 

The answer showed that my surmise 
had been correct, viz.: that the time arguments, 
chronology, etc., were the same as 
used by Second Adventists in 1873, and 
explained how Mr. Barbour and Mr. J. A. 
Paton of Michigan, a co-worker with him, 
had been regular Second Adventists up 
to that time, and that when the date 1874 
had passed without the world being 
burned, and without their seeing Christ in 
the flesh, they were for a time dumb-founded. 
They had examined the time-prophecies 
that had seemingly passed unfulfilled, 
and had been unable to find any 
flaw, and had begun to wonder whether 
the time was right and their expectations 
wrong,— whether the views of restitution 
and blessing to the world, which others 
were teaching, might not be the right 
thing to look for. Not long after their 
1874 disappointment, a reader of the 
Herald, who had a copy of the Diaglott, 
noticed something in it which he thought 
peculiar,-that in Matt. 24:27,37,39 , the 
word which in our common version is 
rendered coming, is translated presence. 

This was the clue, and following it, they 
had been led through prophetic time toward 
proper views regarding the object 
and manner of the Lord's return. We of 
Allegheny on the contrary were led first 
to proper views of the object and manner 
of our Lord's return and then to the examination 
of the time for these things, 



indicated in God's word. Thus God 
leads his children often from different 
starting points of truth; but where the heart 
is earnest and trustful, the result must be 
to draw all such together. 

But there were no books or other publications 
setting forth the time-prophecies 
as then understood, so I paid Mr. Barbour's 
expenses to come to see me at Philadelphia 
(where I had business engagements during 
the summer of 1876), to show me fully and 
Scripturally, if he could, that the prophecies 
indicated 1874 as the date at which the 
Lord's presence and the harvest began. 
He came, and the evidences satisfied me. 
A person of positive conviction and fully 
consecrated to the Lord, I at once saw 
that the new light had an important bearing 
upon our duty and work as Christ's 
disciples; that being in the time of harvest, 
the harvest-work should be done, 
and that present truth was the sickle by 
which the Lord would have us do a gathering 
and reaping work everywhere among 
his children. 

I inquired of Mr. Barbour as to what 
was being done by him and through the 
Herald. He replied that nothing was being 
done; that the readers of the Herald, 
being Adventists, had nearly all lost interest 
and stopped their subscriptions 
—and that thus, with money exhausted, 
the Herald might be said to be practically 
suspended. I told him that instead of 
feeling discouraged and giving up the work 
since his newly found light on restitution 
(for when we first met, he had much to 
learn from me on the fulness of restitution 
based upon the sufficiency of the ransom 
given for all), he should rather feel that 
now he had some good tidings to preach, 
such as he never had before, and that his 
zeal should be correspondingly increased. 
At the same time I felt that the knowledge 
of the fact that we were already in the 
harvest period gave to me an impetus to 
spread the truth such as I never had before. 
I therefore at once resolved upon 
a vigorous campaign for the truth. 

I determined to curtail my business 
cares and give my time as well as means 
to the great harvest work. Accordingly, 
I sent Mr. Barbour back to his home, with 
money and instructions to prepare in concise 
book form the good tidings so far as 
then understood, including the time features, 



while I closed out my Philadelphia 
business preparatory to engaging in the 
work, which I afterward did, traveling 
and preaching. 

The little book of 196 pages thus prepared 
was entitled The Three Worlds, 
and while it was not the first book to 
teach a measure of restitution, nor the 
first to treat upon time-prophecy, it was, 
we believe, the first to combine the idea 
of restitution with time-prophecy. From 
the sale of this book and from my purse, 
our traveling expenses, etc., were met. 
After a time I conceived the idea of adding 
another harvest laborer and sent for 
Mr. Paton, who promptly responded and 
whose traveling expenses were met in the 
same manner. 

But noticing how quickly people seemed 
to forget what they had heard, it soon became 
evident that while the meetings were 
useful in awakening interest, a monthly 
journal was needed to hold that interest 
and develop it. It therefore seemed to 
be the Lord's will that one of our number 
should settle somewhere and begin 
again the regular issuing of the Herald 

of the Morning. I suggested that Mr. Barbour 
do this, as he had experience as a 
type-setter and could therefore do it 
most economically, while Mr. Paton and 
I would continue to travel and contribute 
to its columns as we should find opportunity. 
To the objection that the type was 
now sold, and that the few subscriptions 
which would come in would not, for a 
long time, make the journal self-sustaining, 
I replied that I would supply the 
money for purchasing type, etc., and leave 
a few hundred dollars in bank subject to 
Mr. Barbour's check, and that he should 
manage it as economically as possible, 
while Mr. Paton and I continued to travel. 
This, which seemed to be the Lord's 
will in the matter, was done. 

It was after this, while on a tour of the 
New England states, that I met Mr. A. P. 
Adams, then a young Methodist minister, 
who became deeply interested and accepted 
the message heartily during the 
week that I preached to his congregation. 
Subsequently, I introduced him to little 
gatherings of interested ones in neighboring 
towns, and assisted otherwise, as I 
could, rejoicing in another one who, with 
study, would soon be a co-laborer in the 



harvest field. About this time, too, I was 
much encouraged by the accession of Mr. 
A. D. Jones, then a clerk in my employ 
in Pittsburgh— a young man of activity 
and promise, who soon developed into 
an active and appreciated co-laborer in 
the harvest work, and is remembered by 
some of our readers. Mr. Jones ran well 
for a time, but ambition or something 
eventually worked utter shipwreck to his 
faith, and left us a painful illustration of 
the wisdom of the Apostle's words: "My 
brethren, be not many of you teachers, 
knowing that we shall have the severer 
judgment."— James 3:1 . 



R1214 : page 4 
SIFTING THE WHEAT. 



"Satan hath desired to have you that he might 
sift you as wheat."— Luke 22:31 . 

Thus far all had run smoothly and onward; 
we had been greatly blessed with 
truth, but not specially tested in our love 

R1214 : page 5 

and fidelity to it. But with the Summer 
of 1878, the parallel in time to the Lord's 
crucifixion and his utterance of the above 
quoted words, the sifting began, which 
has continued ever since, and which must, 
sooner or later, test every one who receives 
the light of present truth. "Marvel not, 
therefore, concerning the fiery trial which 

shall try you, as though some strange thing 
happened unto you;" for this "fire shall 
try every man's work, of what sort it is" 
—whether he has built his faith flimsily 
of wood, hay and stubble, instead of with 
the valuable stones of God's revealed 
truth, or whether he has built it upon 
the shifting sands of human theory— evolution, 
etc.— or upon the solid rock, the 

ransom, the only sure foundation, which 
God has provided. They who build upon 
that rock shall be safe personally, even 
though they may have built up an illogical 
faith which the "fire" and shaking of 
this day of trial shall overthrow and utterly 
consume; but they who build upon any 
other foundation, whether they use good or 



bad materials, are sure of complete wreck. 
-See Luke 6:47-49 ; 1 Cor. 3:11-15 . 

The object of this sifting, etc., evidently 
is to select all whose heart-desires are 
unselfish, who are fully and unreservedly 
consecrated to the Lord, who are so anxious 
to have the Lord's will done, and 
whose confidence in his wisdom and his 
way and his Word is so great, that they 
humbly refuse to be led either by the sophistries 
of others, or by plans and ideas of 
their own, away from the Lord's Word. 
These, in the sifting time, will be strengthened 
and shall increase their joy in the 
Lord and their knowledge of his plans, 
even while their faith is being tested by 
the falling into error of thousands on 
every hand.— Psa. 91:7 . 

The sifting began thus: Regarding 
Paul's statement ( 1 Cor. 15:51,52 ): "We 
shall not all sleep, but we shall all be 
changed— in a moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye," etc., we still held the idea which 
Adventists, and indeed all Christians hold, 
that at some time the living saints would 
be suddenly and miraculously caught away 
bodily, thenceforth to be forever with the 
Lord. And now, our acquaintance with 
time-prophecy led us to expect this translation 
of the saints at the point of time 
in this age parallel to the Lord's resurrection; 
for many of the parallelisms between 
the Jewish and Christian dispensations 
were already seen by us, and formed 
one of the features of the little book above 
referred to— The Three Worlds. 

We did not then see, as we now do, 
that that date (1878) marked the time for 
the beginning of the establishment of the 
Kingdom of God, by the glorification of 
all who already slept in Christ, and that 
the "change" which Paul mentions ( 1 Cor. 15:51 ) 
is to occur in the moment of 
dying, to all the class described, from 
that date onward through the harvest 
period until all of the living members 
("the feet") of the body of Christ, shall 
have been changed to spirit beings glorified. 
But when at that date nothing occurred 
which we could see, a re-examination 
of the matter showed me that our 
mistake lay in expecting to see all the 
living saints changed at once, and without 
dying— an erroneous view shared in by 
the whole nominal church, and one which 
we had not yet discarded or observed. 



The clear view just stated, and which has 
been presented through the TOWER, was 
the result of the examination thus started. 
I soon saw that in the Apostle's words, 
"We shall not all sleep," the word sleep was 
not synonymous with die, though generally 
so understood; that on the contrary 
the expression sleep, here used, represents 
unconsciousness; and that the Apostle wished 
us to understand that from a certain 
time in the Lord's presence, his saints, 
though they would all die like other men 
( Psa. 82:6,7 ), would not need to remain 
for any time unconscious, but in the moment 
of dying would be changed and 
would receive the spirit body promised. 
Throughout this Gospel age, dying has been 
followed by unconsciousness, "sleep." 
This continued true of all saints who 
"fell asleep in Jesus" up to the time when 
he took the office of King ( Rev. 11:17 ), 
which we have shown (in Millennial Dawn, 
Vol. II., pages 218, 219) was in 1878. 
Not only did the King at that date "awaken 
in his likeness" all the members of his 
body, the church, who slept, but for the 
same reason (the time for establishing his 
Kingdom having come) it is no longer 
necessary that the "feet" or last remaining 
members should go into "sleep," or 
unconsciousness. On the contrary, each 
now, as he finishes his course, faithful unto 
death, will at once receive the crown of 
life, and being changed in a moment, in 
the twinkling of an eye, cannot be said 
to sleep, or to be unconscious at all. Here, 
too, Rev. 14:13 is applicable-1878- 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the 
Lord from henceforth." 

So this re-examination showed further 
light upon the pathway and became a 
good cause for encouragement, as evidencing 
the Lord's continued leading. 

But while I was thus helped to clearer 
views and brighter hopes, and while I 
diligently endeavored to help others, the 
Spring of 1878 proved far from a blessing 
to Mr. Barbour and to many under his influence. 
Rejecting the plain, simple solution 
presented above, Mr. B. seemed to 
feel that he must of necessity get up something 
new to divert attention. And alas, 
how dangerous it is for any man to feel 
too much responsibility and to attempt to 
force new light. 

To our painful surprise Mr. Barbour 



soon after wrote an article for the Herald 
denying the doctrine of the atonement- 
denying that the death of Christ was the 
ransom-price of Adam and his race, saying 
that Christ's death was no more a 
settlement of the penalty of man's sins 
than would the sticking of a pin through 
the body of a fly and causing it suffering 
and death be considered by an earthly 
parent as a just settlement for a misdemeanor 
in his child. I was astonished, 
supposing that Mr. B. had a clearer understanding 
of the work of Christ as our sin-offering, 
our willing Redeemer who gladly, 
co-operating in the divine plan, gave 
himself as the ransom or corresponding 
price to meet the penalty upon Adam, that 
Adam and all his posterity might in due 
time go free from sin and death. A totally 
different thing indeed was the willing, intelligent, 
loving offering of our Redeemer, 
according to the plan devised and revealed 
by infinite wisdom, from the miserable 
caricature of it offered in the above illustration. 
I had either given Mr. B. credit 
for clearer views than he ever had, or else 
he was deliberately taking off and casting 
away the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness. 
The latter was the only conclusion 
left; for he afterward stated that 
he had previously recognized Christ's 
death as man's ransom price. 
Immediately I wrote an article for the 
Herald in contradiction of the error, showing 
the necessity "that one die for all"— 
"the just for the unjust"— and how Christ 
fulfilled all this as it had been written, 
and that consequently God could be just 
and forgive and release the sinner from the 
very penalty he had justly imposed ( Rom. 3:26 .) 
I also wrote to Mr. Paton, calling 
his attention to the fundamental character 
of the doctrine assailed, and pointing out 
how the time and circumstances all corresponded 
with the parable of the one 
who took off the wedding garment when 
just about to partake of the wedding feast. 
He replied that he had not seen it in so 
strong a light before, that Mr. B. had a 
strong, dogmatic way of putting things 
which had for the time overbalanced him. 
I urged that, seeing now the importance of 
the doctrine, he also write an article for 
the Herald, which, in no uncertain tone, 
would give his witness for the precious 
blood of Christ, which he did. Those 



articles appeared in the issues of the Herald 
from July to December, 1878. 

It now became clear to me that the 
Lord would no longer have me assist financially 
or to be in any way identified 
with anything which cast any influence 
in opposition to the fundamental principle 
of our holy Christian religion, and I 
therefore, after a most careful though unavailing 
effort to reclaim the erring, withdrew 
entirely from the Herald of the 
Morning and from further fellowship with 
Mr. B. But a mere withdrawal I felt was 
not sufficient to show my continued loyalty 
to our Lord and Redeemer, whose cause 
had been thus violently assailed by one in 
a position to lead the sheep astray— and 
in that position too very largely by my 
individual assistance and encouragement 
when I believed him to be in all sincerity 
true to the Lord. I therefore understood 
it to be the Lord's will that I should start 
another journal in which the standard of 
the cross should be lifted high, the doctrine 
of the ransom defended, and the 
good tidings of great joy proclaimed as 
extensively as possible. 

Acting upon this leading of the Lord, 
I gave up traveling, and in July, 1879, the 
first number of Zion's Watch Tower and 
Herald of Christ's Presence made its appearance. 
From the first, it has been a 
special advocate of the ransom, and by 
the grace of God we hope it will never be 
any thing else. 

For a time we had a most painful experience: 
the readers of the Herald and 
of the TOWER were the same, and from 
the time the latter started and the supply 
of funds from this quarter for the Herald 
ceased, Mr. B. not only treated all he 
had in his possession as his own, but 
poured upon the editor of the TOWER the 
vilest of personal abuse in order to prevent 
the TOWER and the doctrine of the ransom 
from having due influence upon the readers. 
This of course caused a division, as 
such things always do. The personal abuse, 
being regarded by some as true, had its 
intended effect of biasing the judgments 
of many on the subject of the ransom, 
and many turned from us. 

But the Lord continued his favor, which 
I esteem of more value than the favor of 
the whole world. It was at this time that 
Mr. Adams espoused the views of Mr. 



Barbour and likewise forsook the doctrine 

of the ransom. And, true to our interpretation 

of the parable of the wedding 

garment as given at the time, Mr. Barbour 

and Mr. Adams, having cast off the wedding 

garment of Christ's righteousness, 

went out of the light into the outer darkness 

of the world on the subjects once so 

clearly seen— namely, the time and manner 

of the Lord's presence; and since then 

for ten years they have been expecting 

Christ, Spring or Fall, down to the present 

Spring, which was their latest 

disappointment. 

During this ordeal, or we might truly 
call it battle, for the cross of Christ, we 
had the earnest co-operation of Mr. Paton, 
who, up to the Summer of 1881, was an 
appreciated co-laborer and defender of 
the doctrine of coming blessings through 
Christ based upon the ransom for all given 
at Calvary. The book The Three Worlds 
having been for some time out of print, it 
seemed as if either another edition of that, or 
else a new book covering the same features, 
should be gotten out. Mr. Paton agreed 
to get it ready for the press and Mr. Jones 
offered to pay all the expenses incident to 
its printing and binding and to give Mr. 
Paton as many copies of the book as he 
could sell, as remuneration for his time 
spent in preparing the matter, * provided 
I would agree to advertise it liberally and 
gratuitously in the TOWER— well knowing 
that there would be a demand for it if I 
should recommend it, and that his outlay 
would be sure to return with profit. I 
not only agreed to this but contributed 
to Mr. Paton's personal expenses in connection 
with the publishing, as well as 
paid part of the printer's bill at his 
solicitation. 

In the end I alone was at any financial 
loss in connection with that book, called 
Day Dawn, the writer and publisher both 
being gainers financially, while I did all 
the introducing by repeated advertisements 
in the TOWER as well as in Food for Thinking 
Christians, of which over a million 
copies were circulated. We need to give 
these particulars, because of certain one-sided 
and only partial statements of facts 
and misrepresentations, which have recently 
been published and circulated in 
tract form by Mr. Paton, who is also now 
an advocate of that "other gospel" of 



which the cross of Christ is not the center, 
and which denies that he "bought us with 
his own precious blood." Mr. P. has gotten 
out another book, which, though 
called by the same name as the one we 
introduced, being on another and a 
false foundation, I cannot and do not 
recommend, but which I esteem misleading 
sophistry, tending to undermine the 
whole structure of the Christian system: 
yet retaining a sufficiency of the truths 
which we once held in common to make 
it palatable and dangerous to all not rooted 
and grounded upon the ransom rock. 

The false foundation which it presents 
is the old heathen doctrine of evolution 
revamped— which not only denies the fall 
of man, but, as a consequence, all necessity 
for a redeemer. It claims, on the 
contrary, that not by redemption and restitution 
to a lost estate, but by progress of 
evolution or development, man has progressed 
and is still to progress from the 
lower condition in which he was created 
until he ultimately reaches the divine nature 
by his own good works. It claims 
that our blessed Lord was himself a degraded 
and imperfect man, whose work 
on earth was to crucify a carnal nature, 
which, it claims, he possessed, and to thus 
show all men how to crucify their carnal 
propensities or sinful desires. 

And here we remark that the darkness 
and degradation, which came upon 
the whole world in its fallen, cast-off condition, 
and which was only intensified by 
Papacy's priestcraft during the dark ages, 
when contrasted with the light of intelligence, 
which God is now letting in upon 
the world, have gradually led men to esteem 
present intelligence as merely a part 
of a progress of evolution. This view, 
as we have shown (Millennial Dawn, Vol. 
I., page 156), though quite incorrect, is 
nevertheless the occasion of the predicted 
great falling away from the faith of the 
Bible during the harvest period. ( Psa. 91:7 .) 
And few Christian people seem 
to be well enough grounded in the truth 



*For this reason Mr. Jones' address, was, properly, 
the only one mentioned in the advertisement. 

R1214 : page 6 



to be able to withstand this trial of the 
evil day, in which the many will fall, 
while only the few will stand. For this 
cause, we use great plainness of speech. 

The little history of the way in which 
Mr. Paton came to turn from us and the 
ransom, to oppose that which he once 
clearly saw and advocated, is important, 
as it became the occasion of another sifting 
or testing of the WATCH TOWER readers, 
by that time a much larger number; 
because Mr. Paton had been a respected 
brother and co-worker with us, and because 
as a traveling representative of the 
TOWER and its doctrines, his expenses being 
met in part by TOWER subscriptions 
and renewals, as well as by money from 
me, he was personally known to a larger 
number of the readers than was the editor 
of the TOWER. It came about thus:- 

In the year 1881, Mr. Barbour, still 
publishing the Herald, and still endeavoring 
to overthrow the doctrine of the 
ransom, finding that on a preaching tour 
I had used a diagram of the Tabernacle 
to illustrate how Christ's sacrifice was 
typified in the sacrifices of typical Israel, 
etc., wrote an article on the atonement, 
in which he undertook to show that the 
sacrifices of the Day of Atonement typified 
almost anything else than what they 
do typify. I could readily see through 
the fallacy of his presentation, which 
made of the bullock a type of one thing 
in one verse and another thing in each 
other verse in which it was mentioned, 
and so too with the goat. But I well 
knew that people in general are not close 
reasoners, and that with the cares of life 
upon them, they are too apt to accept a 
seeming interpretation, without a critical 
examination of the words of Scripture 
and their context. 

I thought the matter all over; I examined 
the chapter ( Lev. 16 ), but while seeing 
the inconsistency and error of Mr. 
Barbour's interpretation, I could only 
confess that I did not understand it and 
could not give a connected interpretation 
which would fit all the details so plainly 
stated, and all of which must have a particular 
meaning. What could I do? 
Those reading the Herald as well as the 
TOWER would probably be misled, if not 
helped out of the difficulty; and to merely 



say that the Herald's interpretation was 
inconsistent with itself, and therefore a 
misinterpretation, would be misunderstood. 
Many would surely think that I 
opposed that view from a spirit of rivalry. 
(There are always people with whom every 
thing resolves itself into personality, rivalry 
and party spirit, and such cannot understand 
others who take a higher and nobler 
view, and who think always and only of 
the truth, regardless of persons.) I went 
to the Lord with this as with every trial, 
told him just how it seemed to me, how 
anxious I felt for the dear sheep, who, having 
their appetites sharpened by some 
truth, were by their very hunger exposed 
to Satan's deceptions. 

I told him that I realized that he was 
the Shepherd, and not I, but that I knew 
also that he would be pleased at any interest 
in the sheep, and my desire to be his 
mouthpiece to declare the truth, the way 
and the life to them; that I felt deeply 
impressed that if the time had come for 
the permission of a false view to deceive 
the unworthy, it must also be his due time 
to have the truth on the same subject 
made clear, that the worthy ones might 
be enabled to stand, and not fall from the 
truth. Believing that the due time had come 
for the correct understanding of the meaning 
of the Jewish sacrifices, which all 
Christians see were typical of "better sacrifices," 
and that the Lord would grant 
the insight as soon as I got into the attitude 
of heart best fitted to receive the 
light, I prayed with confidence that if the 
Lord's due time had come, and if he was 
willing to use me as his instrument to declare 
the message to his dear family, that 
I might be enabled to rid my heart and 
mind of any prejudice that might stand 
in the way and be led of his spirit into 
the proper understanding. 

Believing that the prayer would be answered 
affirmatively, I went into my study 
next morning prepared to study and write. 
The forenoon I spent in scrutinizing the 
text and every other Scripture likely to 
shed light upon it, especially the epistle 
to the Hebrews , and in looking to the 
Lord for wisdom and guidance; but no 
solution of the difficult passage came. 
The afternoon and evening were similarly 
spent, and all of the next day; everything 
else was neglected, and I wondered why 



the Lord kept me so long; but on the 
third day near noon the whole matter 
came to me clear as the noon-day sun— so 
clear and convincing and so harmonious 
with the whole tenor of Scripture, that I 
could not question its correctness; and no 
one has ever yet been able to find a flaw 
in it. 

Then I knew why the Lord had led me 
to it so slowly and cautiously. I needed 
a special preparation of heart for the full 
appreciation of all it contained, and I was all 
the more assured that it was not of my 
own wisdom; for if of my own why 
would it not have come at once? I found 
that the understanding of that subject was 
bound to have a wide influence upon all 
our hopes and views of all truths— not in 
that it overturned old truths or contradicted 
them, but on the contrary, in that it 
set them all in order and harmony and 
straightened out little knots and twists. 
For instance, the doctrine of justification 
by faith had always been more or less confused 
in my mind, as it is in every mind, 
with the doctrine of sanctification which 
calls for self-sacrifice and works. This 
was all made clear and plain at once; for 
the types showed that we all, as sinners, 
needed first of all Christ's ransom sacrifice, 
and that we appropriate its merits 
(justification— forgiveness) to ourselves by 
faith, and that thus we are justified (reckoned 
free from sin) when we by faith accept 
of Christ's sacrifice on our behalf. 
The type showed, too, that it was only after 
being thus cleansed in God's sight (by 
our acceptance of Christ's finished work 
as our ransom-sacrifice) that God was 
willing to accept of us as joint sacrifices 
with Christ, and if faithful to the end, following 
in his footsteps, we should be granted 
the favor of joint-heirship with him. 

Here I first saw that the great privilege 
of becoming joint-heirs with Christ and 
partakers with him of the divine nature 
was confined exclusively to those who 
should share with him in self-sacrifice in 
the service of the truth. And here, too, 
I saw for the first time, that the Lord 
was the first of these sacrifices, the Sin-Offering; 
consequently, that none of God's 
servants, the prophets, who lived and died 
before Christ, were priests after his order, 
nor sharers in sacrifice with him, even 
though some of them were stoned, others 



sawn asunder and others slain with the 
sword for the cause of God; that though 
they would get a good and great reward, 
they would belong to a separate class and 
order from those called to sacrifice and 
joint-heirship with Christ on and since 
Pentecost. Here, too, I first saw that 
the acceptable day of the Lord signifies 
this Gospel age— the time during which 
he will accept the sacrifice of any who 
come unto God through Christ, the great 
Sin Offering, and that when this acceptable 
day ends, the reward of joint-heirship 
and change to the divine nature ends; and 
that when this great day of sacrifice, the 
Gospel age (the real Day of Atonement), 
has closed, when all the members of the 
body of Christ have participated with him 
in the sacrifice of their lawful rights and 
privileges as justified men, then the blessing 
will begin to come to the world— the 
Millennial blessings purchased for men by 
their Redeemer according to the grace of 
God. 

This first brought us to a clear recognition 
of the distinction of natures— of what 
constitutes human nature, what constitutes 
angelic nature and what constitutes divine 
nature, as shown in Millennial Dawn, Vol. 
I., Chapter x. And whereas we used to 
use the word RESTITUTION in a general 
way to mean some sort of blessed change, 
now, under the clearer light, we began to 
see that the great work of restitution 
could only mean what the word implies— 
a restoration of that which was lost ( Matt. 18:11 ) 
—a restoration to the original condition 
from which man once fell. Then 
I saw that God's plan when carried out 
would not bring all his creatures to the 
one level of the divine nature, but that he 
purposed to have an order of creatures 
called Angels, who, though perfect, would 
always be of a different order, or nature, 
from the divine nature, and he likewise 
purposed to have a race of beings of the 

human nature, of whom Adam was a sample 
or pattern and of whose future earthly 
home, Paradise, Eden was a sample or 
pattern. I also saw that God purposed 
that Christ and his join t-sacrificers and 
joint-heirs are to be God's instruments for 
blessing the fallen race and restoring them 
to the condition of perfection enjoyed by 
Adam in Eden— a condition which God 
said was "very good," and an image of 



himself. And these joint-heirs with Christ, 
I saw, were to be highly exalted to a nature 
higher than restored and perfect manhood, 
higher too than the angelic nature 
—even to be partakers of the divine nature. 

When all these things so unexpectedly 
shone out so brightly and clearly, I did 
not wonder that the Lord gave me several 
days of waiting and preparation for the 
blessing, and to him I rendered praise 
and thanks. All my faintness of heart 
and fear of the bad effect of the wrong 
view fled before this evidence of the 
Lord's leading in the pathway that shines 
more and more unto the perfect day. I saw 
at once that these new developments would 
probably prove a stumbling block to some, 
as well as a great blessing to others who 
were ready for it. Instead, therefore, of 
publishing it in the next TOWER, I determined 
to first present the matter privately 
to the more prominent brethren; 
—remembering Paul's course in a similar 
matter.— Gal. 2:2 . 

Accordingly I sent invitation and the 
money necessary for traveling expenses to 
four of the more prominent brethren, requesting 
a conference. Mr. Paton from 
Michigan was one of the four, and the 
only one who rejected the fresh rays of 
light. Nor could he find any fault with 
the exegesis, though urged, as all were, to 
state anything which might seem inconsistent 
or to quote any passages of Scripture 
thought to be in conflict. But there 
were none, and every question only demonstrated 
the strength of the position 
more fully. I therefore urged that what was 
beyond the criticism of those most familiar 
with the plan of God must be the truth, 
and ought to be confessed and taught at 
any cost, and especially when it arranged 
and ordered all the other features of truth 
so beautifully. I pointed out, too, how 
necessary it was to a logical holding of the 
ransom, to see just what this showed— 
viz.: the distinctions of nature— that our 
Lord left a higher nature, and took a lower 
nature, when he was made flesh, and that 
the object in that change of nature was, that 
he might, as a man, a perfect man, give 
himself a ransom for the first perfect man, 
Adam, and thus redeem Adam, and all 
lost in him. I also showed how, as a reward 
for this great work, he was given 
the divine nature in his resurrection— a 



nature still higher than the glorious one 
he had left, when he became a man. 
But either his mental vision or his heart 
was weak, and he never took the 
step, and before long, alas! he too, as 
we had foreseen and forewarned him 
would be the natural course, forsook the 
doctrine of the ransom. Yet he still 
uses the word, ransom, while denying the 
idea conveyed by the word, nor can he 
give the word any other definition, or 
otherwise dispute the correctness of the 
meaning, which we attach to it— which 
may be found in any English dictionary 
and is true to the significance of the Greek 
word which it translates. 

Notwithstanding our best endeavors to 
save him he drifted farther and farther 
away, until I was obliged to refuse his articles 
for the TOWER for the same reason 
that obliged me to refuse to longer spend 
the Lord's money entrusted to me to assist 
Mr. Barbour to spread the same pernicious 
theory. 

It was about this time that Mr. Jones 
informed me that the copies of the book 

Day Dawn which I had purchased last 
were all that were left; and announcing it 
so that no more orders for it might come 
to the TOWER office, I took occasion to 
promise MILLENNIAL DAWN, which should 
present the Plan of the Ages in the clearer, 
more orderly manner made possible by 
the new light shed upon every feature 
of it by the lessons from the Tabernacle. 
About this time Mr. Paton concluded that 
he would publish another Day Dawn, revised 
to harmonize with his new views ignoring 
the ransom, ignoring justification 
and the need of either, and teaching 
that all men will be everlastingly saved— 
not in any sense as the result of any sacrifice 
for their sin by Christ, but as a result 
of each one's crucifying sin in himself— 
the Law under which the poor Jews tried 
to commend themselves to God, but which 
justified none. 

During this time I was busied by an 
immense work known to many of you— 
the issue and circulation of over 1,400,000 
copies of the two pamphlets entitled 
"FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS" and 
the "TABERNACLE TEACHINGS," whose 
united matter was in sum about the same as 

Dawn, Vol. I.; and besides this I was flooded 
with thousands of joyous and joy-giving 



letters, from those who had gotten and were 
reading the pamphlets thus distributed, and 
asking questions and more reading matter. 
To add to our throng, financial complications 
came, and thus for four years I was 
hindered from fulfilling my promise of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. Nor will our promise 
be fulfilled for several years yet; for 
though two volumes are now out and a 
third on the way, I purpose several more, 
as the Lord shall give grace and strength, 
in connection with the other features of 
his work entrusted to my care. But because, 
during those four years in which 
we were struggling through an immense 
amount of labor and many draw-backs 
(all cheerfully undergone for the sake of 
the Lord and his saints), when each year 
we hoped afresh to be able to gather the 
hours necessary to complete the first volume 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and after the 

R1214 : page 7 

old edition was exhausted, notified all applicants 
that the Day Dawn advertised 
and recommended by us was out of print 
and could no longer be supplied, I have 
been made the target of innumerable petty 
misrepresentations too small to notice, and 
malicious insinuations told in a sly but 
slanderous manner and circulated in print, 
which a noble nature would disdain, but 
which are often successful, as intended, in 
stirring up bitterness, and injuring the influence 
of the truth. What do I do about 
it? I thank the Lord for the privilege of 
suffering some of the reproaches of Christ 
and the cross, and for grace sufficient that 
none of these things move me from the 
utmost determination to always hold up 
Christ and him crucified, as the Redeemer, 
who in due time shall restore whosoever 
wills to all that was lost in Adam. 

Some who have The Three Worlds or 
the old edition of Day Dawn would perhaps 
like to know my present opinion of 
them— whether I still think them profitable 
books to loan to truth-seekers. To 
this I reply, Certainly not; because the 
very immature views of God's truth therein 
presented fall far short of what we now 
see to be God's wonderful plan. Things 
which are now clear as noonday were then 
cloudy and mixed. The distinctions between 
the perfect human nature to which 



the obedient of the world will be restored 
during the Millennium, and the divine 
nature to which the little flock, the sacrificing 
elect of the Gospel age, are soon to 
be exalted were then unnoticed. All 
now so clear was then blurred, mixed and 
indistinct. Neither had we then seen the 
steps or planes, shown upon the Chart 
of the Ages, in Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., 
which have assisted so many to distinguish 
between justification and sanctification, 
and to determine their present standing 
and relationship to God's plan. And the 
time reckonings which those books present, 
lacking point and leaving the reader in 
doubt as to what the author is attempting to 
prove by them, tend only to confuse the 
mind and to give the impression that time 
prophecies are merely clues and serve no 
definite purpose or object. Hence, I answer 
most decidedly, I would not recommend 
nor use either of those books to-day. 
Once I was much less careful about what I 
circulated or commended, but I am learning 
every day to be more careful as to what 
sort of food I put before any of the Lord's 
hungry sheep. The Lord has taught me 
that it is a responsible matter to be a teacher, 
even to the extent of circulating a 
book or a paper. 

Another chapter in our experience needs 
to be told, as it marks another shaking 
and sifting. Mr. A. D. Jones proposed to 
start a paper on the same line as the 
WATCH TOWER, to republish some of the 
simpler features of God's plan and to be 
a sort of missionary and primary teacher 
to draw attention to the TOWER, etc. 
Knowing him to be clear on the subject 
of the ransom, we bade him God speed 
and introduced a sample copy of his paper, 
Zion's Day Star (now for some years discontinued), 
to our nearly ten thousand readers 
—only to stumble some of them into rank 
infidelity and others into the rejection of 
the ransom. For though the Day Star for 
a few months steered a straight course and 
maintained the same position as the TOWER 
with reference to the ransom, and for the 
same reason refused the no-ransom articles 
sent for its columns by Mr. Paton, yet within 
one year it had repudiated Christ's atoning 
sacrifice, and within another year had 
gone boldly into infidelity and totally repudiated 
all the rest of the Bible as well 
as that which teaches the fall in Adam 



and the ransom therefor in Christ. 

All this meant another strain, another 
sifting, another cutting loose of friends, 
who erroneously supposed that our criticism 
of the false doctrines were prompted 
by a spirit of rivalry, and who did not see 
so soon whither the teachings were drifting, 
nor how great the importance of holding 
fast the first principles of the doctrines of 
Christ— how Christ died for our sins and 
rose again for our justification. 

This brings the history down close 
enough perhaps to the present time; but 
we want to put you all on notice that the 
shaking and sifting process, so far from 
being over and past, is bound to progress 
more and more until all have been tried 
and tested thoroughly. It is not a question 
of who may fall, but of "Who shall be 
able to stand?" as the apostle puts it. 
And we have need again to remember the 
admonition, "Let him who thinketh he 
standeth (who feels very confident, as did 
Peter when he said, "Lord, though all deny 
thee yet will not I") take heed lest he 
fall." 

This doctrine of another way of salvation 
(and salvation for all, too,) than 
by the cross of Christ is not only the error 
which is, and has been since 1874, sifting 
all who come into the light of present 
truth, but it is the trial that is to 
come upon the whole Christian world to 
try them. ( Rev. 3:10 .) It already is 
spreading among all classes of Christian 
people, especially among the ministers, of 
all denominations. The number who believe 
that Christ's death paid our sin-penalty 
is daily getting smaller, and before 
very long there will be a regular stampede 
from the doctrine of man's fall in Adam 
and his ransom from that fall by the man 
Christ Jesus. ( 1 Tim. 2:5,6 .) As David 
prophetically pictured it, a thousand will 
fall to one who will stand.— Psa. 91:7 . 

The time has come for each one to declare 
himself boldly. He who is not for 
the cross and the ransom there effected, 
is against it! He that gathereth not, 
scattereth abroad! He who is silent on 
this subject, when it is being assailed by 
foes on every hand, whether it be the silence 
of fear, or of shame, or of indifference, 
is not worthy of the truth, and will 
surely be one to stumble quickly. He 
who from any cause sits idly by, while the 



banner of the cross is assailed, is not a 

soldier of the cross worthy the name, 

and will not be reckoned among the overcomers, 

who shall inherit all things. And 

God is permitting these very sittings, in 

order to sift out all who are not "overcomers," 

and test and manifest the little 

flock, who, like Gideon's final army, will, 

though few, share the victory, and the 

honors, with their Captain in glory. 

Are you prepared for the issue, dear 
Brethren and Sisters? The armor of 
truth has been given you for some time 
past; have you put it on?— have you 
made it your shield and buckler?— your 
defence against all the wily arts of the 
evil one? 

Do not be deceived by the agents he 
often makes use of. In this he will be as 
cunning as in his presentation of the deceptive 
misrepresentations of truth, making 
unwitting use of many a weaker 
brother, and to some extent of every 
stumbling and deceived one, to spread 
the infection of false doctrine farther. 
And while every child of God should 
take earnest heed, that he prove not an 
occasion of stumbling to any, we cannot 
doubt that every one will, through some 
instrumentality, be assailed by it. 

Aptly indeed did the prophet liken it 
to a pestilence. ( Psa. 91:6 .) A pestilence 
spreads because people are in a physical 
condition which renders them susceptible 
to disease. Physicians will tell you 
that those whose systems are in good, 
healthy order are in little danger of any 
disease. So it is with a spiritual pestilence: 
it will flourish not only because 
all will be exposed to it who have not 
a clear intellectual appreciation of the 
doctrines of Christ, but from another 
cause also. Out of the heart are the issues 
of life, and most needful of all to be 
in right condition is the heart. How is 
your heart, dear Brother, dear Sister? Is 
it proud, boastful, independent, self-conscious 
and self-willed? If so, take care; 
you will be very liable to this epidemic, 
no matter how far from it you may seem 
to be. Make haste to labor and pray for 
"A heart resigned, submissive, meek, 
The dear Redeemer's throne, 

Where only Christ is heard to speak, 
Where Jesus reigns alone." 

With such a heart you are safe. In 



meekness and lowliness, you will never 
think of redeeming yourself from the 
condemnation that you inherited through 
Adam, by sacrificing present sinful desires, 
but you will flee to the cross, where God 
himself opened the fountain for sin and 
uncleanness, present as well as past. 

DOTH THIS OFFEND YOU? 

We expect that it will offend some, 
though it is not designed to offend any. It 
is written for the defense of the meek, 
against the sophistries of error. "Who 
shall ascend into the hill of the Lord [into 
the kingdom offered]? or who shall 
stand in his holy place? He that hath clean 
hands and a pure heart [who is diligently 
fashioning his life after the principles of 
holiness]; who hath not lifted up his soul 
unto vanity [who cultivates no earthly 
ambitions or pride, but patiently waits for 
the glory to follow the course of present 
self-sacrifice], nor sworn deceitfully [ignoring 
or despising his covenant with God]: 
He shall receive the blessing of the Lord, 
[the kingdom glory and joint-heirship 
with Christ] and righteousness [perfection 
—full deliverance from present infirmities, 
etc.] from the God of his salvation." 
( Psa. 24:3-5 .) "Seek righteousness, 
seek meekness: it may be, ye shall 
be hid in the day of the Lord's anger" 
[in this "evil day"— this day of snares, 
and pitfalls, and flying arrows, and destructive 
pestilences]. "Watch and pray, 
that ye enter not into temptation"— that 
"your minds be not corrupted from the 
simplicity that is in Christ." Let all the 
meek fully awake to the trial of the hour; 
and while many are putting stumbling 
blocks in the way of the "feet" of the 
body of Christ, let each soldier of the 
cross be vigilant not only to stand but 
to assist others— bearing up the "feet."— 

Psa. 91:11,12. 



R1214 : page 7 

PUTTING OFF AND PUTTING ON. 

"Having put off the old man with his 
practices. ..put on the new one, being 
renewed by knowledge according to a 



likeness of him who created him."— 
Col. 3:9,10. 

The great work of the consecrated in 
this present time is this process of putting 
off the old defilements and putting on the 
new character. However zealous we may 
be in our efforts to spread the truth, to enlighten 
those about us, and to see the 
great harvest work progressing, we should 
ever keep in mind this one element of the 
work, which, to each of us personally, is 
the all important work; for it is possible 
that after having preached to others, we 
ourselves should come short and be 
counted unworthy of a place in that 
chosen company to which we are called, 
and to which we aspire. 

Let us then consider what it is to put 
off the old nature, and how we may put 
on the new. The Apostle tells us, saying, 
"Put to death, therefore, those 
members on the earth— fornication, impurity, 
passion, evil desire and inordinate 
lust, which is idol-worship; on account 
of which things the wrath of God is coming." 
And "Put off also all these— 
Anger, wrath, malice, evil-speaking, vile 
words out of your mouth. Do not speak 
falsely to each other, having put off the 
old man with his practices." 

Here are two sets of evil dispositions 
to be put to death by patient and continuous 

R1215 : page 7 

resistance: the one gendered by 
perverted love, which is idolatry, and the 
other by hatred. These are the filthy 
rags of sin with which the old nature is 
clothed since the fall, and these must be 
put away. We cannot keep and cherish 
them and put on the new nature too; we 
must be washed, cleansed, sanctified by 
the blood of Christ and with the washing 
of water by the Word; and then we may 
begin to put on the new man— the new 
nature. "As chosen ones of God, beloved 
saints, be clothed therefore with a 
merciful mind, kindness, humility, meekness, 
patience, endurance, bearing with 
each other, and freely forgiving each 
other, if any one for some things may 
have a cause of complaint; even as the 
Lord forgave you, so also do you forgive." 
What a transformation it will make 



when all of those are put off and all of 
these are put on! How like the Lord 
himself, when so cleansed and attired in 
the livery of heaven! Consider each 
item of this apparel and daily strive to 
have it all on. But, "besides all these 
things, put on love: it is the bond of the 
completeness:" it is the girdle which 
binds and fits them all close to the person. 
"And let the peace of the Anointed preside 
in your hearts. ..and be thankful." 

With such a cleansing and robing 
comes the delightful refreshment of that 
peace which passeth the understanding of 
the old, sinful man. The feeling of spiritual 
refreshment is akin to that of the 
natural refreshment when the body has 
been cleansed in water and clothed in 
clean linen, pure and white. 

Thus cleansed and clothed, we are ready 
to put on the whole armor of God and 
to go forth to battle for truth and righteousness. 
Without the invigorating cleansing 
and the robing of righteousness, we 
would be unable to bear the heavy armor; 
but thus attired the armor fits, and is well 
sustained; and the man of God, thoroughly 
equipped, may confidently and courageously 
go forth to battle. 



R1215 : page 7 

A POINTED APPLICATION. 



A journalist being called to task for applying 
the name "Mother of Harlots" to 
Papacy, and thus implying that all Protestant 
sects as systems are implicated as 
harlot-daughters defends himself thus: 

"As the individual members of the 
church of Christ cannot be joined to the 
world without being counted by the word 
of God as adulterers against him, so also 
the church as a body cannot be joined in 
any way to the power of the world without 
likewise being declared by the word of 
God an adulteress and a harlot. 

"Let not the professed Protestant 
churches blame us for this application of 
the scripture. They themselves have acknowledged 
the church of Rome as their 
mother, and they need not blame us if 
we call attention to the Scripture description 
of the family. In the New York 



Evangelist of February 9, 1888, Rev. 
Charles W. Shields, D.D., of Princeton 

R1215 : page 8 

College, in proving that it would never 
do, in the re-union of Christendom, to forbid 
a doctrine of Apostolic Succession, 
said:— 'You would exclude the Roman 
Catholic church, the mother of us all, the 
church of scholars and saints.... You 
would exclude also the Protestant Episcopal 
Church, the beautiful daughter of a beautiful 
mother.'" 



R1215 : page 8 

THE SUBSIDENCE OF MOUNTAINS. 

Possibly the prophecy that the mountains 
shall be brought low, and the valleys 
filled, is to have a literal as well as a 
symbolical fulfilment. The following 
which I clip may interest you and others. 
W. M. WRIGHT. 

"According to La Gazette Geographique 
the Cordillera of the Andes are gradually 
sinking. In 1745 the city of Quito was 
9,596 feet above sea level; in 1803 it was 
only 9,570; in 1831, 9,567; and scarcely 
9,520 in 1867. This amounts to a lowering 
of 76 feet in 122 years, or at the rate 
of 7-1/2 inches per annum. We are also 
told that the farm of Antisana has sunk 
165 feet in sixty-four years, or more than 
two and a half feet per annum. This is 
the highest inhabited spot on the Andes 
—about 4,000 feet higher than Quito, the 
highest city on the globe. The peak of 
Pichincha was, according to the same authority, 
218 feet lower in 1867 than in 1745, 
a sinking of nearly two feet per annum. 
Assuming the accuracy of these figures, 
they present a curious geological problem, 
especially as there is no record of a 
corresponding change at sea level or at 
the foot of these same mountains, which 
descend rather steeply to the Pacific. If 
the plasticity or viscosity of the earth's 
crust be such as I have contended in this 
magazine, it follows almost of necessity 
that such a mass of mountain land as that 
in this region of Quito and Chimborazo 
must be squeezing itself downward into the 



subcrust of the earth by its own enormous 

weight. Although the highest of these 

peaks are not quite so high as the highest 

peak of the Himalayas, the concentration 

of elevation in a given area, or, otherwise 

stated, the mass standing above sea level 

in proportion to the base on which it 

stands, is greater than can be found in any 

other part of the world, and its downthrust 

is similarly pre-eminent. Such 

down squeezing and sinking must be accompanied 

with corresponding lateral 

thrust, or elbowing that should produce 

earthquake disturbances on every side. 

The facts fully satisfy this requirement of 

the theory, as the country all around the 

region in question is the very fatherland 

of terrible earthquakes." 



R1213 : page 8 

AN EPISCOPAL BISHOP ON BAPTISM. 

Only when men lose sight of the meaning 
of the symbol can they descend to such 
puerilities as the following. 

Note also that the "Church" speaks to 
them, not through the inspired word of 
God, but by the prayer book ["Rubric"], 
confessedly of human origin, and 
which they openly talk of remodeling at 
an early date.-- W. M. W. 

The clipping criticized by Bro. W. 
is from the Episcopalian journal called 
The Living Church, and reads as follows: 

Bishop Tuttle, speaking of the practice 
of some ministers in simply sprinkling the 
head of the person baptized, says: "May 
I call attention to the fact that the Church 
never in the Prayer Book says one word 
about 'sprinkling.' Her words are 'Shall 
dip in the water or pour water.' I may, 
therefore, be permitted to say to the clergy 
that it is well worth their while to take 
pains to fill the palm of the hand full of 
water and pour upon the head when they 
baptize, in order, first, to ensure that the 
water does indeed touch the person so as 
to make the sacrament valid, and secondly, 
to comply with the exact injunction of the 
rubricand to help banish the unfounded 
accusation that we have aught to do with 
any such thing as 'sprinkling.'" 



R1215 : page 8 
"ACCEPTED." 

I had been sitting alone in the little 
chapel for some time, busy at the organ 
in preparation for a meeting, and was 
about to leave the room, when an old man 
who had been in the reading-room adjoining 
came slowly toward me, and lifting 
his face toward mine, said: 

"I like music. Won't you go back 
and play a little more for me?" 

He was eighty-four years old, as he 
told me afterward. His body was bent 
under the burden of years, and as I seated 
myself again at the organ he came and 
stood beside me, fully ripe, as it seemed, 
for heaven. He was alive to only one great 
thought— Jesus, the Savior and Master! 

He had been turning the leaves of the 
"Gospel Hymns" while my fingers ran 
over the key-board, and presently he laid 
the book before me, saying: 

"Play that slowly, and I'll try to sing 
it for you." 

Softly and very slowly I followed him, 
as with a broken voice, often scarcely 
audible, he tried to sing: 

"Take the name of Jesus with you, 
Child of sorrow and of woe; 

It will joy and comfort give you; 
Take it, then, where'er you go." 

It was little more than a whisper song; 
but as he took up the words of the chorus 
a glad smile spread over his face, and 
his voice seemed to gather strength from 
his heart as he looked rather than sang: 
"Precious name! O, how sweet! 

Hope of earth and joy of heaven." 

It was true worship: the simple, glad 
expression of a loving, loyal heart. 
Verily, I sat alone with a saint that day, 
for as the other verses of the hymn were 
sung their wondrous meaning was interpreted 
by the face of the singer, and the 
vail seemed almost to fall away, revealing 
to me the things unseen. 

I had never seen the old man before; 
it is not probable I shall ever see him 
again in the flesh; but his life touched 
mine with blessing that day, for he had 
unconsciously brought the Master very 
near. God's work in the world calls 



loudly for consecrated talent, vigorous 
minds, songful voices, physical strength, 
business tact, enterprise, money and 
time. We realize this, and perhaps, finding 
that we have none of these things, 
think that we have nothing that would be 
"acceptable in God's sight." He wants 
the best we have, it is true; but if the 
best is very, very poor, it is acceptable to 
the Father, who cares more for the love 
which prompts our service than for the 
service itself. There was no music in the 
old man's voice; indeed, it could truthfully 
be said that he almost had no voice; 
but he drew a soul a little nearer to its 
Savior with what he had. God owned 
and blessed his weakness. "If there be 
first a willing mind it is accepted according 
to that a man hath, and not according 
to that he hath not."— Selected. 



R1216 : page 8 

UNDER Bible influence all the finer faculties 
are expanded, invigorated and elevated; 
all the purest and best emotions of 
the heart are refined, exercised, and ennobled; 
all the highest, manliest, and 
most beautiful attributes and virtues of 
the character are moulded into symmetry, 
and assimilated to the likeness of Christ 
and of God. 



R1216 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., JUNE, 1890. NO. 7. 



page 1 

ARP TRACTS— free— in any quantity you 
think you can use judiciously. We have 
these both in English and German. 



WE HAVE thought best to postpone the 
publication of "The Tabernacle Teachings" 
and to make it the August number. 



R1216 :page 1 

THE MAY TOWER, it seems, was just 
what was needed and longed for by many 
of our older readers. The July issue may 
contain extracts from some very interesting 
letters it has called forth, which are 
coming in daily. Not for persons entirely 
unacquainted with the views represented in 
the TOWER and MILLENNIAL DAWN, but 
for use among others who already know 
considerable of "this way," we consider 
it and this present issue very suitable. 
We will supply free all that you can judiciously 
use. You may either order the 
papers and distribute them yourselves or 
send the addresses to us, explaining the 
kind, and we will mail them. 



R1216 :page 1 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

As we do not have printing presses and 
a bindery of our own, but hire our work 
done, we are more or less dependent upon 
others. We must therefore ask patience 
on your part for the volume of Poems and 
Hymns until about July. Orders will be 
filled in rotation as received. Those sent 
in now may not be attended to before 
July 15th as quite a number are already 
ahead of them. Order at once. The 
book will contain 495 pages of poems and 



hymns by various authors, some of them 
overhauled and repaired theologically. 
We believe it is just what all the TOWER 
readers need and will want. To put it 
within the reach of all, the price in cloth 
binding will be 50 cents postpaid or 40 
cents per copy by express at your charges. 
Any one who has been a TOWER reader for 
a year (and thus shown to be interested 
in the subject treated) who cannot afford 
to purchase will be supplied free upon 
request. 



R1216 :page 1 

PUT ON THE WHOLE ARMOR AND STAND. 

All of Satan's deceptions are manifestly 
aimed in the one direction. As he originally 
misled mother Eve by telling her 
that death would not be inflicted as the 
wages of sin, he has persistently stuck to 
that text since. When death did result 
and he could not totally deny it, he next 
tried to persuade the world that the dead 
are not dead, but more alive than ever 
when they seem to die. And to prove 
his lie he instituted witchcraft, which 
God prohibited and forbade any who at 
all acknowledged him to have anything 
to do with.-- Exod. 22:18 ; Gal. 5:20 . 

Next Satan tried to blaspheme God and 
oppose the gospel of Christ, the gospel of 
the ransom and the resurrection, and to 
cause men to hate God, by representing 
that the wages of sin is lasting life in torment. 
His constant course has been to represent 
the wages of sin as being anything 
else than what God has declared— death. 

And to-day what policy is he pursuing, 
to deceive? We answer, he is still pursuing 
those same lines of deception, and 
opening up new lines to specially deceive 
any who begin to get the eyes of their 
understandings opened. Instead of Witchcraft 
he now has Spiritism, and through 
mediums instead of through witches he 
gives pretended communications from 
the dead, who, God declares, know not 
anything, whose very thoughts have perished, 
and who have no hope of life except 
through Christ and the resurrection. 
He still has many who hold firmly to his 
God dishonoring doctrine that the wages 



of sin is not death, but lasting life in torment. 
He has recently put forward devices 
and sundry theories, of which 
Christian Science is a fair sample. This 
teaches that death and sickness, instead of 
being realities, and the wages of sin, are 
merely imaginations. And he is now introducing 
among so-called "intellectual 
people" certain doctrines long held in 
India, called Karman, which also oppose 
God's sentence against sin— death. 

But while all these have their influence, 
and all serve to enslave and blind, the 
great Adversary has a special form for 
presenting this same lie, "Ye shall not 
surely die," to the more advanced of 
God's children— to whom specially we 
now write. To these he seductively declares: 
God is too loving to carry out 
such a threat; eventually every creature 
will have everlasting life. Ye shall not 
surely die; for God doth know sin will 
only make you the wiser and that eventually 
you shall all be as gods. Just what 
he said to deceive mother Eve.— 
Gen. 3:4-5 . 

Realizing the importance of this subject 
to all who would hold fast the confidence 
of their rejoicing firm to the 
end, and who would not be moved away 
from the faith once delivered unto the 
saints, to another gospel, we have devoted 
a very large space in this number to the 
consideration of these devices and snares. 
Put on the whole armor of faith provided 
in God's Word, that you may be able to 
stand— and having done all this, stand on 
the defensive, resisting in Christ's name, 
and with the sword of the spirit and the 
shield of faith, all the wiles of the devil. 



R1216 :page 1 

THE ONE LOST SHEEP SAVED. 

The parable of the one lost sheep is supposed 
by some to teach that God will pursue 
every sinner and ultimately bring the 
lost one back into the fold of God. But 
does the parable teach this? 

By no means. A sheep, a docile creature, 
always represents one who wills to 
be in harmony with God and in the fold. 
A goat is the Lord's symbol for the wayward 



and wilful. This is clearly shown in 
the parable of the sheep and the goats, in 
which the Lord represents himself as the 
shepherd of the sheep who selects them 
from the goat class. The parable shows 
how at the close of the Millennium those 
found to be sheep will be received into 
lasting life prepared for such, while all 
who shall then have proved themselves 
goats, preferring sin, shall be cut off from 
life, with Satan, whose servants or messengers 
they will be considered. 

While the Lord died for all, and will 
give all the fullest opportunity to know of 
him and his fold and his laws for his sheep, 
and to become his sheep, yet it is those 
whom he foresees will become his sheep 

R1217 :page 1 

that he is really seeking. 

In the parable, who, shall we say, are 
represented by the ninety-nine sheep, the 
"ninety-nine just persons, who need no 
repentance?" ( Luke 15:4,7 .) Surely 
none of humanity are among these ninety-nine, 
for "all we like sheep have gone 
astray." ( Isa. 53:6 .) "There is none 
righteous, no, not one." ( Rom. 3:10 .) 
This parable is wider than some have seen. 
It includes the perfect angels of God who 
left not their first estate, who went not 
astray, who were never lost. Our Lord 
left these and came to earth to seek and 
to recover man —the lost sheep. 

Mankind as a whole is lost— men feel 
themselves lost and want back to the fold; 
and as a whole mankind is to be found or 
brought fully under the tender Shepherd's 
care, in the times of restitution. But any 
who, after coming to a knowledge of the 
truth, after being found and rescued by 
the Shepherd, follow him not, but prefer 
to follow Satan, will no longer be counted 
the Lord's sheep; for his sheep are those 
who hear his voice and follow him, and 
only such. And we have every reason to 
believe that the vast majority of mankind 
—the one sheep— will be brought back 
to the fold. 

The idea of some, however, that God 
has a certain amount of pride in the matter 
and that on this account he will coerce 
the last one, even Satan, is attributing to 
God the weaknesses of the one who thus 
reasons. Human pride and ambition "not 



to be beat" does indeed so think and act 
often, but it is not so with God. He seeketh 
such to worship him as worship willingly, 
lovingly, in spirit and in truth, 
and he seeketh not the worship of others. 

The Pharisees got that idea once and 
boasted to the Lord that they were sure 
of God's favor because they were children 
of Abraham. But he very pointedly answered 
that if God could get no better 
children for Abraham from among his 
literal sons, he would create children out 
of stones rather than recognize them, 
whom he denominated children of the 
devil, because his course they followed 
and his works they did.— See Matt. 3:9 ; 
John 8:44 . 



R1216 :page 1 

A BROADER LOVE. 



Some will suggest, Could there be perfect 
happiness beyond the Millennium if 
even one mother's son were to die the 
Second Death? 

Let such consider that the love which 
a mother has for her son more than for 
others is a more or less selfish love, the 
outgrowth of present conditions and circumstances. 
When the race has reached 
perfection, in the times of restitution, the 
loves now bounded by the narrow family 
circle will be overwhelmed and swallowed 
up by a universal love for all the sons of 
God on every plane of being. Love will 
then be founded upon the substantial basis 
of character and intrinsic merit. When 
perfection is reached the love between the 
members of the restored race will be the 
true, pure, unselfish love, more like the 
love of God. Every mother will love 
every other mother's son just as she loves 
her own; the human family will be one 
family, and all will be sons of God, loving 
God supremely and each the other as 
himself. All who have not this spirit 
(after full opportunity and knowledge), 
whatever or whoever such may be, will 
not be recognized as members of the family 
of God, but as aliens, and enemies of 
God and righteousness. When people 
are thus loved for what they really are, 
and when God's law is the recognized 



standard, no love will be lost and no 

sympathy wasted upon those who wilfully 

prefer and choose evil. When they shall 

be destroyed from among the people ( Acts 3:23 ) 

and shall "be as though they had 

not been," all will realize and fully 

acquiesce in the wisdom of his law— that 

wilful sinners shall die. This will be the 

effect of the broader, fuller love upon all 

who enter into perfect love and perfect 

harmony with all the wise arrangements 

of our just God and Savior. 

Indeed a feeling like this is often experienced 
now by disheartened mothers 
whose gray hairs are brought down with 
sorrow to the grave by wayward sons who 
have no respect for their counsels and entreaties. 
How often such say, Would that 
I had never given birth to such a son. 



R1217 : page 3 

"YE ARE CHRIST'S!" 



"Ye are Christ's!" oh yes; I know it! for he bought 

me with his blood; 
And I never can forget it, for He is my Savior God. 
In his hands behold the nail-prints, in his face eternal 

love. 
How I long to be just like him in the Father's 

house above! 

"Life is yours:" oh yes; I have it— having all in 

God's dear Son; 
He began "the life" within me, and he'll work 

till all is done. 
His eternal mind inspires me, breathing through 

his holy Word, 
So I'm resting in the keeping of the Spirit's voice 

I've heard. 

"Death is yours:" oh yes; but vanquished— for 

"the Son of God" has died: 
With his righteousness I'm clothed; in his life I'm 

sanctified. 
He is coming soon to take me, so I'm watching at 

his gate; 
As I long for his appearing, I am serving while I 

wait. 

"Present things:" oh yes; I use them as I cross 

the ocean's foam, 
On the voyage of life's journey to my Lord's eternal 

home. 



His own guide-book is my treasure, and his lifeboat 

cannot sink; 
Christ, the Captain, gives me daily more than I 

could ask or think. 

"Things to come:" O depths of riches! all God's 

promises are sure; 
And through these I'm made partaker of the life 

which shall endure. 
In the "Times of Restitution" of the "all things" 

he hath made, 
I shall evermore behold him in the light which 

cannot fade. 

"In the world:" I live above it— all the mammon 

with its load; 
For I've found the "Enoch" secret— how to walk 

along with God. 
Through the day I walk with Jesus, and at night 

sleep on his breast: 
I just tell him all that presses, and he gives me 

perfect rest. 

Do I glory? Yes; I know it, for there's no "perhaps" 

with God; 
All my ifs and buts are buried, with my sins, beneath 

the blood. 
Christ is risen: He lives in me; and all power to 

him is given; 
Thus he'll use me for his glory till he takes me 

home to heaven. — W. Luff. 



R1217 : page 3 

SATAN'S DEVICES. 

"We are not ignorant of his devices."— 
2 Cor. 2:11 . 

When we mention Satan's snares for 
the "feet" of the Christ, we of course do 
not refer to literal snares, but to doctrinal 
ones; nor to the literal feet of our Lord, 
but to his symbolic feet— the last living 
members of the elect church not yet glorified. 
Nor will any expect to see Satan 
personally preaching or publishing deceiving 
errors: on the contrary, Satan's 
devices and snares are operated by men; 
and as far as he can manage it so, by 
moral men, or such as have, or have had, 
some character or standing in connection 
with the cause of Christ. And indeed 
some who are his active servants are totally 



unaware of the fact, and are themselves 

deceived by his devices, as the Apostle suggests. 

( 2 Tim. 3:13 .) Nevertheless, his 

servants you are to whom you render service. 

( Rom. 6:16 .) As an illustration 

of those who betray the truth from bad, 

selfish motives, consider Judas, who betrayed 

the Lord for thirty pieces of silver. 

Woe unto that man and all like him: it 

had been better for such never to have 

been born; for such a life proves a miserable 

failure. 

As illustrations of those who served 
Satan ignorantly, consider Peter and 
Paul. Peter became Satan's agent and 
mouthpiece unwittingly when, neglecting 
to be humble and to remember 
that he was to be taught of the Lord 
and not to attempt to be his instructor, 
he began to try to persuade the Lord 
not to yield himself as the sin-offering. 
( Matt. 16:23 .) And our Lord's answer 
shows that he regarded Peter for the moment 
as the unintentional servant of Satan, 
whose bad counsel, if followed, would have 
been a violation of his covenant. Paul, 
too, was a child of God, a Pharisee of the 
strictest sect, jealous for God's law and 
devoted to its service at the very time 
that he was actually in Satan's service 
and opposing God's plan by persecuting 
the church of Christ. He was blinded 
by false religious teaching and thus got 
into Satan's service; and yet, as he tells 
us, at that very time when he was so actively 
serving Satan, he verily thought that 
he was serving God. In both of these 
instances (and we believe it will be so in 
every instance where the motives are 
right and only the head at fault), the 
Lord had mercy upon them because they 
did Satan's work ignorantly; and as an 
evidence and means of mercy he rebuked 
them sharply and painfully. Had they 
not been honest, humble men they would 
not have received the Lord's rebukes as 
they did, but would have endeavored 
somehow to justify themselves and their 
fellows and would ultimately have gotten 
farther and farther away into error instead 
of becoming, as they thereafter did, the 
mightiest of his servants. Therefore, as 
the Apostle exhorts, if any find himself in 
error, instead of attempting to justify it 
and prove it right, let him remember the 
Apostle's words: "Humble yourselves 



under the mighty hand of God, that he 
may exalt you in due time."— 1 Pet. 5:6 . 
We have given this sketch of what it is 
to be a servant of Satan, in order that we 
may not be misunderstood when referring 
to Satan's devices now, in our day. We 
do not attempt to say which of those 
whom Satan is now using are used ignorantly, 
like Peter and Paul, nor which 
may be entering heartily into the work of 
seducing the body of Christ with a kiss 
of feigned love into the power and service 
of the enemy. God alone knoweth the 
heart; and the Lord, not we, must judge 
of the motives prompting the action. Nor 
can we determine the measure of guilt 
and the punishment due for it in individual 
cases; but it is the duty of each one 
of God's children to judge for himself according 
to God's Word as to what is truth 
and what is error; and it is the duty of 
each to the extent of his ability to help 
others to see the truth, discern the error and 
stand firmly upon the Word of God and 
not be removed by the traditions and 

R1218 : page 3 

theories of men, which, as snares, on every 

hand, the enemy is causing to be spread 

for the "feet" of Christ. Satan must 

be regarded as the real foe, the real instigator 

of the errors, no matter who is his 

willing or ignorant agent. 

One of these devices or snares, and one 
which at first sight certainly appears to be 
harmless and even benevolent, yet which 
leads into error, is the theory that God 
has foreordained the 

EVERLASTING SALVATION OF ALL. 

This has at first a charming sound to 
those whose minds are just liberated from 
the narrow views of "Orthodoxy." The 
impulse of all is to say, "Praise God for 
all his gracious plan." If he has declared 
in his Word that all men shall be everlastingly 
saved, who could desire to have 
it otherwise? So say we all. We want 
to know, however, that it is God's Word 
and plan that we are building on, and 
not merely the generous impulses of our 
own hearts. 

Believing a thing or disbelieving it will 
not affect the facts, and we want something 



more than fancy as a basis for faith. 
We have learned, too, or should have done 
so, if we are Christians of development 
and experience, that our ways and thoughts 
are not always God's ways and thoughts; 
and therefore we need to submit our ideas 
of justice and wisdom to God's ideas, as 
expressed in his Word. 

Well, let us see what God says on this 
subject. And let us remember that God 
speaks to us of the principles of righteousness 
by his own conduct, as well as by 
the word of his inspired servants in the 
Bible. 

But before examining what the Lord 
has to say on the subject, let each ask himself, 
"Am I perfectly willing to look at 
the matter just as the Lord presents it?" 
If his Word shows that all will be saved 
everlastingly would we accept it gladly 
and teach it? Or would we combat it and 
endeavor to twist the words of inspiration 
to the contrary. And, on the other hand, 
if his Word shows that all will not be 
saved everlastingly, what then? Will we 
with equal cheerfulness accept the justice 
and love of God as far higher and wiser 
than ours, and esteem our contrary ideas 
as erroneous misconceptions? Or will we 
try to force our ideas into the Scriptures 
and to twist and turn all the contrary 
passages to meet our ideas? 

In approaching God's Word in the 
study of these or any questions, it is the 
same as though we approached him in 
prayer. To obtain our request it must be 
the heart's desire. Our own will and preference 
must be dead and buried, so that 
we shall have no other desire than to hear 
God's Word and make it ours. Let each 
one prayerfully do this before going further 
in this investigation. 

Now, to begin with, "Does any passage 
of Scripture declare in so many 
words the everlasting salvation of all 
men?" (Look this up in your concordance.) 
No; not one passage. 

Next, what passages might be so viewed 
as to seem to imply this, or to furnish 
some ground for such an inference? 

The following would seem to be the 
only ones from which such an inference 
even would be deducible:— 

(1)— "We trust in the living God, who 
is the Savior of all men, specially of 
those that believe."— 1 Tim. 4:10 . 



(2)— "Who will have all men to be 
saved, and to come unto the knowledge of 
the truth."-- 1 Tim. 2:4 . 

(3)— "Therefore, as through the offense 
[sin] of one sentence came upon all men 
to condemnation; even so, through the 
righteousness of one, the free gift came 
upon all men unto justification of life."— 
Rom. 5:18 . 

(4)— "That as sin hath reigned unto 
death, even so might grace reign through 
righteousness unto eternal life through 
Jesus Christ our Lord."— Rom. 5:21 . 

(5)— "For as in Adam all die, even so 
in Christ shall all be made alive."— 

1 Cor. 15:22 . 

(6)— "The gift of God is eternal life 
through Jesus Christ, our Lord."— 
Rom. 6:23 . 

(7)— "The last enemy that shall be 
destroyed is death."— 1 Cor. 15:26 . 

(8)— "He will swallow up death in 
victory."- 1 Cor. 15:54 ; Isa. 25:8 . 

We can find no other statements than 
these, throughout the entire Bible, to even 
give a color of truth to the claim that 
the Bible is full of it. And remember 
that all that can be said on that subject 
aside from what can be built reasonably 
and logically upon these statements 
of the Bible is merely deceptive sophistry 
and not in any sense the Word of 
God's testimony. 

Now let us examine these statements 
which some claim as ground for the inference 
that God's revealed plan is that all men 
are to be saved everlastingly. Is the inference 
tenable under critical examination? 
Let us look at each statement in 
order with its context, and see just what 
it means and settle once and forever 
whether any of them support such an inference, 
even. 

We say, settle it, because a condition of 
uncertainty is not a condition of faith. 
And it is our duty to have settled convictions 
of truth, convictions so rooted and 
grounded in God's Word that we cannot 
be moved therefrom.— See Col. 1:23 ; 

1 Pet. 5:10. 

(1)— This text shows clearly two classes 
of saved ones, the first, "all men," including 
the last, those who "believe," 
who are specially saved. All men, we 
know, lost life in Adam; and according 
to God's plan our Lord Jesus tasted death 



for every man; and therefore, in due time 

(either in the Gospel age or in the Millennial 

age) all shall be saved or delivered 

from that lost condition of hopeless condemnation, 

by being brought to a knowledge 

of Christ's redemptive work and 

the reconciliation and restitution thereby 

made possible for them. Each is thus 

made safe —saved from the condemnation 

to destruction which Adam's sin brought 

upon all. We who now accept of God's 

plan in Christ speak of ourselves properly 

as saved now; we are brought back into 

God's favor and recognition (in Christ, 

our Mediator); and according to God's 

promise and provision, all who become 

obedient to the Son of God shall be specially 

or lastingly safe. On such the second death 

shall have no power. Thus seen, this statement 

signifies that God saves all men from 

the loss experienced by all in Adam's fall, 

and will make that salvation special or 

lasting to those who believe. The word 

believe here does not signify to give general 

assent or have a knowledge; for all 

shall know of God, from the least to the 
greatest. The Greek word here rendered believe 
is pistos and its signification is trusty 
and trusting. Thus it is to the trusty and 
trusting ones that God shall work out special 
or lasting salvation. Nothing in this 
text, therefore, teaches the everlasting salvation 
of all. 

(2)— The second text above quoted is in 
the same line exactly as the first. It recognizes, 
first of all, that men are lost, and 
thus agrees with our Lord's words that he 
"came to seek and to save [recover, restore] 
that which was lost," referring back 
directly to the failure of Adam and the 
condemnation to death and fall from perfection 
there brought upon all men. Next 
it shows what God's will is with reference 
to those lost ones: He wills that they shall 
be recovered from that lost or cast-off 
condition into which all fell through 
Adam's sin, and that they each and all 
shall come to a clear, full knowledge of 
the truth— that they shall come to see 
clearly what sin is and what its penalty 
is, death; and what righteousness is and 
what its reward is, life. Because this was 
God's will, he made provision for carrying 
it out. How? By providing in the sacrifice 
of Christ a ransom-price for Adam and 
all that was lost. But was any everlasting 



thing lost? Evidently not; its being lost, 
proved that Adam's life was not everlasting 
life. And the saving or restoring of men 
back to life and to favor and harmony 
with God (all that was lost) evidently 
is not, therefore, the giving of everlasting 
life. The everlasting continuance of the 
restored life depends upon the everlasting 
obedience of the restored beings— just as 
it did with Adam. Hence, God's further 

R1218 : page 4 

provision is, that after thus saving men 

from Adamic death he will have all men 

come to a full knowledge of the truth. And 

as they thus come to a knowledge of the 

truth, their responsibility toward it increases, 

and thus the knowledge brings trial 

or testing. And as Adam was tested, 

each one saved from the Adamic condemnation 

is to be tested and finally proved 

worthy or unworthy of life. Those 

("the elect") found worthy under the 

severe trials of the present age will, at 

the close of this age, receive life in its 

highest form— inherent life, Immortality, 

as partakers of the divine nature. At the 

end of the Millennial age, all who shall pass 

their trial successfully will be confirmed in 

their possession of life everlastingly, while 

those not found worthy, and therefore not 

written in the book of life, will be destroyed. 

This destruction is symbolically 

termed the lake of fire, and is called the second 

death, because they had already been 

rescued through the ransom from the first or 

Adamic death; and thus their destruction 

then, as the penalty of their own sin, is 

distinguished from the first death or destruction 

in which all shared and from 

which it was God's will to save all through 

Christ. We find nothing here to teach 

the everlasting salvation of all men. 

(3)— This text refers to how all of our 
race come under the dominion of sin and 
its penalty, death: not willingly, neither by 
any fault on God's part, but by the transgression, 
offense or disobedience of Adam. 

It shows, also, how God arranged that 
through the obedience of Christ even unto 
death, on behalf of all, all might be justified 
to life. And it is to grant all men a full 
opportunity to attain unto a justification 
(or merit) of lasting life, that God has 
made the provision so ample, first by saving 



or ransoming all from the power of the 

R1219 : page 4 

grave; and second, by bringing all to the 
fullest knowledge of the truth. And the 
Millennial reign of Christ is not only the 
period in which this full, clear knowledge 
is to reach the masses of men, but it is 
the period of judgment, or trial, ( Acts 17:31 ) 
to see how many, under fullest favor 
and greatest possible opportunity consistent 
with righteousness, will attain unto justification 
(merit) of LIFE EVERLASTING. We 
find nothing therefore in this text to teach 
the everlasting salvation of all men. 

(4)— This text is a continuation of the 
thought of the foregoing one (3). The 
Apostle here contrasts the reign of sin and 
death during the 6000 years of the permission 
of evil, with the coming 1000 years 
reign of righteousness and life. The tendency 
of the reign of sin was always 
unto death: and so, too, the tendency 
of the reign of righteousness will always 
be unto life. But even as now sin 
does not reign in all ( Rom. 6:12 ), so 
that some now, in heart, pass from 
death unto life notwithstanding the reign 
of sin and death, so in the future (as 
indicated by the contrast), though the 
reign of righteousness and tendency toward 
life will affect all, some then will pass 
from the general condition and in heart will 
be disaffected. And in the end of that 
trial— in the harvest of the Millennial 
age— a testing will take place which will 
clearly manifest all who at heart are opposed 
to the perfect law of God. And 
such shall "be destroyed from among the 
people."- Acts 3:23 ; Rev. 20:9 . 

(5)— Adam was appointed to be the 
father (life-giver) of the human family; 
but losing his right to life himself, when 
he disobeyed God, he has been unable to 
carry out his commission to fill or people 
the earth; for, like himself, all his 
progeny are dying men instead of living 
men. Had God created two head men 
or fathers and had only one of these 
sinned, then only that race in the sinful 
head or father would have died with him 
because of his disobedience. All should 
see how, in what manner, all men are 
in Adam, and therefore die. This should 
be clearly seen before going farther in the 



study of this text, because it is even so, 
that all in Christ are to be made alive. 
No man can be made alive in Christ or 
through Christ except by coming into him 
and through him. There is no other way 
to come to life and no other name given 
than his. When the knowledge of the 
Lord fills the earth and all come to an understanding 
of the truth, they will see that 
"He that hath the Son hath life, and he 
that hath not the Son of God hath not 
life"— hath no right to or promise of 
life. ( 1 John 5:12 ; John 3:36 .) All 
who would have life in that age must 
become children of Christ, begotten 
of truth. ( Isa. 9:6 .) And just as all 
in Adam died, lost life, even so with 
all in Christ, they shall all be made 
alive— reach a state or condition of perfection 
and freedom from death. Surely 
nothing in this text teaches that all will 
be kept alive everlastingly. 

(6)— This text not only shows that everlasting 
life is a boon, a favor, a special 
gift, but it teaches that there are certain 
limitations surrounding it. It is not common 
or given away regardlessly, but under 
the limitations and conditions of the 
New Covenant. It is given only through 
Jesus Christ, our Lord, the Mediator of 
that New Covenant. Thus again we are 
reminded that only all in Christ shall be 
made alive, and all not in him "shall not 
see life."— John 3:36 . 

The remainder of this text should never 
be forgotten, either. The entire verse 
declares that God is willing to give the 
gift of life everlasting only to those who 
accept it in and through Christ and on the 
condition of worthiness of everlasting life, 
which he as the appointed judge shall 
decide at the close of the Millennial age, 
the general trial or judgment day. For 
all others than those who accept the gift 
upon the proffered terms— righteousness 
—God declares he will pay the proper 
wages of sin— death. Surely nothing in 
this text teaches that all will be everlastingly 
saved. 

(7)— The thought here is the same as in the 
foregoing text. We were reconciled to God 
by the death of his Son, hence in his due 
time the power of death over us shall be 
broken. To this end the Millennial reign 
of Christ has been appointed. During 
that age one after another of the curses 



and evils of the present time will be destroyed 

—most of them at the beginning 

of that reign, in the great time of trouble 

by which it shall be introduced. The one 

enemy which shall longest have a footing 

is Adamic death. It will continue to 

have a measure of power until near the 

close of the Millennium— not that people 

will then sicken and die as now, through 

weaknesses inherited; but though mankind 

will be getting stronger mentally, 

morally and physically, and nearer perfection 

and life, as they conform to the 

rules and regulations of the New Covenant, 

yet as any imperfection of mind or 

body is so much of death, it is evident 

that in this respect this Adamic death will 

be the last enemy to be banished and destroyed; 

for its last taint will not be gone 

until there is not one of the human family 

imperfect or in any manner under the 

control of Adamic death. If any are in 

death then, it will not be because of 

inherited weakness, but because of wilful 

sin of their own. And God does not 
offer any degree of life to such. 

Adamic death is classed as an "enemy" 
because it has a hold upon some who are 
already reconciled to God by the death 
of his Son. And many others, also, who 
will become reconciled when brought 
to the full knowledge of the truth, 
are held by it and hindered from full 
harmony and communion with God and 
full obedience to his laws of righteousness. 
For this reason the ransom was provided 
and all are released; for God is not willing 
that any creature of his who desires 
good should be held back, or to any degree 
hindered from the same. God wills, 
therefore, that Adamic death shall be destroyed 
and that all shall go free from that 
sentence and that all shall have full knowledge 
and an individual trial for life. 

The death which will come upon some 
(few, we trust and believe), as the result of 
their own wilful sins against clear light, 
will not be an enemy in God's sight, but 
the honorable servant of righteousness, 
executing the just decree of the King of 
kings. Nor will it be the enemy of any of 
those in harmony with God who will rejoice 
to see his will done in cleansing the 
universe from all whose ways are an abomination 
in the sight of God and all the 
lovers of righteousness.— Rev. 21:8 . 



The trial in the end of that age is briefly 
stated in Psa. 1:5 . "The ungodly 
shall not be able to stand in the judgment 
[they will fall] nor sinners [be permitted 
to continue] in the congregation of the 
righteous." It will be an everlasting blessing 
to all the righteous that the wicked will 
not be everlastingly perpetuated. And 
the second death, which will cut them off 
from life forever, will be the friend of God 
and of righteousness and of all in harmony 
with these. So, then, the "enemy," 
death, that Christ will destroy during the 
Millennium, will be Adamic death, and 
this text can in no sense or degree be used 
as a proof of the everlasting salvation of 
all.- Isa. 25:8 . 

(8)— This text also refers to the Adamic 
death. This is clearly discernible from 
the context. ( 1 Cor. 15:12-18,26 .) 
It therefore is no proof whatever that the 
restitution standing, given to all in Christ, 
will be maintained in the trial of the Millennial 
judgment and forever. This passage 
the Apostle quotes from Isa. 25:8 . 
It is a pen picture of the blessings to be 
accomplished during (not after) Christ's 
reign of a thousand years. Verse 6 refers 
to the mountain or kingdom of Christ, in 
which God shall provide a feast of blessings 
for all mankind. Verse 7 declares 
that the shame (sinful weaknesses) of all 
and the shade (sorrow, gloom— "vail") 
of all shall be swallowed up in the blessings 
of that day. Verse 8 declares that even 
death itself shall yield to the powers of 
that King and the laws of his kingdom, 
and all tears shall be wiped away (just as 
the Book of Revelation also pictures it), 
and then to be of the Lord's people will 
no longer bring reproaches and dishonor 
and persecution. Thus, in this as in every 
place, the Lord does most positively declare 
his intention to utterly destroy 
Adamic death, from which his death ransomed 
all— it "shall be rendered powerless" 
to hold any back from obedience 
and life; it shall be no more, when all are 
thus freed from its condemnation and 
bondage and given full liberty and choice 
of life as Adam had before his 
condemnation. 

But notice that it is not the Second Death 
which is here or anywhere represented as 
being destroyed, but the death whose 
baneful influence was spread over all people 



—the Adamic death. Note also that this 
death being destroyed by the release of 
all out of it would not hinder any so released 
from dying the second death as 
the penalty for their own wilful sins, when 
on trial. On the contrary, chapter 26 , 
continuing the same picture of the Millennial 
reign, indicates that the second death 
will be the just retribution for wilful sinners. 
Verses 7-9 show that the way 
of the upright and the path of the just will 
be made level, and they shall delight 
therein; for it is what their souls longed 
for even in the night of sin. Such shall 
seek the Lord early in that Millennial 
morning, and all the inhabitants of earth 
will learn perfectly what righteousness is 
and what are its rewards. Yet verse 10 shows 
(just as Matt. 25:41-46 and Rev. 20: 10 and 
many other passages do) that even then, with 
fullest knowledge, some will not learn (to 
love) righteousness. In the land of uprightness 
(Christ's Kingdom) will he deal unjustly, 
and will not recognize the majesty 
of the Lord's law. Lord, when thy hand is 
raised high they shall not see: oh! that they 
might see thy zeal for the people and be 
ashamed; yea, the fire shall devour them, 
thine enemies. 

R1220 : page 4 

The sum of this testimony then is, that 
God hath ordained and fully provided for 

A UNIVERSAL SALVATION, 

BUT NOT FOR 

ITS EVERLASTING CONTINUANCE 

EXCEPT TO 

WORTHY INDIVIDUALS. 

Not only do all of God's promises attest 
this to be his plan, but all of his arrangements 
and dealings agree to the same 
testimony. He condemned all through 
one man's disobedience (and gave all an 
experience with sin) in order that he 
might have mercy upon all through 
another one. And his provision of mercy 
is that the one who redeemed them shall 
establish a reign of righteousness in the 
world and grant to all the fullest knowledge 
of it and its workings, that thus their previous 
knowledge of sin and its workings 
may be offset by an equal knowledge of 
righteousness and its results, in order to a 



full, fair trial of each individual, to prove 
whether he prefers the fruits of the spirit 
—meekness, gentleness, patience, love; 
or whether he still has sympathy with the 
evil disposition which led to all the present 
woe, and which if permitted to work would 
lead to similar results again, viz.: pride, envy, 
selfishness. The tests which the Lord will 
provide will, we may be sure, be equal to 
the emergency. In the close of the thousand 
years reign of Christ, when men have 
reached perfection of being and when 
they have full knowledge of right and 
wrong, Satan will be permitted a measure 
of liberty (having been restrained during 
that reign) in order to test these so highly 
blessed, to prove which of them are 
worthy of everlasting life. None are 
worthy of that great gift and none will 
get it except those who, when possessed 
of all that knowledge and ability 
which all by that time will have attained, 
will stand the test of God's perfect law. 
And it is in order to give that test that 
Satan will be granted "a little season" 
of permission to deceive and thus to test 
all. It will not be a deception as to 
what is right and what wrong, but they 
will be deceived into supposing that they 
would not be interfered with or punished 
for the wrong. Just such was mother Eve's 
deception: she knew all along what God 
had forbidden and that disobedience 
would be sin, and that God had pronounced 
the penalty of death against sin. 
Her deception did not therefore lessen her 
guilt, and evidently consisted in supposing 
that God either could not or would 
not inflict the penalty pronounced. 

Because of the inexperience of his 
creatures and their little knowledge of 

R1220 : page 5 

him and of the wisdom and justice of his 
laws against sin and all disobedience, God 
provided a redemption from all the evil 
results of that transgression and has arranged 
to give each of them a fresh trial for 
everlasting life, so that even the experience 
of that transgression and fall shall be valuable 
to the groaning creation when the time 
for their trial individually in Christ's 
kingdom shall come. But how different 
it will be in the close of the Millennium. 
The very knowledge and experience lacked 



in the first trial will be theirs, with the 
same perfections of mind and body, and 
hence that test will be final. If they do not 
hate sin, if they have the least sympathy with 
it, after all their experiences with it and its 
results, if they do not love righteousness 
and its blessings so that they delight in it, 
they are not in heart union with God and 
would be unfit to graduate into the ages 
of glory to follow where no sin nor any 
who love sin in any degree will be permitted 
to enter. 

Get the thought clearly in mind, that 
God's mercy in Christ consists in redeeming 
and restoring to the race all that was 
lost in Adam. Ask yourself whether Adam 
possessed and lost everlasting life. If he 
had possessed everlasting life, he could not 
have died. What then did he possess, 
and what did he lose, and what does 
Christ propose to restore to all? 

We answer, Adam possessed life in a perfect 
degree and had the promise of its 
everlasting continuance if he stood trial 
successfully. (And we have no reason to 
suppose that he would have been tried no 
more if that one trial of the forbidden 
fruit had been passed successfully. We 
believe that, before passing Adam into an 
everlasting condition, God would have 
given increasing tests of obedience with 
increasing knowledge until the test of fidelity 
would be complete). Adam, therefore, 
perfect but inexperienced, was enjoying 
a trial for lasting life, the results 
of which, if successful, would have proved 
him worthy of life everlastingly, and if 
unsuccessful would prove him unworthy 
of life, worthy of death. This trial was 
cut short, all share in God's offer of life 
as a reward of obedience was lost, and 
the sentence to death was incurred, by the 
act of disobedience. By paying the fine 
or sentence (death), for Adam and all in 
him, our Lord Jesus secured for all men 
a renewal of the trial, a renewal of the 
offer of lasting life to the obedient. In securing 
for all another trial or opportunity 
for proving themselves worthy of life everlasting, 
our Lord Jesus redeemed for the 
whole race, by his own blood (death), the 
very thing lost. To enable men to stand 
trial under the most favorable conditions 
possible, the Redeemer will make known 
his salvation to all, and will restore to perfection 
all who desire life, gradually, during 



the Millennium, schooling and disciplining 
them the while, so that before 
their (second) test shall have passed, they 
shall not only be perfect in powers, but 
perfect in knowledge and experience also. 

Nor should we judge of the Lord's 
methods and laws by the standards adopted 
among fallen men, which permit all 
to live whose liberty would not be dangerous 
to society. The ideas of fallen men, 
upon what is a good condition of society 
and safe laws for its regulation and upon 
who would be fit to enjoy its blessings 
and be considered a good member of it, 
are very different from God's view of 
the same. ( Isa. 55:9 .) And among 
men the standard of good differs greatly. 
Some would class all who refrain 
from murder, profanity, liquor and tobacco 
as good and worthy to go beyond the 
Millennium and have everlasting life. 
Others would be more exacting and would 
suggest that in addition all filthiness of the 
flesh must be put away, all evil speaking 
and malice, and that tempers must be controlled, 
if the fair perfection of God's 
Kingdom would be maintained and his 
promise realized that there shall be no 
more sorrow or pain. 

But, dearly beloved, even this last estimate 
falls far short of the perfection of 
heart that God will require of all who 
shall pass into the everlasting condition beyond 
the Millennium. It will be for the 
good and everlasting happiness of all who 
shall enjoy the everlasting conditions he is 
preparing for those who love him, that he 
will demand perfection, of all who shall 
enter it. And not only perfection in outward 
conduct, but perfection of heart — 
every desire and plan and thought, as well 
as every act and word, must be fully subjected 
to the Lord's plans and wishes, 
which are perfect. 

We realize this when we come to a full 
appreciation of God's law, under which 
all will be tested. Our Lord explained 
that grand law— so just and perfect and 
good ( Rom. 7:12 )— when he declared 
that it was briefly comprehended in one 
word, Love; and it is of two parts: 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all 
thy being and with all thy strength;— 
and thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." 
Ah! how grandly perfect that 



law. How perfectly safe it will be to introduce 
beyond the Millennium, into the 
everlasting state, such of the then perfectly 
restored race as shall be heartily in accord 
with that grand law of Love. 
In hearts where such loyalty to God 
controls, no room for ambition such as 
Satan manifested will be found, seeking 
to usurp authority and honor. ( Isa. 14:14 .) 
In such hearts no strife to be greatest will 
find place; and no disposition to rule 
over or be served by another, but rather 
in honor to prefer one another. And 
such even as would prefer the present 
unequal conditions of wealth and poverty, 
princedom and serfdom, and who would 
not greatly prefer the new state of general 
blessing and equality, would, by that law 
of Love, be condemned as unworthy of 
everlasting life and worthy of the second 
death. Such, if permitted to live, would be 
dangerous to the future good and liable, 
if an opportunity were ever presented, to 
establish for the future an aristocracy and 
caste, contrary to the laws of God's Kingdom 
and a continual menace to the joy 
and blessing and peace of all his perfect 
creatures. 

EVIDENCE SUFFICIENT FOR SOME. 

For some the above examination of the 
Scripture testimony on this subject will be 
quite sufficient. They will see that it is 
God's word and they will want no other 
way or plan than his. Loving God with 
all their hearts, and with all their minds, 
they will permit no will or thought of 
their own to oppose his. And many, if 
not all such, will at once see the reasonableness 
of God's arrangement as presented 
and the unreasonableness of any other, 
and thus their loyalty to God and to 
his plan will be rewarded by clearness 
of mental vision. To thus see clearly the 
why and wherefore and the grand outcome 
of the Lord's plan was not the privilege of 
God's saints in past centuries; but those 
who could not then see clearly all the 
reasons and the results were blessed in 
holding on to the first principles of the 
gospel— that sin is a terrible thing in 
God's sight, that the ransom given by our 
Lord was needful, and that all released by 
him must fully conform their wills to his 
laws if they would have the everlasting 



life promised. Now, however, God is 
preparing his people, forearming them, as 
it were, for the great conflict between 
truth and error, which his word declares 
is due to take place in the close of this age. 
Increase of knowledge and awakening increase 
of thought upon all subjects bring 
increased thought upon God's revelation 
of his will and plan. The crumbling of long 
cherished errors of every sort tends to 
shake confidence in everything that is 

R1221 : page 5 

old, and God therefore prepares his faithful 
ones by granting increased knowledge 
of his will and plan. This in symbol is 
aptly termed the sealing of the servants of 
God in their foreheads —intellectually. 
( Rev. 7:3 .) And all this clearness of vision, 
so satisfying to all whose only desire is to 
know the will of God, is the result of this 
sealing and is for your joy and comfort and 
strengthening in the truth; that you may 
be able to sing with the spirit and with 
the understanding also: 
"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word. 
What more can he say than to you he hath said, 
You who unto Jesus for refuge have fled." 
Yet some, whether because their wills 
are not fully submitted to God's will we 
judge not— God judgeth, not we— have not 
submitted themselves to these plain statements 
of God's plan, but have gone about 
to establish a plan of their own ( Heb. 10:2-5 .), 
which they modestly (?) think a 
better one. And of course they succeed 
in satisfying themselves as to the invulnerableness 
of their own arguments 
and theories. And God permits them to 
do so; just as he has all down through 
the Gospel age permitted false theories. 
And they of course quote Scripture to 
prove or to give seeming support to their 
theories, just as every false system or doctrine 
of the church has been bolstered 
up by misapplied and misinterpreted 
isolated statements of Scripture. 
This method of deceiving themselves as 
well as others, by building an argument upon 
a word or sentence of the Bible, regardless 
of the fact that such theory would be 
wholly out of harmony with the remainder 
of the paragraph or chapter, has long 
been the method of all errorists. Not 



only are the errors of Christendom, which 
separate God's people into various sects, 
thus supported, but whoever will read 
the theological discussions of past centuries 
should be struck with the same- 
even going back as far as Satan quoting 
isolated passages, out of harmony with 
their connections, to deceive our Lord 
during the forty days temptation of the 
wilderness. 

But as it is the will of God to permit 
errors to take their course to test and to 
manifest those loyal to him and his word, 
so it is also his will that such errors be 
met with the truth and their unscripturalness 
exposed, not for the sake of such 
as are wilful and want their own way regardless 
of God's way, but for the sake of 
such as really at heart have no will of their 
own but merely desire to know the Lord's 
plan, whose heads only may be temporarily 
confused by the sophistical theories referred 
to. 

For the benefit of such, then, and 
as a forearming of others to whom 
such theories have not yet come, we will 
in the succeeding articles examine some 
of these erroneous views. Let all remember, 
however, that we have already in the 
foregoing article examined every Scripture 
passage even seeming to teach the everlasting 
salvation of all, and have found them 
with their contexts not only not teaching 
thus, but opposed to the idea. So what 
we shall now discuss are not passages which 
really teach or seem to teach thus, but 
isolated statements which, by twisting and 
turning out of their connection and true 
meaning, they would make serve their purpose 
instead of clear statements. 

And notice, too, that all these efforts are 
to build upon isolated statements and perversions 
a theory outside the Bible, which 
cannot be supported by any line of argument 
inside the Bible. 

"TO BE CARNALLY MINDED IS DEATH." 

This is one of those isolated statements 
used to sustain a portion of a theory, the 
outcome of which is to prove the everlasting 
salvation of all. How? Why? Why 
should any one desire to use any passage 
wrongfully? And how could this scrap of 
one verse be useful to such a theory? 

In answer, we ask, Why have all errorists 



quoted portions of Scripture to prove 
their various theories, so that it has become 
a by-word with scoffers that the 
Bible is an old fiddle and that any tune 
may be played upon it? They see how 
each denomination selects a few proof 
texts and entrenches itself behind them; 
but they do not know and God's children 
do not generally realize that the texts are 
misused, that the whole passage or treatise 
would stand no such construction. It is, 
alas! too true that hundreds of passages 
have been quoted to prove, often, the 
very reverse of what their writers intended, 
as the context would prove if referred 
to. But a theorist anxious to establish his 
theory is often not particular to examine 
the context to see if it would justify his 
construction; and many of God's children 
are not sufficiently studious to criticize 
every theory by God's Word and to examine 
every text quoted by a teacher to see 
if its context will sustain his application of 
it. These, like the world, are of the opinion 
that the Bible is a fiddle upon which any 
tune may be played, and they want to hear 
all the tunes and choose the one which 
suits them best. But this is all wrong. 
The Bible taken as a whole, and each 
text considered in the light of the discourse 
of which it forms a part, plays but the one 
tune— that grand and harmonious melody, 
the song of Moses and the Lamb 
—the Love of God and the redemption 
and reconciliation provided in Christ. 

No better text could be found, perhaps, 
than the one under consideration, as illustrating 
this very common way of wrongfully 
playing different tunes from God's Word, 
by human manipulation. In the first place 
it has been misused by "Orthodoxy" for 
a long time to support one false theory, 
while now it is being drafted into service 
to prove another and exactly opposite 
theory. And all this because the common 
translation happened to give an obscure 
form of expression which permitted the 
passage to be used with a seeming fitness 
to their theories, and because they could 
find none to fit better. 

"Orthodoxy" has long used this statement, 
"To be carnally minded is death," 
as an offset to God's statement in Eden 
when he pronounced the penalty of disobedience 
to be death. "Orthodoxy" had 
the erroneous theory that everlasting torment 



is the penalty of sin, and would not 
accept of God's plain testimony, and this 
obscurely translated passage has long 
served their purpose to give them a reply 
against God's plain statement, "The 
wages of sin is death:" And they reply, 
"Yes, but not the death you think of, 
not the usual death which all die, not cessation 
of being." With their view of death a 
man can die, become carnally minded, 
and yet live on and on forever in torment. 
Thus they have seemingly justified their error 
in their own minds and held captive all 

R1221 : page 6 

who trusted implicitly their teachings 
without looking up the Scripture testimony 
on the subject. 

But those who sought God's testimony 
found that God had declared positively 
what the penalty of sin should be in 
Adam's case and in every other case; that 
his general law against sin is— "The 
soul [being] that sinneth, it shall die." 
( Ezek. 18:4 .) These, too, remembered 
Paul's explanation of how death ( Rom. 5:12-19 ) 
came through Adam's disobedience 
and as the penalty of that disobedience; 
how we are redeemed from 
it by that very same penalty, death, being 
executed upon our Lord Jesus, who became 
thus our Redeemer; and how he is 
as a consequence to rescue all from that 
death penalty by a resurrection of the 
dead. Then turning back to Genesis to 
see how God has stated the penalty, they 
are left without a shadow of doubt by 
God's own explanation of his death sentence 
upon Adam— "Dust thou art, and 
unto dust shalt thou return." 

Now, we see the same blind translation 
made to do duty again, as God's 
people are getting free from the error of 
supposing everlasting torment to be the 
wages of sin. It is brought forward with 
its false application, as a new proof that 
real death is not the wages of sin. 

But why? What object can they have? 
Surely these do not as the others want a 
support for a theory of everlasting torment? 
No; they want it for a prop to the 
very opposite theory— that all men shall 
attain to everlasting life. 

In what way could the disproving of 
actual death as the wages of sin help 



their argument or theory? In this way: 

If it be admitted that God once tried 

Adam, to test his worthiness of everlasting 

life, the inference is plain that this 

will be God's method with every creature, 

for he is no respecter of persons and 

declares that he changes not. And it implies, 

too, that Adam had a will of his own 

and that God did not coerce it but let him 

have and follow his own free will, and 

thus, by choosing obedience or disobedience, 

choose between the clearly stated rewards 

of these. And of course, again, 

the inference is plain that if Adam was 

judged by a trial of his will without God's 

interference, so the judgment of the whole 

race ( Matt. 25:31-46 ) will be, similarly, 

a judgment or trial of their wills without 

God's interference. 

And, further, the admission that Adam 
was tried for life, and that disobedience 
brought the penalty prescribed— loss of 
life, death— implies that when all men 
are tried or judged the penalty for wilful 
sin of each one will be just the same as 
in Adam's case, death— "Dust thou art and 
unto dust shalt thou return"— "the soul 
[being] that sinneth, it shall die." For 
there is no escape from the conclusion that 
if God's law condemned one sinner to extinction 

R1222 : page 6 

of life, the same unchangeable 
God and the same unchangeable law would 
condemn any wilful sinner to the same 
penalty in the end of the world's trial, at 
the close of the Millennium. 

Furthermore, it is well to know that the 
Scriptures ( Rev. 20:9 ) foreshow that at 
the close of the Millennium some will be 
found (after all their favors, of instruction 
and restitution to perfection and experience 
with both sin and righteousness) 
unworthy of everlasting life, because found 
shortcomers when measured by the perfect 
golden rule of Love. And the fact 
that these, rescued by Christ's ransom-sacrifice 
from the first death, are at 
the close of the second trial (an individual 
one) sentenced to the second 

death makes it evident that the two death 
sentences must be the same in kind. 
Hence, their theory that any who fail in 
the end of the Millennial age will be 
tried over and over again until all have 



been forced to the condition of everlasting 

life must fall if the second death, the 

penalty of failure in the second trial, 

were admitted to be the same in kind as 

the first death, the penalty of the failure 

under the first trial— unless it could be 

somehow made to appear that the first 

death was not the actual loss of life and 

return of dust to dust. Hence the effort 

is made to prove from this text that carnal-mindedness 

is the only death— the 

only penalty of sin. 

This, then, is the object of the teachings 
(not teachers) we are examining and reproving 
as false. They for this reason 
use this portion of the text under consideration 
to prove that the wages of sin is 
not and never was loss of life —never was 
the death of the soul or being. To serve 
the needed argument the text is turned 
thus: If to be carnally minded is death, 
then death must be the condition of carnal-mindedness, 
hence, the wages of sin 
is carnal-mindedness and not literal death, 
not extinction of being, not the return of 
dust to dust. 

And straightway, without noticing the 
poor translation upon which they are 
about to build so much and on the strength 
of which they are about to cast aside so 
many plain statements of Scripture; without 
noticing that the application they are 
giving to a part of the sentence is not only 
out of harmony with the entire argument 
of the Apostle, but out of harmony with 
the remainder of the same verse, they 
begin to build upon it their theory. They 
reason and build, thus, with reference to 

THE SECOND DEATH. 

The first death, the penalty of the first 
failure in the first trial in Eden, was a 
death to righteousness (a ceasing to be 
righteous), a state of carnal-mindedness; 
the second death may be a death to carnal-mindedness 
(a ceasing to be carnal 
minded), a state of holiness. Or the second 
death may mean that those who experience 
it at the close of the Millennial 
age will be again sentenced to wages of 
sin— carnal-mindedness, and be again on 
trial repeatedly in ages after the Millennial 
age until they finally crucify their 
carnal minds. Either theory regarding 
second death will do, and they care not 



which is accepted so long as it is one 
which would support their theory, no 
matter how much common sense and 
Scripture would thus be antagonized. 
Furthermore, if such a definition of 
death can be established, to their own 
satisfaction, it will harmonize another 
feature of their theory, which is that 
Christ Jesus our Lord 

WAS NOT THE SUBSTITUTE FOR ADAM, 
AND DID NOT PAY HIS 
PENALTY FOR HIM. 

For this, too, has a connection with this 
theory of everlasting salvation for all; and 
to retain the latter the former had to be 
denied. How? Why?— Do you not see? 
If it were admitted, as the Scriptures so 
plainly teach, that our Lord Jesus gave 
himself as the ransom price or substitute 
for Adam, to cancel the penalty of death 
—destruction, extinction of being— that 
came upon him and that through him 
came upon all, and that he did this when 
he died the just one for, or instead of, or 
as a substitute for, the unjust Adam,* and 
that he thus made reconciliation for 
iniquity according to God's will, it would 
effectually settle the theory they are so 
bent upon establishing, viz.: the everlasting 
salvation of all. Therefore substitution 
must be opposed, though they know 
or ought to know that the Greek word 
huper, occurring nearly one hundred times 
and variously rendered in the English (for, 
for the sake of, on behalf of, instead of, 
etc.), answers to our word substitute and in 
many instances could have no other meaning. 
But all will not at a glance see why 
it would be necessary to deny that Christ 
bought us with his own precious blood 
(death) in order to uphold the theory of 
the everlasting salvation of all. Therefore 
we briefly show why. 

If it be admitted that the transgression 
of Adam brought a condemnation which 
could not be gotten rid of except by the 
payment of the penalty [death] for him by 
a substitute or redeemer, then it would as 
clearly prove that those who by wilful sin 
come under the penalty of death the second 
time could not be released from the 
second death penalty without another payment 
of their ransom price. And then, 
too, it will be remembered that it was because 



only one man (Adam) had been tried 

and sentenced by the law of God that 

the sacrifice of one (the man Christ Jesus, 

who gave himself to carry out the Father's 

gracious plan) was sufficient, and by settling 

the condemnation of the one, in 

whom all others were unwillingly involved, 

the legal ransom for all was given. But it 

would be different with those who die the 

second death, for each one of them will have 

had an individual trial (just as in Adam's 

case), and each so sentenced will be 

sentenced for himself (as saith the Prophet 

- Ezek. 31:29,30 ). So if it were God's 

plan to redeem men out of the second 

death it would require a separate ransom-sacrifice 

for each individual. 

The inconsistency of such a supposition, 
as well as the Apostle's statement that 
"Christ dieth no more," are proofs to any 
sane mind that hope for wilful sinners 
sentenced to the second death cannot lie 
in the direction of paying their ransoms for 

them. All can see that while it was consistent 
that God in indicating his justice 
and upholding his law should, in love for 
the strayed sheep, provide one willing 
sacrifice for all at Calvary, it would be inconsistent, 
absurd indeed, to talk of a 
Calvary intensified ten, or a hundred, or a 
thousand, or a million of times, according 
to the number of wilful sinners condemned 
to the second death. 

Nor can any one show the slightest 
promise of God to do anything more for 
those who go into the second death, as the 
result of their second trial (the first individual 
trial except to Adam and Eve). 
Nor can the slightest reason for any release 
from the second death for further trial 
be urged; for it must be admitted that the 
Millennial day is the one appointed for 
judging or trying the world (See Acts 17:31 ; 

Rev. 20:6 ; 1 Cor. 6:2 ), and it 
must be admitted that the conditions 
during that period of trial will be most 
favorable— with evil bound and the 
knowledge of the Lord covering the 
earth as the waters cover the sea. And 
who dare dispute that Jehovah's Anointed 
One, whom he hath appointed for the very 
purpose of judging the world righteously, 
in that appointed day, will do the work 
properly and fully in the appointed time, 
or that he who loved the lost sheep so 
that he gladly laid down his life once on 



their behalf will give them anything less 
than a full, just trial? —so full, so favorable, 
so just, that it will need no further 
judging or testing to determine definitely 
which, after full knowledge and opportunity, 
are "sheep," followers of Christ's 
example of meekness, love and obedience, 
whom God desires to bring into 
his everlasting fold, and which are wilful, 
rebellious "goats," followers of Satan's 
course of pride and disobedience, and therefore 
unworthy of the gift of everlasting life, 
and whose everlasting cutting off from life, 
by destruction in the second death, will be 
the best thing for themselves and especially 
of advantage to the millions who then 
will be lovers of righteousness, lovers of 
God and lovers of each other. 

So then we see— what? We see that 
an erroneous theory, even though it has 
not one text to give it a shadow of 
support, if accepted and tied to, leads 
the would-be teachers of this, their own 
brand of "new light," first to overlook 
the great mass of the Bible's testimony on 
the subject of sin, its penalty and its only 
remedy, and secondly to deny the real 
penalty and the real remedy and to pervert 
the plainest statements of God's word 
to accomplish their object. 

We know not the amount of guilt that 
attaches to such a course— we know not 
how much a defective sense of justice may 
have to do with it— we cannot know to 
what extent such teachers are deceived by 
the very sophistries they are using to deceive 
others. But while not even wishing to 
pass sentence upon any fellow creature, 
and realizing our inability to allow for 
all the extenuating circumstances, we do 
nevertheless judge of the doctrines by 
the rule of God's word. And the writer 
can and does judge of himself, that if he 
should, with the light he has, ignore God's 



*Some one will perhaps ask how he was instead 
of, or a substitute for Adam, since Adam also 
died. We answer that God's argument is that the 
wages of sin is lasting death, and that Adam 
never could have been set free from it and the sentence 
to it, which was upon him from the time of 
his disobedience, except by the substituting of one 
in his place in death. For this reason our Lord 
Jesus became a man and gave himself (as a man) 



a ransom or corresponding price for Adam; that 
Adam and all his children might be released from 
the sentence and from the penalty of his transgression. 
The manhood then laid down as our substitute is 
still dead and will never be restored. Instead of 
manhood the Heavenly Father gave our Lord Jesus 
a new, a higher nature— made him, a sharer of his 
own divine nature. 

R1223 : page 6 

plan and thus wrest the Scriptures and 
teach others so to do, in order to establish 
a theory, it would be a terrible crime. And 
the claim that Christ's death was not the 
ransom price for Adam's sin, in order to 
prove that wilful sinners could be forgiven 
without a ransom, would, in the writer's 
case, be denying the blood of the Covenant, 
wherewith he was sanctified— made 
holy and acceptable and fit for the high 
calling. And we "warn" ( Col. 1:28 ) 
every fellow member of the body of Christ 
not only to take heed not to accept any 
theory that does not, in harmony with the 
context, prove itself from God's Word, 
but more— to be very certain in coming 
to the study of God's Word that his 
heart is entirely emptied of self-will 
and plans which he wants to see carried 
out, and that every thought and desire is 
brought into captivity to that will of God, 
which is being worked out by him through 
Christ. (See 2 Cor. 10:5,6 .) Be assured, 
that if you have a theory which you want 
to prove to yourself, the great adversary 
of God, who from the first has been a deceiver 
and misrepresenter of God's Word 
and plans ( Gen. 3:5 ), will be ready to 
assist you in every conceivable manner. 
Whereas, if sincerely desirous of knowing 
and holding only what God reveals as 
his plan, he will just as surely not leave 
you without some helping hand, some index 
finger to guide you into the truth. 
Listen carefully for the voice of the Shepherd. 
His sheep will do this and will not 
follow strange voices— false doctrines 
—but will quickly know to flee from them. 

R1223 : page 7 

THE REAL MEANING. 

As we have suggested, the translation of 
the verse already cited ( Rom. 8:6 ) is faulty. 



But while this is true, the poor translation 

is not so much to blame for the error 

based upon the verse as the wrong condition 

of the hearts (wills) of those who, 

to find support for a theory, so readily 

seized upon half of Paul's sentence and hastened 

to apply it in opposition to the known 

general sentiment of Scripture, without 

noting either the faulty translation 

or the opposition of the context to the 

theory which they sought to build upon 

it. 

The faulty translation ( Rom. 8:6 ) 
reads: "To be carnally minded is death;" 
and remember that the inference drawn 
is that the death which is the wages of sin 
consists, solely and only, in being carnally 
minded. The Greek word sarx, here 
rendered carnal, occurs one hundred and 
thirty-nine times in the New Testament, 
and only twice it is blindly rendered carnal 
(in the above text and in Heb. 9:10 ). 
It is generally rendered flesh, as in other 
verses of this same chapter. (See verses 1,3,4,5,8,9,12,13 .) 
The word sarx 

does not mean sinful at all, nor sinful 
flesh; it means flesh, simply and only, and 
is used in reference to Adam and Eve before 
they sinned ( 1 Cor. 6:16 ) as well as 
after; and twenty-five times it is used in 
referring to our Lord's flesh, which was 
perfect, spotless without blemish. (See 
John 1:14, and 6:51,52,53,54,55,56 , 
and Heb. 10:2 and 1 Tim. 3:16 .) 

The expression "carnally minded," in 
Rom. 8:6 , therefore signifies merely 

the mind or will of the flesh. Since the 
Apostle well knew, and had long taught, 
that all mankind had fallen from perfection 
through Adam's disobedience, and 
that all as a consequence were unsound, 
not only morally but mentally and 
physically as well, he did not need to 
distinguish between the will of the flesh 
as it would be if perfect and the will or 
preference of the flesh in its fallen condition; 
for he had already instructed 
them that he and they and all the fallen 
race had tastes, appetites and desires of 
the (depraved) flesh, which, if gratified, 
would lead to further degradation. 

The sense of the passage is not difficult 
to discern if it be read in connection with 
the chain of discourse of which it forms 
apart, at least from Chap. 7:18 to 8:15 . 
Other translations may assist (Rotherham's, 



the Diaglott, or the Revised Version); 
but the common version is simple 
enough when it is known and remembered 
that the phrase, "the carnal mind," 
should be rendered "the mind of the 
flesh" or "the will of the flesh." 

For the sake of making clear the 
Apostle's argument, let us paraphrase 
briefly the epistle to the Romans , down 
to 8:15 , amplifying as we reach the eighth chapter 
First, Paul would have the believers 
at Rome know that the reason for 
his not having visited Rome to preach 
the gospel was not because of any shame, 
or any feeling that the gospel of Christ 
would not stand the light and criticism 
of Rome, then the capital city of the 
world, as well as that of the less notable 
cities of Asia Minor, which he had visited 
and evangelized. He declares himself 
not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, but 
ready, when the way should open, to preach 
it boldly in Rome also. 

Next, he proceeds to answer objections 
and doubts liable to be raised by Jewish 
converts among the Romans. He shows 
that the ignorance, superstition and degradation 
prevailing were not the result of 
imperfect work on God's part in creating 
the people so. He declares that no such 
excuse can be allowed ( Chap. 1:21 to 2:11 ); 
he shows that men are themselves to 
blame for their degradation, and that the 
Jews, too, are involved in sin under God's 
perfect law and would be condemned 
as unfit for lasting life as surely as the 
Gentiles. For as the Gentiles, without 
the law given at Sinai, were sinners and 
degraded, and died (punished) under 
sentence of some law aside from Sinai's 
law, so they (the Jews) who had received 
the law of Moses had been condemned 
by that law and had not escaped death 
nor obtained any right to further life. 

He argues ( Chap. 3 ) that though no 
Jew got life under Moses' law, and therefore 
all were in a state of condemnation 
as complete and hopeless as Gentiles, yet 
the Jew got some blessings through that 
Law Covenant— though lasting life was 
not one of them. He got a clearer idea 
of God's will from the Law, as well as a 
knowledge of his further gracious purposes 
from the testimonies of the prophets; yet 
all that he then learned, instead of justifying 
or proving him worthy of God's favor, 



only showed more and more how firm a 
hold sin had gotten and how impossible 
it is for any one with an imperfect organism 
and its depraved tastes and desires to 
live an absolutely perfect life, and thereby 
to commend himself to God. The 
more they learned of God's law the less 
they felt like saying— "Lord, I am perfect 
in thought, word and deed; there 
is nothing whatever unholy or selfish in 
me; I am therefore just such a one as 
thy law declares shall have lasting life." 
On the contrary, the law revealed most 
clearly the fact that all are sinners, that 
all are unworthy of divine recognition 
and favor; for all have sinned and come 
short of what would glorify God. So then 
the Law given to Israel, and under which 
they were condemned, served to prove to all 
men, what God already knew, that no 
man in his fallen condition is worthy or 
could make himself worthy of lasting life 
under the only conditions upon which 
God will give that blessing. 

Then the Apostle shows ( Chap. 3:21-26 ) 
how God provided in Christ a propitiatory-covering 
[See Rotherham's translation 
and foot note.] for all who exercise 
faith in the blood of the New Covenant 
—declaring to such the remission of sins 
past, and at the same time showing God's 
righteousness in the entire procedure— 
his justice in sentencing all the fallen ones 
as unworthy of life, and his justice, too, 
in the reversal of that sentence and the 
granting of life to some through the redemption 
provided. 

He proceeds to show that though Israel 
had expected every blessing and advantage 
through their law, God had the larger 
plan of favor through Christ all along; 
and this fact he shows by references to the 
promises. 

Next he discusses the standing of all 
who accept of Christ, and shows how they 
are cleansed in Christ from all the defilement 
brought upon them through Adam's 
transgression.— Chap. 5 . 

Chapter 6 shows that in thus justifying 
us, or imputing to us a righteousness not 
actually ours, God's intention is not to 
have us continue in sin, but rather to set 
us free from its condemnation in order 
that we may now begin to use ourselves 
in God's service and to strive against all 
things in us opposed to his perfect will. 



This setting free from sins past and from 
their just penalty, and making continual 
allowance for the weaknesses of the flesh 
which we have inherited, is not to be construed 
as a change of God's attitude toward 
sin and wilful sinners, but as an 
opportunity for those desiring harmony 
with God to show by their strivings against 
sin and for righteousness that in heart 
they fully approve his perfect law and delight 
in it, and that if they could do so, 
they would rejoice to have every word 
and thought and act obedient thereto. 
Such desire not to follow the will of the 
flesh but to follow the Spirit or will of 
God. For those who live in accord [and 
have no battles] with their flesh [which is 
depraved] indicate their preference, while 
they who live in accord with the spirit 
show their preference. Therefore, the 
preference of the flesh means death [the 
just sentence of the law], but the preference 
of the spirit means life and peace 
[the reward of obedience to the law of 
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, which 
relieves such from condemnation on account 
of weaknesses of the flesh inherited 
from Adam]. For the preferences of our 
[depraved] flesh are in opposition to God; 
for the flesh is not in harmony with his 
law, and indeed it cannot be; and hence 
those whose existence is fleshly cannot 
please God. 

But you [the consecrated] have not your 
existence in the flesh, but in the spirit, if 
truly the spirit of God dwells in you. 
And whoever has not Christ's spirit [disposition 
or mind] is not his. But if 
Christ is in you, the body is indeed dead 
as to sin [not reckoned of God in considering 
your case] but the spirit [intention 
or new will] has life [reckoned to it] 
because of its righteousness. 

R1224 : page 7 

Moreover, if the spirit of him who 
raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, 
he who raised Christ from the dead will 
also make alive even your mortal bodies, 
by the dwelling of his spirit within you. 
In a word, it will take far less of God's 
power to quicken your mortal bodies [reckoned 
dead] to activity in his service, than 
it took to raise Jesus from the dead; and 
as surely it will have an increasing influence 



upon your body, bringing it more 

and more into a course of righteousness. 

So then, brethren, you see we do not 
owe any thing to the flesh [it brings us no 
advantage, present or future], that we 
should desire to follow its leadings and be 
its servants. Quite the contrary, indeed, 
we see that if we live according to the 
will and leading of our flesh, which is depraved, 
we shall die, but if we live according 
to the spirit, according to the renewed 
mind or spirit of Christ, we shall 
thereby obtain a great blessing— we shall 
live. Because as many as are guided by 
the spirit of God, the same are God's 
sons.— Rom. 8:14 . 



Following thus the Apostle's argument, 
we see that the sentiment expressed in 
verse 6 is reiterated in verse 14 , and that 
the thought of giving a new definition to 
death— that the death which results from 
sin is a carnal mind— is an absurd as well 
as a false interpretation. Quite to the 
contrary, it teaches that if we live after 
the flesh, i.e., if we obey the will of our 
sin-depraved and death-condemned flesh, 
even after we have come to a knowledge 
of Christ, and after we have come 
under the new arrangement of the law of 
the spirit of life through Christ, we shall 
die the second death, the result of our 
preference or choice of the things that 
are contrary to the law of God. But as 
many as accept of Christ and partake of 
his spirit of obedience, and whose minds 
or spirits prefer the things of God, and 
seek to overcome and put an end to the 
depraved desires and weaknesses of the 
flesh, and to bring every thought into subjection 
to the will of God— these, under 
the Law of God which now judges only 
the spirit or intention of those in Christ, 
will receive lasting life. 

But, the Apostle urges ( Chap. 7 ), do 
not get a wrong impression of the Law 
given at Sinai. Do not think of it as an 
imperfect or unjust law which God found 
would not serve its purpose and from which, 
therefore, he released you. On the contrary, 
it was a good, just, perfect law; and only 
because of your inability to keep it, has 
God in his mercy released you from its 
obligation and placed you for a time under 



conditions suited to your infirmities. It 

has ceased to be over you through God's 

favor, he having all along intended the 

plan of justifying all sinners freely, 

through faith in Christ. When you begin 

to think of how the Law failed to be a 

blessing, you should realize that the fault 

was in yourselves and not in the Law. It demanded 

righteousness and you were unable 

to fill the requirement actually. Thus 

by the law comes the appreciation of 

what sin is, and of how our race has 

become enslaved to that terrible master, 

Sin, whose commands we are unable to 

fully resist, even though we despise them. 

( v. 15 .) Then, in this very fact that we 

see and desire a perfection that we are 

unable to live up to, we attest that God's 

law, which demands perfection, is a proper, 

good law, and that the fault lies in 

ourselves. 

But this very fact, that we desire to do 
better than we are able to do, proves that 
the fault is not in our wills, but the result of 
Sin's enslavement of our members. This 
is very evident, for the will represents us 
as individuals, and the will desires righteousness 
and approves God's perfect law. 
But it is frustrated often, and cannot 
control the Sin-enslaved body. And as a 
result of the mind or will being subjected 
to God's law, and the body being weak 
through the fall and enslaved to Sin, 
those things which our minds and God's 
law disapprove are constant snares and 
besetments. As a result, we often do 
those things which we disapprove, and 
leave undone many things which we approve 
of.— Verses 16-23 . 

Thus, if we come back to look at God's 
law given to Israel, we find it was just and 
right in condemning us, since we are 
constantly condemning ourselves as imperfect, 
in its light. Is there then no hope? 
Must we perish because we cannot obey 
God's law, when we really desire to do so 
but are prevented by this poor body over 
which Sin and death gained control 
through the fall? Surely this is a wretched 
condition to be in, desiring righteousness 
and its reward of lasting life, but unable 
to grasp the prize because the will is fettered 
to the sin-degraded body? O! is 
there no help? Must we die? 

Ah! yes, there is help: God foresaw this 
very state and desires to rescue and bring 



to everlasting life all who thus hate sin 
and despise and strive against it in themselves. 
Thank God, this very deliverance 
has been provided. Our Lord Jesus died, 
and rose, and lives, to bring about this 
very result for all who are thus minded. 
It was the transgression of God's law by 
Adam that brought separation from Eden 
and from God's favor, and a sentence of 
death, resulting in the mental, moral and 
physical decay and death of himself and 
his race, under Sin, his new master. And 
God's way, by which his love operated to 
rescue us from the control of Sin and 
death, was, first, by payment of the legal 
penalty or sentence against Adam and 
his race, under which Sin and death 
held power or authority; and secondly, 
as a result of this redemption from the 
dominion of Sin and death by the Lord 
Jesus' death, he shall restore to physical 

R1224 : page 8 

perfection all of the class described, who 
with their minds serve the law of God, 
and who desire full deliverance from the 
control of Sin and death. 

Thus accepting of Christ Jesus as the 
Redeemer, and trusting him for the new 
bodies promised in God's due time, we 
see God's way out of the difficulty from 
which we could never extricate ourselves. 
Thanks be to God for this way of salvation 
provided through Jesus Christ our 
Lord. So, then, we can realize that while 
with our minds (our wills, our hearts) we 
serve the law of God, even though with 
our flesh we to some extent obey the laws 
of Sin, yet for the reasons stated (God's 
grace in Christ's redemption) there is no 
longer any condemnation to those who 
are in Christ Jesus. All who have this 
new standing come under new conditions. 
As all in Adam were, under his sentence, 
brought under the control of sin and 
death, so all who now are in Christ Jesus, 
the Redeemer, are in God's reckoning 
brought under a new arrangement and 
judged according to their spirit, mind or 
intention, and thereby declared worthy of 
life.-- Rom. 8:2 . 

Thus we see that though God's just, 
good law could not acquit sinners, no 
matter how much they abhorred their 
sins, nor grant lasting life to imperfect, 



erring beings, yet, without violating that 
law, but on the contrary upholding it, God 
has accomplished the work in another way, 
namely, by the sending of his own Son, in 
the same form (or nature) as the flesh 
which Sin had gotten control of, and on 
account of Sin. He with (or by) his flesh 
sentenced Sin, the great enslaver, to an 
overthrow; that thus the just requirement 
of the Law might be fully met by us who 
are in Christ Jesus. 

Thus seen, Rom. 8:6 not only does 
not teach what some, out of all harmony 
with its context and in great violence 
to itself, attempt to make it prove, but 
it proves the very reverse— that only such 
of mankind will be everlastingly saved as 
receive of Christ's spirit, mind or disposition; 
only such as become sons of God. 

But it must be borne in mind that only 
the few yet know of the ransom given by 
our Redeemer and Lord; only the few 
therefore know that now, in the strength 
of that atonement, they may have peace 
with God; that God will accept of them 
according to their spirit or intention, and 
that coming into their willing hearts by 
his power and truth, he will work in them 
mightily and use even their sin-depraved 
bodies in his service. The great mass of 
mankind as yet knows not of God's 
gracious plan. And since such could 
neither reject nor accept what they did not 
know of, God's gracious provision is that 
they all shall hear and appreciate the case 
fully. He will pour out his spirit [his 
power, his influence] upon all flesh; all 
shall be brought to a knowledge of the 
truth, and all shall have fullest opportunity 
to make a choice between the 
law of God which leads to life, and the 
law of sin which leads to death.— 

1 Tim. 2:4-6 . 

WHAT IS SIN? AND WHO IS RESPONSIBLE 
FOR ITS EXISTENCE? 

Before answering, it is but just that we 
explain the necessity for answering questions 
so simple that even "a babe in 
Christ" should have no difficulty with 
them. Nor would any need assistance, 
were it not that the great deceiver has misled 
some who, instead of needing help, 
ought for their time to be teachers of the 
truth. This claim which seems to be deceiving 



some has the same general 
characteristic of all Satan's deceptions, 
namely, that the wages of sin is not death, 
and that the soul that sinneth shall not 
die. This theory, like the one just examined, 
has for its object the establishing 
of the doctrine that all men will be everlastingly 
saved. But though the result 
intended to be proved is the same, the 
method or theory for proving it is different. 
This theory declares that God is the author 
of sin; that he made man and his surroundings 

R1225 : page 8 

such that sin could not be avoided. It 

claims, too, that sin exists to-day in all its 

various forms and shades as the direct result 

of God's exercise of his omnipotent 

power which no man is able to resist. It 

declares that the world of mankind are 

the clay and that God is the potter; and 

that every curve and kink and wrinkle, mental, 

moral and physical, found in men, is 

as much the work of God and the manifestation 

of his pleasure as the kinks and 

twists and turns on a piece of pottery are 

the evidences of the power and will of the 

potter who formed it. It, therefore (and 

consistently with this foundation— if the 

foundation will stand), proceeds to say 

that as the clay was powerless to resist 

the potter, so poor, frail, finite humanity 

is powerless to resist God's will and 

whatever shaping toward sin or toward 

righteousness he may give it. The argument 

proceeds to claim that since God has caused 

men to sin they are no more responsible 

or punishable for their sins than the potter's 

vessel is blame-worthy for its shape. 

Hence the conclusions reached are, (1) that 

God could not punish men by death or in 

any other manner for sins that he alone 

was responsible for; and (2) that as God 

has been thus causing sin for 6000 years 

(To show how much sin and misery a 

God can produce—?) he will, by and by, 

turn about and show all men how much 

good he can accomplish by working over 

the clay of humanity into beautiful and 

perfect shapes. And for the same reason 

that he succeeded in creating sin, God, 

it is claimed, will succeed when he undertakes 

a work of righteousness, and will 

make every member of the race incapable 

of sin. 



This wonderful, absurd theory of course 
claims to have Bible support. It and 
many other theories would have no weight 
among God's children, to deceive any, 
were it not for this. So this theory twists 
four texts of Scripture to answer as support 
or premises to rest upon. When we 
examine these we will find them misapplied, 
perverted, and really teaching no 
such thing. 
These proof texts are as follows:— 
(1)— "Hath not the potter power over 
the clay, of the same lump to make one 
vessel unto honor and another unto dishonor?" 

- Rom. 9:20 . 

(2)— "For the creature was made subject 
to vanity, not willingly, but by 
reason of him who hath subjected the 
same in hope."— Rom. 8:20 . 

(3)— "I form the light and create darkness: 
I make peace and create evil. I, 
the Lord, do all these things."— Isa. 45:7 . 

(4)— "Shall there be evil in a city and the 
Lord hath not done it?"— Amos 3:6 . 

Slim proofs these, to be the proofs of a 
doctrine charging the Almighty with being 
the direct and intentional author of 
sin. We need not cite the hundreds of 
texts to the contrary— that God is of 
purer eyes than to recognize iniquity, and 
cannot look upon sin with allowance; 
that he is holy, just and good, and "his 
work perfect." ( Deut. 32:4 ; Job 37:16 ; 
Psa. 18:30 .) Nor need we cite the 
frequent declarations of Scripture, that 
sin is contrary to God's laws and that 
whoever (willingly) commits sin is of the 

[Conclusion on 2nd page.] 

R1225 : page 2 

SATAN'S DEVICES. 

— [Continued from 8th page.] — 

devil. We notice, however, that according 
to this false theory God not only made 
man so bad that he could not avoid sin, 
but that he actually caused him to sin. 
If so, who was the sinner? Surely not 
man, who could not resist God, but God 
the irresistible one, whom they declare the 
creator or instigator of sin. And if this 
be so, who deserves the punishment due 
for sin? Surely not man, if, as this theory 



claims, he was the mere dupe, the 

mere puppet who carried out the sinful 

designs of God. Who but God could 

deserve punishment according to this blasphemous 

theory? And how terrible a 

punishment would be due such criminality 

could be measured only by the terrible 

suffering thus brought upon his helpless 

creatures. Nay; more, what a hypocrite 

this theory would make of God. For six 

thousand years he has been denouncing 

sin, declaring that man is the sinner, 

threatening penalties and declaring his 

pity for them in their fallen state— even 

sending his Son to be a sin-offering on 

their behalf, to "make an atonement for 

the sins of the people." If we shall now 

find that all these are falsehoods, told to 

deceive mankind, and that God is the real 

sinner, it will surely be a great discovery. 

But if it is true, surely the Bible would 

be the last place from which to expect 

proofs of it. If God be such a great fraud 

and deceiver, he surely would not tell it 

on himself. To suppose that he has done 

so would be to charge him with folly as 

well as with sin. 

But let us examine the above texts and 
see whether they prove what is claimed. 

(1) Rom. 9:21 —We must consider 
this text in the light of the whole argument 
of which it is a portion. Paul is 
showing that though God's promises were 
handed to Israel, and though they understood 
that they were for them only, God 
had a perfect right to make such selection 
as he saw fit, for the high-calling to joint-heirship 
with Christ. He was not bound 
to take that nation. He had never said 
that all of that nation should fill this position. 
He had, on the contrary, shown 
through the prophets that only a remnant 
would be worthy of this honor, and that 
all of nominal Israel were not the real 
Israel referred to in his promise. 

Paul is justifying God's course and 
showing that since it is a favor that he is 
about to grant, and not a justice (a privilege 
of sharing with Messiah in the great 
work of dispensing still other favors and 
blessings), he had a perfect right to do 
what he chose with his favors. God had 
a perfect right, had he so chosen, to have 
selected only a part of Israel to honorable 
service in his great cause and a part to a less 
honorable share, or to no share at all, even 



if they had been all exactly alike, and all 

equally adapted to his work and equally 

pliable to the moulding influences he exerts 

through his truth, his providences, 

etc. He had already shown his right in 

this direction in the choice of Isaac to be 

of the line in which the blessing should 

come, and the rejection of Ishmael's line 

or family. Likewise he chose Jacob as 

the line instead of Esau, though both were 

sons of the same parents and he might 

have chosen either line. Nor can it be 

claimed that God's choice of Jacob above 

Esau, as the line or family through which 

he intended to favor and bless the world, 

was a choice dependent in any degree 

upon character; for God's selection of 

Jacob's line was declared before his birth. 

And not only has God thus chosen to use 

certain persons in his service to honor his 

name, but he can select and has at times 

selected others for other places, for the illustration 

of his power. For instance Pharaoh: 

in him God raised to power in Egypt a man 

who more than others was a hard and determined 

man, that the bringing of Israel 

out from a cruel bondage should not only 

furnish a just punishment upon Egypt, 

but also manifest God's power of deliverance 

against all opposition. In addition 

God made in the deliverance of Israel 

under Moses and the overthrow of Pharaoh 

a type of the ultimate deliverance 

of all his people under Christ from the 

bondage of Sin and the power of the devil, 

whom Pharaoh typified. 

But though God had the right to make 
as absolute selections as those mentioned, 
when selecting those whom he will use as 
the "promised seed" through whom he 
will bless all nations, yet he has not done 
so. The selected ones are not entitled to 
the honor by reason of ability to do the 
work to be done, hence are selected according 
to favor (grace); yet there is a 
reason why they are selected, namely, 
their faith and obedience to the light and 
ability enjoyed. 

Here, then, we have the proper view of 
this passage, and we see the fallacy of 
using it to prove that God now makes all 
people sinners, vessels of wrath, and by 
and by will make all vessels of honor possessed 
of everlasting life. The Apostle's 
argument has nothing whatever to do with 
salvation, but has to do entirely with the 



high-calling. The fact that Esau and Ishmael 
were used to typify those who fail to 
attain the high-calling ( Heb. 12:15-17 ) 
has nothing whatever to do with their 
chances of attaining life during the Millennium. 
And the fact that Pharaoh and 
his hosts were used to typify the overthrow 
of Satan and his hosts by no means proves 
that they will be of those destroyed in 
the Second Death. God merely used them 
as typical vessels of wrath. They were 
already under sentence of death through 
Adam, and their day of judgment or trial 
for everlasting life will come under Christ's 
Millennial reign. They only represented 
the real vessels of wrath (those who sin 
wilfully after coming to a knowledge of 
God's gracious plan in Christ), just as 
Moses, Isaac and others were used as the 
typical vessels of mercy representative of 
those through whom God will manifest 
his mercy during the Millennium. The 
application of this text, then, as a proof 
that God caused any man to sin, is wholly 
wrong. 

(2) Rom. 8:20 .—This passage except 
the last two words is well shown in Rotherham's 
translation to be a parenthesis, 
which, so far as the argument is concerned, 
could be omitted, but which is thrown in 
as an explanation of the statement of 
verse 19 . Rotherham translates verses 19,21 
(we here omit the parenthesis) thus: 

"For the eager outlook of Creation is 
ardently awaiting the revealing of the sons 
of God, in hope that even creation itself 
shall be freed from the servitude of corruption 
into the freedom of the glory [or 
glory of the freedom] of the children of 
God." 

Thus seen, the hope is not God's hope, 
as some have imagined. Hope is a quality 
which belongs to finite creatures. It 
would be improper, therefore, to say that 
God subjected the world (creation) to 
frailty, in hope that he could do something 
for them. God never hopes: he knows. 
Where perfect knowledge exists, there is 
no more room for hope. 

R1226 : page 2 

How beautifully simple the connection 
between verses 18 and 21 when this word 

"hope" connects them, and the remainder 
of verse 20 is recognized as a parenthesis. 



For long years all creation has 

been waiting and longing for relief from 

pain and death, and dreaming of a 

"Golden Age," when all things will be 

desirable. Life-giving balms, elixirs of 

life and healing springs have, for long 

centuries, had their places in the fictions 

which expressed the longing hope of the 

groaning, dying world. And still "hope 

springs perennial in the soul;" men are 

still longing and hoping amid their groanings 

for "a better day coming." Some 

look for it in one way, and some in another; 

but very few are looking in the 

right direction. Nevertheless, what they 

are groaning for and hoping for is coming, 

and, as the Apostle declares, will 

come at the manifestation of the sons of God 

who are now being chosen— the Church. 

What, then, is the meaning of the 20th verse 
as a parenthesis, without the words 
in hope —"(For Creation was not made 
subject to vanity [frailty] voluntarily, but 
by him who put it under)"—? It is now 
very simple and easily understood. Mankind, 
longing and hoping for a better state 
of things, for deliverance from bondage 
to pain and death, did not voluntarily 
choose this dying state, but got into it by 
some one else's act. By whose act did they 
come into this condition of trouble, this 
bondage of corruption, from which they 
are longing to be free? Paul answers: 
I have already answered this question 
( Rom. 5:12) and declared that it was by 
the act of Adam that all mankind became 
subject to death, the bondage of corruption. 

So, then, nothing in this passage supports 
the theory that God compelled the 
sin, under the penalty of which creation 
groans— quite the contrary. 

(3 and 4) Isa. 45:7 and Amos 3:6 .-- 
These passages teach the same thing. 
But notice that they do not speak of sin, 
but of evil. Sin is always an evil, but 
evil is not always a sin. A great trouble, 
disaster or calamity is an evil, but not a 
sin. As illustrations of the two kinds of 
evil (sin and calamity) mentioned in the 
same connection and in contrast notice 
Jer. 19:3 , and 36:3 . See also 
Isa. 47:10,11 . 

God's dealings with the Jewish nation 
were in many respects similar to what his 
dealings will be with the world in general 
during the Millennial age. Those nations 



and individuals who seek to make progress 
and to obey the Lord will be blessed, 
and others will be chastised. Thus God 
dealt with Israel, his typical kingdom. 
If the people of any city or tribe got into 
a state of idolatry or other gross sin, 
God would send a plague or other chastisement 
for their correction. But so long 
as they endeavored to walk in God's statutes, 
he preserved them. This was in accordance 
with the Covenant he had entered 
into with them at Sinai. Read carefully 
Leviticus, 26th chapter , throughout, for a 
detailed enumeration of the calamities 
(evils) which God declared would follow 
their neglect of his laws, and for the 
blessings which he promised if they 
should obey them. 

It was with reference to those calamities 
(evils) which came upon Israel, that our 
Lord spoke to them through Isaiah and 
Amos. He would not have them lose the 
lesson. They should know, and he here 
tells them, that he brought the evil upon 
them purposely; that no matter what accidental 
evils might happen to other nations, 
no accident could occur in their 
case. He would carry out his part of the 
Covenant with them to the last— every 
blessing, and every evil, just as promised. 

Now, with this view of these texts, 
which cannot be disputed, is it not evident 
that they do not support the blasphemous 
claim that God is the author of 
sin? We think that all candid minds will 
concede this, and we write for none other. 
With Paul we say, "Let God be true 
(righteous) though it prove all theories to 
the contrary to be falsehoods." If there 
is one thing above another which every 
well balanced heart and head should rejoice 
in, it is justice. To attempt, by such 
teaching as that referred to, to rob God 
of this quality is sacrilege of the vilest sort, 
and blasphemy the most atrocious. 

Yet this is what is done by those who 
claim that he is the author of sin, and 
that man is merely his dupe. If we so 
believed how could we worship God, or 
how trust him for the future? If capable 
of perpetrating so great an injury to mind 
and body as we see sin to be, might he 
not be unjust enough to try it again in the 
future? If we believe that God unpityingly 
caused all the misery of the present 
time, needlessly and causelessly, and without 



its being merited by mankind as a 
penalty, how could we feel certain of any 
good thing for the future? If man was 
not the sinner— if God was the sinner 
and man merely his tool— God has been 
guilty not only of injustice, but of fraud, 
hypocrisy and lying. For God has declared 
man the sinner, he has declared 
that he doth not willingly afflict the children 
of men, and that it is our sins that 
have separated between us and him, and 
that the only way in which he could receive 
us back was by ransoming us. He 
therefore sent his Son, who died for our 
sins and who rose for our justification. 
But if the theory we are criticizing be true, 
God was the only sinner and the only one 
who needed to be justified. 

But why proceed to argue on this line 
further? God's dealings, promises and 
threats, revealed in Scripture, everywhere 
recognize man as having a free will, a will 
which God refuses to coerce. Else why 
promise, exhort and threaten? What 
avail would threats or promises be to men 
if they were mere machines, overmastered 
and compelled by God to do right or 
wrong irrespective of their own will or 
choice. It is because man has a will of 
his own that experience can profit him. 
If man has not a free will (if God now 
forces him to sin and will by and by force 
him to righteousness), then the past six 
thousand years of sin and trouble were 
utterly useless, for experience could be of 
no value to a creature who has not a will 
of his own. 

Our confidence, on the contrary, is, 
that because man has a free will, the sad 
plight of sin and death, with all their train 
of consequences, will, through God's 
abundant mercy in Christ (through his 
two fold work— ransom and restitution), 
result in the full appreciation of both 
good and evil, right and wrong, to the 
end that so many as will choose to do 
right may live and be blessed 
everlastingly. 



"THE tongue of a fool is the key of his 
counsel, which, in a wise man, wisdom 
hath in keeping." 



"WHOEVER makes the truth appear unpleasant, 
commits high treason against 
virtue." 



R1226 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., JULY, 1890. NO. 8. 



page 1 

ARP TRACTS— free— in any quantity you 
think you can use judiciously. We have 
these in both English and German. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES.-The price of 
these is reduced to 25 cents per hundred, 
or $2.00 per thousand. (This includes 
expressage or mail charges of delivering 
them to you.) We want these messengers 
to go everywhere, bearing testimony to 
the Truth, and calling attention to God's 
gracious Plan of the Ages. 



R1226 : page 1 

"I WILL DRAW ALL UNTO ME.' 



"Now is the judgment of this world: now shall 
the prince of this world be cast out [i.e., the judgment 
or testing of this world is now about to begin 
—the testing which shall result in casting out 
the present prince, Satan, who now dominates the 
world and who sways fallen men by ignorance, 
superstition, fear, etc.]. And I, if I be lifted up 
from the earth, will draw ALL unto me." — 
John 12:31,32. 

It seems strange that so simple a statement 
as the above can be differently understood 
by God's children. Our Calvinistic 
friends see in the word all no more than 
the elect, and in the word draw they see 
nothing but force or compulsion. Our 
Universalist friends get the all right, but 
hold the same erroneous view of the word 
draw. 

Our Arminian friends, on the contrary, 
though they get the correct view of the 
word draw, namely, to constrain, or to exert 
an influence upon, but not a compulsory 
influence, nevertheless fail to get the 
true sense because they do not allow the 
true meaning to the word all. They see 
that all are not drawn now, and know 



nothing of the greater work of constraining 
love, in the Millennial age. 

When, however, the passage is examined 
by those who have clear views of God's great 
plan of the ages, all is harmony, and no 
necessity is found for either belittling or 
exaggerating the meaning of such simple 
words as all, draw and unto. (The Greek 
word here rendered unto is pros, signifying 
toward.) 

The passage predicts that though our 
Lord's death by crucifixion ( verse 33 ) 
might seem like Satan's victory, it would 
really be the beginning of his overthrow, 
who for so long had held humanity as 
blinded slaves in sin, superstition and ignorance. 
While it looked like the defeat 
of the Son of man, it really was not; it 
led to his exaltation and power, whereby 
he should in God's due time free men 
from bondage to sin and death, and 
grant to all an opportunity of life— to draw 
all away from error and from love of sin 
and the service of Satan, to himself, and to 
obedience to him as the great ruler whom 
God has appointed. As the Prophet, Priest 

R1227 : page 1 

and King appointed of God to destroy sin 
and to restore to perfection all who will 
yield themselves to the drawing influence 
of the truth, he shall be exalted in his 
Millennial kingdom. Many who should 
know do not know that our Lord has 
not yet begun this work of drawing men 
unto himself. Thus far he has been receiving 
such only as are drawn to him by 
the Father's promises through the prophets, 
etc. His work of drawing will not begin 
until the Millennial kingdom has been 
established— not until the Father's promises 
have drawn out from the world a 
little flock to be the bride, the Lamb's 
wife. 

All of God's dealings with his intelligent 
creatures are on this same principle 
of drawing, persuading and constraining, 
and not of compulsion. During the Gospel 
age the Father himself is the one who 
draws or persuades to righteousness by his 
truth. Our Lord Jesus attributes to him 
all the drawing of the present time, saying, 
"No man can come unto me except 
the Father which sent me draw him." 
The Father's work is to draw or call, and 



to select from among the called the "little 
flock" whom he shall accept with and 
under Jesus Christ to be partakers of the 
divine nature, to constitute his kingdom, 
and to bless and draw all the families of 
the earth, during the Millennium. 

This, as the Father's part of the work, is 
beautifully illustrated in the type of the 
calling of Rebecca to be the wife of 
Isaac. Abraham typified the Heavenly 
Father, Isaac, the Lord Jesus, and Rebecca, 
the Church, the Lamb's wife. Not 
Isaac, but Abraham, called Rebecca to 
be Isaac's joint-heir. As Abraham sent 
Eliezer as his honored representative and 
servant with instructions how to select 
the proper person, and to draw or influence 
her to come with him to be Isaac's 
wife, so God has sent forth his Spirit— the 
spirit of his truth and the power of his 
truth— to call or draw, not all, but 
merely a desired class— such as gladly receive 
the messenger and willingly forsake 
their father's house (the human family), 
to become members of the divine 
family. 

Abraham did not send his servant to 
call or draw any maiden whom he should 
meet, but, on the contrary, charged him 
strictly that he should not fetch one of the 
daughters of the Canaanites, but one 
from among those already related to him. 
So God does not call or draw sinners 
(represented by the Canaanites, to whom 
Eliezer was not to go,) to this high position 
of joint-heirship with Christ, but 
only such as are already justified, in 
harmony with God— friends of God. 

The servant, in representing his mission 
and calling the bride, always spoke in the 
name of Abraham and as Abraham's servant, 
and not as Isaac's servant, though as 
a matter of fact Isaac was being served 
too, because Abraham's service and instructions 
included Isaac's interest. So 
the spirit of truth speaks to us who are now 
being drawn. We are told that we are 
called of God ( Rom. 8:28,29 ); begotten 
of God ( 1 Pet. 1:3 ); adopted by God into 
his family by the spirit of adoption sent of 
God ( Rom. 8:15 ; Gal. 4:5,6 ); we are to 
come unto, and find access to, the Father 
(Rom. 5:2; Eph. 2:18; 3:12); and we 
are finally to be resurrected by the Father 
( 1 Cor. 6:14 ). Thus the Father is 
credited with doing all the drawing of the 



Church, the bride, during this age, although 

our Lord Jesus and all the faithful 

of God have been his servants, ambassadors 

and representatives, represented 

also in the person of Eliezer, doing the 

calling and drawing in the Father's name. 

This, then, the Father's method of 
drawing, is a proper sample of the drawing 
which our Lord Jesus will do when 
he shall, as promised, draw all men unto 
him. (The word draw in both cases is from 
the same Greek word helkuo. John 6:44 
and 12:32 .) Using the Father's work as 
an illustration of Christ's work, we know 
that there will be no coercion, no compulsion; 
that it will be by the cords of the truth 
that all will be drawn; and that those who 
would resist the spirit of the truth, when 
the Lord and all his gracious provisions 
are fully known, will be privileged 
to do so, none being drawn against their 
wills. 

As the Father drew the Bride by the 
special promise of the heavenly estate, and 
will bestow upon her the divine nature in 
accordance with that agreement, so the 
conditions and promises by which our 
Lord Jesus will draw all are clearly defined. 
The promise which he will hold 
out will not be the same that the Father 
has held out to us— the "high calling" 
or "heavenly calling"— but an earthly 
calling. A calling and drawing to the restitution 
of all things lost in Adam will be the 
prize which he will set before all mankind, 
and for which all will be invited to so run 
as to obtain it. 

The promises of full restitution of life 
—including perfect health and strength 
—and of all the honor and rulership of 
earth originally given to Adam will be 
parts of the drawing power which shall 
influence every man. Yet then, as now 
under the Father's drawing, there will be 
no compulsion; and notwithstanding the 
drawing of those promises, the wills of 
men will be free to choose between humility 
and pride, between God's law of 
love and Satan's law of selfishness, between 
good and evil. 

If all other conditions were to be the 
same then as now, we might well reason that 
few would be drawn by the Redeemer, as 
only a "little flock" have been drawn 
by the Father. But we have already seen 
that in many respects the difference between 



now and then will be great. Satan 
will be bound; his deceptions, political, 
financial and theological, will no longer 
mislead those really seeking the truth and 
the right way. The way of holiness will 
then be a highway— a broad, open, public 
thoroughfare, upon which there will be no 
danger of pitfalls and snares, and whereon 
no ravenous beasts (false systems 
and false doctrines) shall go to torment 
with fear or to turn back the seekers of 
perfection of holiness.— See Isa. 35:8-10 . 

Not only will the way be so much more 
favorable than the narrow, thorny way 
open during the present age, by which 
alone the heavenly calling can be reached 
by those who have been called and 
drawn of the Father, but the call and 
drawing will be more attractive to mankind. 
It will be a drawing in perfect 
harmony with all that is good of human 
nature in mankind, whereas the call and 
drawing of this present age is in many 
respects (when rightly understood) the 
very reverse. The present call to the 
Church is to leave the human, earthly, all 
the visible delights and experienced 
pleasures, to seek after such as can only 
be seen by faith and grasped by hope. 
How much more enticing will be the call to 
"build houses and inhabit them, plant 
vineyards and eat the fruit of them, 
and long enjoy the work of their hands." 
- Isa. 65:21,22 . 

Even now, while the saints are called 
to the heavenly things, and exhorted to 
lift their minds from earthly hopes and 
ambitions, and to place them upon the 
heavenly things not seen as yet, how difficult 
all find it to do so at all times. 
How apt are earthly plans and ambitions 
to intrude and carry us captive to earthly 
things for a time. How difficult it seems 
for the very large majority of God's children 
to lift their affections and place all 
of them upon the Kingdom promised 
them, but seen only by faith— to live for 
that Kingdom, to spend all of time and influence 
(aside from the necessities of the 
present) in preaching that unseen Kingdom, 
not believed in except by the few. 

On the contrary, do we not see that 
most of God's people grasp earthly reforms 
and seek to push them, instead of 
prosecuting the work for the promised 
but deferred and unseen Kingdom? 



Among these earthly ambitions are Temperance 
reforms, Political reforms, Financial 
reforms and Social reforms. All of 
these, and many more, are good and pleasing 

R1227 : page 2 

to God and will be regularly the order 
of the day under Christ's Millennial 
Kingdom. These are all earthly and tend 
toward earthly restitution, and for mankind 
in general they are the proper thing, 
and manifest the proper aspirations and 
ambitions. We are not objecting to such 
reforms, but while commending them, wish 
to have all see how much more natural it 
is to fall in with such works of restitution 
than with the one and only thing that the 
consecrated believers are now called to give 
their attention to— "Go thou and preach 
the Kingdom of God."— Luke 9:60 . 

Thus will the Son of man, because lifted 
up, (because he became man's ransom-price, 
and by virtue of his consequent exaltation 
to be man's King and Restorer,) 
draw all unto him, into harmony with 
him and the laws of righteousness. And 
as a result of the light then shed abroad 
and the knowledge of the truth then caused 
to fill the earth, and the drawing power 
of that light and truth, in connection with 
the promises and blessings of restitution, 
many, we hope and believe, will choose life 
by choosing to obey the New Covenant— 
the law of the spirit of life in Christ. But 
whether the vast majority will so choose 
and obtain life everlasting for the ages of 
glory and joy and peace beyond the Millennium, 
God only knows, and his Word 
makes no declaration on the subject, except 
what may be inferentially drawn from 
the only parable of our Lord which 
illustrates that Millennial age and the results 
at its close. ( Matt. 25:31-46 .) 
The inference which it would give is that 
a majority will obtain everlasting life, as 
sheep are more numerous than goats. 



R1228 : page 2 

DO YOU BELIEVE IN THE RANSOM? 

Do you know what the word ransom 
means? When you have found out that 



the Greek word, antilutron, rendered ransom, 
has a particular meaning, that it 
means neither more nor less than a corresponding 
price, then ask yourself whether 
you believe in it according to its true and 
only meaning? Do you believe that the 
Lord Jesus gave a corresponding price? 
that is, a price equivalent to the forfeited 
life of Adam, in whose condemnation you 
were involved and in whose redemption 
also you are therefore included? If so, 
you are a believer in the ransom; if not, 
you might use the word ransom in every 
sentence you uttered and yet not be a believer 
in it. Remember that no other definition 
of the word ransom is ever offered, even. 

Let us briefly go into the philosophy of 
the ransom and ask a few questions which 
may assist some to clearer views on the 
subject and enable them to square and repair 
their belief in harmony with this, 
the fundamental principle of God's plan 
of salvation. 

If you accept of the fact which the 
word ransom teaches— that Christ gave a 
corresponding price for all— then ask yourself, 
What was the price which he gave? 
Does he not say, it was his life that he 
gave as the price of ours? ( John 10:15 ; 
6:5 1 .) Was that price not given to save 
us— to recover us out of death, to make 
legally possible the resurrection of the 
dead? Is it not written, I will ransom 
them from the grave? ( Hos. 13:14 .) 
Are you sure that you believe in the ransom, 
thus, according to its only meaning 
and use in the Scriptures? Make sure that 
you do so fully; for to believe something 
else about it and to use the word ransom 
in a wrong sense is only to deceive and 
ensnare your own heart, and will lead you 
bound hand and foot into the "outer darkness" 
of human philosophy— evolution. 

Well, if you are sure that you have the 
correct idea of the corresponding price, 
look at the facts and ask yourself, When 
did our Lord pay that price for us? Does 
not the Apostle give the answer of this 
( 1 Tim. 2:5,6 ), saying that it was the 
man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom 
for all? When was he the man Christ 
Jesus? Surely not before he was made 
flesh, when he was a spirit-being with the 
Father. Surely not since his resurrection; 
for he is the man Christ Jesus no longer. 
He was made alive from the dead "a 



quickening spirit," of the divine nature, far 
higher than angels, while manhood is "a 
little lower" than the angelic nature.— 
Heb. 2:7-9 ; Psa. 8:4-8 . 

Is it not clear, then, that our Lord when 
he was the man Christ Jesus gave himself 
(all of himself, his human rights, privileges, 
etc.) as our corresponding price? 

And as the price paid by the Lord was 
a corresponding price, does not this prove 
that those for whom this price was paid 
had lost or forfeited just such things as corresponded 
to what he paid? And does not 
this agree with the statement, oft confirmed 
in the Scriptures, that God created 
man perfect, upright, in his own image, 
only of a fleshly or earthly nature instead 
of a spirit or heavenly nature? 

Is it not evident, then— since Adam 
was created in God's likeness, and not in 
a state of imperfection and sin; and since 
he lost his powers of perfect manhood 
and all right to their possession through 
disobedience; and since by losing these 
he and all in him became subject to death 
( Rom. 5:12 )— that our Lord Jesus under 
the divine plan became a man for the very 
purpose of giving himself a corresponding 
price for Adam, and thus for all involved 
in the loss and fall through him? 
Is it not evident that he gave up his manhood 
on our behalf as a substitute for condemned 
Adam, that Adam and his children 
might be released from the tomb "in 
due time"? Is it not evident, then, 
that our Lord Jesus would not prefer 
to be a man, being now of a nature so 
much higher than the one that he humbled 
himself to take for our sakes, that 
he might be able to give the corresponding 
price? And is it not evident that even 
if human nature were higher and more 
desirable than the divine nature, our Lord 
could not take it again without taking 
back the price of our justification? 

And is it not evident that this is the 
one and only view of ransom which fits 
to the meaning of the word and to the 
facts and testimonies which God gives 
relative thereto. 

Do you know, now, whether or not you 
believe in the ransom? and are you able 
to see through the thin deceptions of some 
teachers who use the word repeatedly to 
give the impression that they believe the 
sentiments which the word represents, but 



who are nevertheless constantly teaching 
theories in direct opposition to the meaning 
of the word ransom and its use in the 
Scriptures? Settle this question at once 
and definitely; and then see to it that 
your every mite of influence, by word and 
by letter and by literature, is exerted for 
the ransom as God's Word teaches it,— a 
"corresponding price," its only definition. 



R1228 : page 2 

QUESTIONS ON THE RANSOM. 



One who has been somewhat confused 
by the growingly prevalent no-ransom 
views, which darken counsel and pervert 
the Scriptures by stringing together disconnected 
portions of Scripture and by 
using such words as ransom and restitution 
regardless of the meaning of the words, suggests 
the following questions, which, for 
the benefit of all, we answer publicly. 

Ques. Could not Christ be our ransom 
and yet not be our substitute? 

No; the word ransom means all that 

substitute and redeem mean, and more. 
The word ransom not only signifies a price 
put instead of, or as a substitute for, something, 
but it means a corresponding price, 
a corresponding thing substituted. 

Ques. Do you not misstate the case when 
you declare that Christ as our ransom is 
the Rock upon which all should build, the 
foundation of all true faith? Do not the 
Scriptures declare that "That Rock was 
Christ," without mentioning the ransom? 

No, we do not misstate the matter. 
While acknowledging all of the features 
of Christ's work, we claim, and have repeatedly 
shown, that the work of Christ as 
our ransom is the foundation Rock upon 
which all other parts of his work for man's 
salvation are built, and that faith in his 
work as our ransom price is the solid rock-foundation, 
and the only foundation for 
all our hopes, present and future, through 
him. What is it to believe in Christ? 
Surely not the mere belief that such a 
person lived and died. No; many infidels 
believe this, and yet, rejecting the work 
which he accomplished as our Redeemer, 
our ransom-price, they have no foundation 
for faith in him. Besides, in the very 



case you cite ( 1 Cor. 10:4 ), the rock 
which typified Christ was the one from 
which the water flowed out as the result of 
its being smitten. That smiting represented 
Christ's crucifixion as our ransom. 
As the direct result of that ransom the 
water of everlasting life flows to the otherwise 
perishing. The source of life, the 
foundation of all faith and hope, then, is 
the smitten Rock, Christ as our ransom. 

Ques. You have pointed out repeatedly 
the many texts which mention the value 
of Christ's death, the efficacy of the precious 
blood as the one and only propitiation 
(satisfaction) for our sins, which effects 
for us a release from sin and its 
penalty, death; will you permit me to inquire 
—How comes it, then, that the 
Apostle, while agreeing with you that 

"we were reconciled to God by the death 
of his Son," declares that "we shall be 

saved by his life?" He even declares that 
if Christ be not risen, we are yet in our 
sins. If Christ's death was our ransom-price, 
and effected our reconciliation 
with God, as you and the Apostles declare, 
how could it be true that if Christ 
had not risen, our guilt would have been 
unforgiven and we would have been without 
hope of a resurrection? 

A careful study of the typical sin-offering 
(See next issue of the TOWER,) will 
show clearly the answer to this question. 
When the typical high-priest made atonement 
for sin, he first slew the bullock, 
which represented the man Christ Jesus 
who gave himself a ransom (a corresponding 
price), putting it on the altar of sacrifice, 
where it was fully consumed. Then he, 
as the representative of Christ, the "new 
creature," partaker of the divine nature, 
took the blood of the bullock into the Most 
Holy and sprinkled it upon the Mercy-seat 
and before the Mercy-seat, thus representing 
a work done by our Lord Jesus 
after his resurrection, when he, as our great 
High Priest, "entered into heaven itself 
(the true Holy of Holies), there to appear 
in the presence of God for us"— there to 
present before the Father, as the payment 
of our sins, the merit or value of his own 
sacrifice at Calvary. 

Just as in the type the slaying of the 
bullock and the consuming of it as a sacrifice 
did not effect the typical atonement 
nor typically take away the sin, just so in 



the antitype. Our Lord's sacrifice of himself 

did not take away our sins, nor in any 

way effect a reconciliation, nor justify us 

from our sins, nor secure to us resurrection 

life, until presented to God, after his resurrection 

and ascension. As in the type 

the death of the bullock became the 

means or price by which reconciliation 

and atonement for sin was afterward effected 

in the Most Holy, so in the antitype 

R1229 : page 2 

the death of Christ became the 

means, the merit, the price by which reconciliation 

and atonement for sins was 

afterward effected, when Christ our Lord 

arose, ascended, and presented before the 

Father the merit of his obedience, as the 

offset to the penalty against Adam and all 

his race— as substitutionary payment of 

the penalty against Adam, as his ransom 

price (a corresponding price). 

When you have earned the money for 
the purchase of an article, that alone does 
not make the article yours. The money 
may lie in your purse and the desired thing 
will never be yours unless you present the 
money for it. So, our Lord's death, which 
corresponded to man's penalty, became in 
his hand a merit, a valuable thing, available 
for man's purchase or ransom, sufficient 
as a propitiation to settle or cancel 
the debt of the sinner. But the presenting 
of that price for us was not done at 
Calvary, but after our Lord was risen and 
ascended up on high. The presentation 
of that merit before the Father and its 
acceptance as our ransom price was typically 
shown in the type of the atonement, 
by the sprinkling of the blood of the 
bullock (blood of propitiation or satisfaction) 
upon the Mercy-seat or Propitiatory. 

Did God then accept the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice as the full offset, ransom 
or purchase price for the world of mankind? 
Yes; God not only indicated that 
the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus was an acceptable 
one in his sight, but he in a special 
manner granted an acknowledgment 
that when presented to him as the payment, 
the price, the propitiation of our 
sins, he thus accepted of it. 

The resurrection of Christ from the dead 
was the proof or evidence that in him God 
was well pleased, that his life and sacrifice 



were acceptable before God; and this became 

an assurance or evidence to men 

that he is the one through whom God intended 

to judge the world— to try or test 

men under full knowledge and opportunity, 

and reward all who will choose righteousness 

with lasting life.— Acts 17:31 . 

The descent of the holy Spirit at Pentecost 
was the evidence or proof that the 
sacrifice of Christ had been applied on our 
behalf as the price of our sins and that 
God had accepted it as such. It was ten 
days after our Lord ascended up on high 
before any forgiveness of sins or other advantage 
from his death accrued to men. 
What was our Lord doing in heaven during 
those ten days, while the disciples 
waited for the promised blessing? He 
was doing what was typified in the act of 
the typical high priest sprinkling the 
blood of the already offered and consumed 
sacrifice, as an atonement or propitiation 
upon the Mercy-seat or Propitiatory. He 
was presenting the merit of his human life 
given up as the price of our forfeited life, 
that he might, by thus meeting our penalty, 
have the right to offer lasting life, by 
a resurrection, to all. 

Thus seen, the resurrection of our Lord 
was all-important. Had he not risen, he 
would have been proved a sinner, one not 
worthy of life and unfit to be our ransom 
price. Had he not risen, he could not 
have gone into the Holy of Holies, even 
heaven itself, there to appear on our behalf, 
to present to God the merit of the 
sacrifice he had made; and therefore we 
would have remained unbenefited. Remember, 
too, how he declared after his 
resurrection, "It is expedient for you 
that I go away." Had he not entered 
the true Holy of Holies and presented his 
sacrifice as our ransom, we would have remained 
in our sins, and the holy Spirit 
and the privilege of God's call to joint-heirship 
with Christ would not have been 
granted— for this favor comes not to 
sinners, but to the justified. And had 
Christ not risen, he could never do the 
great work of restitution for mankind. 
For be it remembered, only believers in 
his ransom-sacrifice are yet justified, freed 
from sins, or in any way forgiven. Of 
others it is written, "ye are yet in your 
sins." Only believers have escaped from 
the condemnation that is still upon the 



world ( John 3:18 ). And these believers 
are such as not only believe that such a 
person as Jesus lived and died, but that 
his death was accepted of God as their 
ransom price. Others will be brought to 
a knowledge of this great foundation truth 
in the times of restitution, and when they 
accept of it, their sins will be blotted out. 
-Acts 3:19 . 

So then, we were reconciled to God by 
the death of his Son, but not at the time 
of the death, nor until it was presented 
and accepted as our ransom price. And 
we were justified freely by his blood [his 
sacrificed life], not when he died, nor 
when he presented it to the Father as the 
price of Adam and his race, but when we 
individually accepted of the offer of forgiveness 
and reconciliation— through his 
blood. 



R1229 : page 3 

THE WAITING ONES. 



There are some among the faithful, 

Waiting, watching every day, 
Peering through the misty shadows 

To the clear and lighted way; 
Listening in the dusky twilight, 

Waiting even in the night, 
'Mid the toil and heat of noonday 

Bending forward to the light. 

And they speak in eager whispers— 

"Can we see his chariot yet?" 
"Will the Master come this evening?" 

"Will the heavenly Friend forget?" 
So they stand, these earnest servants, 

Waiting, watching evermore 
For the clouds to part asunder, 

And reveal the open door. 

There are troubled ones among them, 

Looking through the weary night; 
Some are God's dear little children 

Watching for the dawning light; 
Some are aged pilgrims, longing 

For the Master's spoken word; 
There are some in every country 

Waiting, watching for the Lord. 

And they take their daily duties, 
And perform them as for him; 



And they read his loving message 
When their eyes are tired and dim. 

They are living lives of blessing- 
Lives of love for his dear sake, 

While they wait with eager longing 
For the morn of joy to break. 

Now he doth no longer tarry; 

Soon he'll fold them to his breast; 
He will make his watchers happy 

In this everlasting rest. 
He will give them satisfaction 

For their days of waiting here; 
And their joy shall be unceasing 

When they shall his glory share. 
— Selected. 



R1229 : page 3 

THE PRECIOUS BLOOD OF CHRIST. 

All of God's dear children trust in the 
precious blood of the Lamb of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world. 
They know, as Mr. Moody tersely puts it, 
that the blood of Christ is the principal 
topic of God's revelation, and the foundation 
of his great plan of salvation. They 
know that the expression, "blood of 
Christ," somehow stands for sacrifice of 
Christ, though they are sadly confused by 
false ideas on the so-called "trinity," 
and consequently upon what our Lord 
Jesus gave as the sacrifice for sins. 

In this "evil day" the great Adversary 
of God and his truth is taking advantage 
of this confusion, this lack of clearness 
of understanding, to overthrow faith in 
the ransom, the foundation doctrine of 
Christianity. The process is, to scoff at 
the idea of blood cleansing from sin, and 
to insinuate that most Christians believe 
in having literal blood sprinkled on their 
hearts, or that they are cleansed from sin 
by plunging into a literal fountain filled 
with blood drawn from Immanuel's veins. 
Thus the idea of blood-cleansing is 
scouted as being on a par with the doctrine 

R1230 : page 3 

of everlasting torment, and belonging 
to the savage minds of the "dark 
ages." 



As a matter of fact, no sane Christian 
people have ever held this literal and 
absurd view of the meaning of the blood 
of Christ. It has always been recognized 
as synonymous with sacrifice. Any fair-minded 
person can readily see this to be 
true as well of the use of the word blood 
by the Apostles, as in the hymns of all 
denominations of Christian people. Take 
that grand old hymn— 
"There is a fountain filled with blood 

Drawn from Immanuel's veins, 
And sinners, plunged beneath that flood, 
Lose all their guilty stains." 

What could more clearly express the 
very essence of the Bible doctrine; and 
how absurd for any to try to make out 
that those who thus express their sentiments 
believe in a river of literal blood. 
The hymn expresses well and beautifully 
the very thought of the Prophet ( Zech. 13:1 ), 
"In that day there shall be a fountain 
opened to the house of David for sin 
and for uncleanness." 

There is surely an object in this misrepresentation 
of the general views of Christian 
people. Is it to confuse the mind, 
excite disgust at the thought of blood, 
and swimming in rivers of blood, etc., and 
then under the warmth of the denial: 
"Such is not my belief even if my fathers 
did believe it," to point out to the confused 
one a theory which it is desired to 
impress? It looks very much that way. 
The theory then advanced is, that when 
Christ's blood is mentioned, the word 
blood stands for carnal nature, and the 
understanding should be— Christ slew HIS 

carnal nature, as an example of how all 
his followers and the world in general 
should slay their carnal natures. 

Ah! no wonder that, with such a theory 
to advance, the great Adversary first tried 
to excite disgust for any and every thing 
connected with "the blood." He well 
knew that, unless disgust for "the blood" 
should be aroused and form a barrier of 
mental prejudice, some of God's children 
would be sure to examine the forty-three 
places where the Scriptures mention the 
blood of Christ, and the many more where 
they mention the blood of animals which 
typified his blood. And if they would 
but investigate, they would find that which 
would prove fatal to the theory he wished 
to establish as new light. 



The few who look to God's word for 
instruction find that in these forty-three 
times that the blood of Christ is mentioned, 
neither our Lord nor the apostles 
once hint that the blood of Jesus represented 
the slaying of his carnal nature, 
nor that he had in or about him anything 
evil that required to be destroyed. They 
find, on the contrary, that there was no 
cause of death found in him except in the 
sight of the hypocritical Pharisees. And 
they find that, to the contrary of the 
theory we are criticizing, these forty-three 
inspired testimonies on the subject declare 
unitedly, not that our Lord shed his blood 
for himself and as an example to all men 
to shed their blood for themselves and 
thus reach perfection, but that, whatever 
blood symbolizes, it is his blood that 
cleanseth us from all sin. 

Yes, his blood became the basis for the 
forgiveness of our sins, made peace for us, 
opened up the way to reconciliation, and 
transferred us from the domain of sentenced 
culprits, back to sonship in the family of 
God. So says the great Apostle Paul- 
Col. 1:20 ; Heb. 9:12; 10:19; 13:12; 
Rom. 3:25 ; 5:9 ; Eph. 1:7 ; 2:13 ; 
Col. 1:14 and Acts 20:28-31 . So declares 
the great Apostle Peter- 1 Pet. 1:2,19 . 
So testifies the beloved Apostle 
John- 1 John 1:7 ; Rev. 1:5 ; 5:9 ; 
7:14. 

Truly the Word of God is sufficient 
that the man of God may be thoroughly 
furnished against all the wiles, glosses and 
sophistries of Satan. Even those who do 
not see clearly what the blood does signify 
or symbolize, can, without aid, quickly 
see that it means nothing at all like what 
this erroneous view would set forth. The 
idea of the blood of Christ signifying the 
slaying by him of his carnal nature is 
as far from the testimony of the above 
passages of God's Word as the East is 
from the West. 

But what is the true significance of the 
blood of Christ when used in reference 
to our cleansing from sin, as in the above 
citations? If it does not mean literal 
blood, what does it mean? 

We answer by giving God's definition 
of what blood represents or symbolizes. 
The blood is the life. ( Gen. 9:4-6 .) 
"For the life of the flesh is in the blood; 
and I have appointed it to you upon the 



altar to make an atonement for your souls 
[lives, beings]: for it is the blood [sacrificed 
life] that maketh atonement for the 
soul [or being]."— Lev. 17:11,14. 

By accepting God's definition of what 
blood signified, in all the sacrifices, as well 
as in the case of the "one sacrifice for 
all" which our Lord Jesus presented, all 
confusion disappears. As blood represents 
the life, the shedding of blood represents 
the loss of life— death. So then, the expressions 
—the Lamb slain, the cleansing 
blood of the Lamb, the precious blood 
of Christ, no more refer to literal blood 
than to a literal lamb, but to the death 
of Christ. True, our Lord's side was actually 
pierced and blood flowed out, but 
the expression, "He hath redeemed us by 
his blood" (by his death), would have been 
equally true and proper, if not a drop of 
his literal blood had passed from his veins; 
for it merely signifies that he redeemed us 
by his death —by the sacrifice or loss of 
his life. Thus it is written, "He poured 
out his soul [being— life] unto death;" 
and again that he made "his soul [being- 
life] an offering for sin."— Isa. 53:12,10 . 

So then, God's people have always had 
the pith of the truth on this subject, when 
believing that the "blood of Christ" 
meant the sacrifice of Christ. That is the 
correct thought. Their difficulty is, that 
when they come in contact with errors 
their lack of a clear understanding of what 
sacrifice Christ did make for the sins of 
the world, combined with erroneous ideas 
of a trinity, make them liable to be led 
astray from the foundation doctrine of 
Christianity— "that Christ died for our 

sins according to the Scriptures." Finding 
that they cannot clearly analyze their 
own views, they are very susceptible to the 
false view we criticize, which first ridicules 
the idea which no one holds, that it is the 
literal blood of Christ which washes away 
our sins, and then offers the proposition, 
that Christ's blood, when referred to in 
Scriptures, represents his slaying of his 
own carnal nature and desires, as an example 
to men, how they must each slay 
his own carnal nature and desires. According 
to this unscriptural theory each man 
would be his own Savior. And not only 
so, but if each would be a great Savior 
in proportion to the work accomplished, 
then the Lord Jesus would be the least of 



all; because, even those who claim that he 
had a carnal nature to crucify or slay cannot 
dispute that many men have far more 
of evil and sin working in their members 
to overcome than our Lord had. And if 
each slays sin in himself, the more degraded 
the man the greater the salvation, 
and the greater he is as his own Savior. 

But let each compare this view briefly 
with the view presented in the above cited 
statements of the apostles respecting the 
blood of Christ— the life which he laid 
down on our behalf. 

The life of the world in general was 
gone— forfeited in father Adam's failure 
when on trial— all not absolutely dead 
were dying. They were under the execution 
of the just sentence of God, "Dust 
thou art and unto dust shalt thou return." 
God had decreed a sentence which would 
most fully manifest the law of the universe 
—that no sinner shall live— and one 
which at the same time furnished an opportunity 
for revealing to angels and to men 
his unswerving justice, his great love, and 
his boundless wisdom and power. When 
God decreed death as the penalty for sin, 
so that a ransom (a corresponding price 
—a just one to die for [or instead of] the 
unjust one— Rom. 5:17 ) would be necessary 
to the release of mankind from the 
sentence, he did so in full view of the 
course he would pursue. His wisdom foresaw 
the results of leaving Adam to his own 
free will— that in his inexperience he 
would not submit his will to the will of 
his creator and would therefore get into 
sin and under the sentence of death— extinction. 
And his wisdom also foresaw 
how his love could work out a plan for 
the salvation of his creatures. And he 
foresaw that the well beloved and only 
begotten Son would humbly consent to 
carry out the divine plan— to leave the 
glory and honor of the heavenly nature, 
and as the man Christ Jesus give himself 
a ransom for Adam and his race.— Phil. 2:7,8 ; 

1 Tim. 2:5,6 . 

Since the penalty was death, the ransom 
necessary to release the dead and dying 
world from the sentence under which 
all were, and to secure them restitution- 
resurrection— and an individual trial for 
everlasting life, was the death of this perfect 
man whom God thus provided. And 
this simple and easily comprehended plan 



was carried out. The man Christ Jesus 
gave himself a ransom for all;— he died, 
the just for the unjust;— he died for our 
sins. The dying on the cross, the drops 
of bloody sweat in Gethsemane, the pierced 
hands and side and flowing blood were 
not necessary to our ransom. None of 
these things were the penalties of sin. 
God's sentence against Adam— "dying 
thou shalt die"— did not specify what 
manner of death, nor what amount of suffering 
should be connected with it. Death 
alone was the penalty, and had God's will 
been such, for our Lord to have met death 
in any other form than crucifixion would 
have been equally our ransom price. 

R1231 : page 3 

Many do not see that in our Lord two 
things were being accomplished at once. 
Our ransom was being provided, and our 
Lord's extreme fidelity to the Heavenly 
Father was being tested and proved in the 
same sacrifice. As our ransom, death in 
any form would do; but as an unbounded 
proof of his humility and obedience to 
the Father's plan, the shame of the cross 
was added.- Phil. 2:7,8 . 

The result of his death as it affects 
himself is that he is now highly exalted 
and made partaker of the divine nature, 
that all men should honor the Son even as 
they honor the Father.— Phil. 2:8,9 ; 
John 5:23 . 

The result of his death as it affects 
mankind is that it places the world in his 
hands as the purchaser, to the intent that, 
without violating the law and sentence 
of God (which he satisfied with his own 
[life] blood), he may restore men to perfection 
and offer everlasting life to all who 
will come into harmony with God's perfect 
law through him— under his direction 
and assistance. 

R1231 : page 3 

THIS IS JUSTIFICATION. 

Thus we are justified by his blood [by 
the life which he laid down for us]: our 
sins and imperfections are passed over, 
forgiven, covered by the merit of the ransom 
which he gave. Not only sins past 
and present, but also all future sins— all 



that are directly or indirectly the results 
of Adam's transgression— all that are not 
our own, that our wills do not approve of, 
are not reckoned any longer to those who 
are in Christ Jesus. No wonder these 
have joy and peace as they realize that 
there is now no longer any condemnation 
against them.— Rom. 5:1 ; 8:1 . 

Here begins the work of sacrifice and 
crucifixion with Christ to which many 
are invited, but to which few respond. It is 

R1231 : page 4 

a mistake, however, to consider this sacrificing 
as a slaughter of our sins or as having 
anything to do with the "slaying of 
the enmity" mentioned by the Apostle. 
On the contrary (under the Law, which 
was typical), no sacrifice could be offered 
unto the Lord that had any blemish or 
imperfection— blemishes representing sin. 
So it is that no one is ever invited to become 
a sacrificer with Christ until he has 
first been justified from all things- 
cleansed from all sins— by the precious 
blood [sacrificed life] of Christ. And if 
these who are cleansed from sins— justified 
from all things— are told that they 
may present their bodies ["holy and acceptable 
unto God" through Jesus Christ] 
as living sacrifices, it must be their justified 

selves and not their sins that they present, 
and that the Lord proposes to accept. 

The "enmity" which the Apostle declares 
Christ abolished ( Eph. 2:15 ) was 
not sin in himself, nor anything in himself; 
but in or by the sacrifice of his flesh, 
the man Christ Jesus abolished the enmity 
or opposition of the Jewish Law Covenant, 
under which fleshly Israel labored. When 
that Covenant which they could not keep 
was fulfilled by our Lord Jesus and passed 
away ( Col. 2:14 ), all who had been under 
it were released from its requirements of 
absolute perfection which opposed and 
condemned them all, that they might receive 
through Christ forgiveness of sins 
—through faith in his blood. 

The privilege of becoming joint-sacrifices 
with Christ is limited, as truly as is 
the privilege of becoming joint-heirs with 
him. "Now is the acceptable time." 
Both the privilege and the reward of sacrifice 
will end with this age. Now is the 
time when God will accept the living sacrifices 



of all who (after being justified from 
all sin by the blood of Christ) come unto 
God through him. 

Such are not invited to sacrifice for 
their own sins, then, for their sins must 
be canceled before any sacrifice would 
be acceptable. But they are invited to 
sacrifice time, talent, influence, self-ease, 
and lawful self-gratification, in the service 
of the truth— in the general cause of 
God against the great enemy, Sin, and for 
the recovery of sinners out of it through 
Christ Jesus. 

The sufferings of Christ, to a share in 
which all believers cleansed by his blood 
were invited during the Gospel age, will 
soon end. They will be filled up or completed. 
( Col. 1:24 .) Then the glory 
will follow— the glory of Christ Jesus and 
also of all the members of his body, the 
church, those who suffered for the truth 
(not for their sins), sacrificing their 
justified selves with him and in the cause 
of God. Then the reign of righteousness 
will begin and none will have occasion 
to lay down his life for the truth's sake 
thereafter. 

Many have believed in the precious 
blood and have had joy and peace in believing 
and then heard the call to the 
privilege of self-sacrifice with Christ; but 
few have responded, and hence few are 
chosen to be with him and behold and 
share his glory and his throne, and his 
new nature— the divine nature— far above 
both the human and the angelic natures, 
even in their grandest perfections. Let us, 
acceptable to God through the precious 
blood, make our calling and election 
sure. Let us lay aside every weight and 
hindrance and run with patience the race 
of self-denial to the end— looking unto 
Jesus, the author of our faith, to finish it 
by receiving us to the heavenly mansion. 



R1110 : page 4 

"ENTERTAIN no thoughts which you 
would blush at in words." 



R1232 : page 4 



THE UNDEFILED ONE. 

"Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? 
Not one."-- Job 14:4 . 

That the pre-existent Son of God "was 
made flesh and dwelt among us," is clearly 
stated in the Scriptures ( John 1:14 ); that 
he was "holy," "undefiled," and "separate 
from sinners," is plainly stated ( Heb. 7:26-28 
and Luke 1:35 ); and that he 
knew no sin, while all other men are sinners, 
is also stated ( 2 Cor. 5:21 ; Rom. 5:18,19 ; 
and 1 Pet. 2:22 ). The Apostle's 
argument that he was able to, and 
did, give himself a ransom or corresponding 
price, for the forfeited life and rights 
of Adam (Rom. 5:17-19 ; 1 Tim. 2:6 ), 
proves the same. Because the first Adam 
was perfect until he sinned; hence one 
who could give a corresponding price or 
ransom must have been likewise perfect, 
without sin and free from its condemnation. 
The same thought is logically deduced 
from the statement that Jesus fulfilled 
all the requirements of the Law 
( Matt. 5:17 ; John 8:46 ); for we know 
that the Law of God was the full measure 
of a perfect man's ability. Hence the 
conclusion is irresistible that he must have 
been a perfect man when able to do what 
no imperfect man had done or could do. 
- Psa. 49:7 ; Heb. 1:3 ; 4:15 ; 9:28 ; 

10:5-10 ; Isa. 53:9-12 ; John 1:29 ; 

IPet. 1:19. 

But notwithstanding the mass of Bible 
testimony as to his human perfection, 
some inquire, Can the possibility of this 
be scientifically shown? Others assert 
that it is an impossibility, and that the 
laws of nature are in direct opposition. 
They give unbounded weight to their imperfect 
understanding of nature's laws, 
and lightly cast aside the weight of Bible 
testimony. 

The question, however, is well worthy 
of an examination from a scientific as well 
as from a scriptural standpoint, in order 
that the agreement of science and Scripture 
may be clearly seen. Science and Scripture 
always agree when properly understood. 
There is no law against our seeking 
evidence from every good source, but 
only egotism, or blindness, or both, will 
exalt human reasonings above the divine 
testimony. 



We raise the query then: How came it 
that Jesus was perfect while his mother 
was imperfect?— who can bring a clean 
thing out of an unclean? Seeking to answer 
this query, the church of Rome promulgated 
the doctrine of the "Immaculate 
Conception:" not the doctrine that 
Jesus was miraculously conceived by the 
holy power of God, as recorded by the 
Evangelists; but that Mary, the mother 
of Jesus, was miraculously conceived, and 
hence that she was pure, holy, and free 
from Adamic sin and imperfection. But 
the originators of this doctrine could not 
have been far-seeing, or they would have 
known that by the same reasoning it must 
be proved that Mary's mother was of immaculate 
conception, and so all the way 
back to Eve, "the mother of all living," 
whose fall into sin before she bore any 
children is clearly stated in the Bible. 
See Gen. 3 and 1 Tim. 2:14 . 

However, this subject is perfectly clear 
and plain now, from a scientific as well 
as from a Bible standpoint. 

The Scriptures hold out the thought 
that all EXISTENCE, LIVING ENERGY, or 
BEING, comes from the father and not 
from the mother. The mother receives 
and nourishes the germ of being until it is 
able to maintain an independent existence; 
i.e., until it is able to appropriate 
to its maintenance the life-sustaining elements 
which the earth and air supply. The 
living organism which she nourishes came 
entirely from the father. The word father 
has the significance of life-giver. 

In harmony with this principle, God 
was the "FATHER," or life-giver, while 
the earth was the Mother of Adam, and 
hence of the human race ( Luke 3:38 ). 
In harmony with this principle, the children 
are spoken of, as of or from their 
fathers, and borne by their mothers. ( Gen. 24:47 .) 
Thus the children of Jacob, 
counted through his sons, were seventy 
when he came out of Egypt; but if he or 
the twelve Patriarchs had daughters, which 
we cannot doubt, the children of those 
daughters were not counted as Jacob's 
children, they being counted to their 
fathers. And all of these seventy souls or 
beings are expressly said to have come 
out of the loins of Jacob. ( Gen. 46:26,27 , 
and Exod. 1:5 .) So of Solomon it is 
said, that he came out of the loins of 



David. ( 1 Kings 8:19 , and 2 Chron. 6:9 .) 
So also the Apostle Paul and Israelites 
in general claimed that they all came 
out of the loins of Abraham; and of Levi 
it is written that "he was yet in the loins 
of his father when Melchisedec met him." 
-Heb. 7:5,10 . 

Thus also the whole race was in and 
sprang from Adam their father, but were 
not from Eve. And thus it is written 
that in (through) ADAM all die, but 
not in (through) Eve. Because the race 
came of Adam, it was therefore tried in 
him. 

This, which the Scriptures teach, is the 
latest deduction of science on this subject 
of Progeneration, as applied to life 
in all its forms. Scientists find abundant 
and conclusive proof in nature that life 
or being comes always from the male. 
The simplest form of illustration is a 
hen's egg: Of itself it contains no life; 
no living organism could under any circumstance 
come of it, unless it be impregnated 
with a living organism by the 
male. The egg consists of the proper elements, 
and in proper proportion, adapted 
to the minute organism received into it; 
and under proper conditions that organism 
develops. The yolk becomes wholly 
the bird, while the clear liquid albumen 
serves as its earliest nourishment until it 
breaks the shell and is able to sustain 
itself by appropriating cruder elements of 
nutrition. The principles here involved 
are the same in human and other animals. 

In view of these testimonies of the Bible 
and science, it is a reasonable deduction 
that if the father be perfect, the child 
will be so: the perfect progeny would 
absorb and appropriate only such elements 
of nutrition as were suitable and 
beneficial to its perfect development, 
throwing off through the operation of its 
perfect organism any other elements. On 
the contrary, if the germ of being be imperfect, 
it will appropriate whatever qualities 
its mother furnishes— good or bad. 
Being imperfect, it would be unable to 
reject wholly the poisonous elements of 
disease. This is on the same principle 
that if two persons eat of strong food, the 
one with good digestive powers can appropriate 
its nutriment and pass off its 
unwholesome qualities, while the other 
with weak digestion could appropriate 



little nutriment from the same food and 
would be injured by its evil qualities. 

It follows, then, that had mother Eve 
alone sinned, the race would not have 
died. Had Adam remained perfect, his 
life unforfeited and unimpaired, his offspring 
would have been the same; the 
imperfections of Eve would not have affected 
them; being perfect, they would 
have appropriated good elements and 
have passed off naturally any elements 
of decay without injury. On the other 
hand, suppose that Adam had sinned and 
Eve had remained sinless, Adam's condemnation 
and death would have affected 
the entire posterity just the same; the 
most perfect nourishment given to imperfect 
and dying germs would never make 
of them perfect beings. Hence the appropriateness 
of the Scriptural statement, 
that "In Adam all die," and "By one 
man's disobedience. ..death passed 
upon all." ( 1 Cor. 15:22 ; Rom. 5:12,19 .) 
How wonderful the correspondence 
here between the first and second 
Adams and their brides. As the 
death of the race depended not upon 
Eve but wholly upon Adam, and yet she 
shared in the bringing of it, so the restored 
life of the race redeemed depends 
not at all upon the bride of Christ, but 
upon Jesus, though by divine favor it is 
arranged that she shall share in the work 
of RESTITUTION of "that which was lost." 

The fountain, Adam, having become 
contaminated by sin and death, none of 
his posterity can be free from contamination; 
for, "Who can bring a clean thing 
out of an unclean? Not one." The reference 
here must be understood as applying 
to the man, and not to the woman: 
none coming from or out of the contaminated 
fountain can be clean. Hence, 
"There is none righteous, no, not one;" 
none can redeem his own life, nor give to 
God a ransom for his brother.— Rom. 3:10 ; 
Psa. 49:7 . 

It follows, then, that the only obstacle 
to the generation of a perfect man is the 
lack of a perfect father to give a perfect 
life-germ; and hence the teaching of 
Scripture, that in the case of Jesus a perfect 
LIFE-GERM, transferred by divine 
power from a pre-existent condition to 
the embryo human condition, was born 
"holy" (pure and perfect), though of an 



imperfect mother ( Luke 1:35 ). That he 
was uncontaminated with any imperfection 
—mental, moral or physical— which 
his mother in common with the entire 
human race shared, is entirely reasonable, 
and in perfect accord both with Scripture 
and with the latest scientific findings 
and deductions. 

Another fact which scientists are demonstrating 
to themselves, which seems 
to concur with Scripture testimony, is, 
that though life or being comes from the 
father, form and nature come from the 
mother. The scientific proofs of this are 
more abstruse and less easily grasped by 
the ordinary mind; and this, because in 
wisdom God has not only separated the 
various kinds, or natures, but in great 
measure has limited them, so that they cannot 
mix or blend beyond certain limits. 

The clearest illustration of this principle 
that kind or nature comes from the 
mother, scientists have yet to learn, is 
found in the Scriptures. They furnish 
the principal and clearest illustration of 
the effect or result of miscegenation, or 
the blending of distinct natures, and prove 
more conclusively than science has yet 
been able to do, that NATURE comes of 
the mother, though the father's characteristics 
attach. Take, as an illustration, 
the offspring of the improper union between 
"the daughters of men" and those 
angels who kept not their proper estate, 
but degraded their nature: the progeny 
had the vitality of the fathers, but the nature 
of the mothers— they were renowned 
MEN. [Superior to the then decaying 
race, it would have had hard masters in 
those Nephelim had not God in goodness 
not only swept away the new race 

(new, because not of the same father) in 
the Flood, but restrained "those angels" 
who caused this trouble, depriving them 

R1232 : page 5 

of their former liberties. See articles in 
issues of June and December, 1884, and 
January, 1885, treating of these.] So 
great was the renown of these, that it is to 
be found with more or less distinctness 
in heathen mythologies to this day, and 
hundreds of years after their destruction 
in the flood, the false report that some of 
these were yet alive caused a panic among 



the Israelites while flushed with the victory 
of recent battles.— See Num. 13:33 . 

But the chief illustration of this principle 
is found in the fact that Jehovah, 
himself of the divine nature, has begotten 
sons of the same as well as other 
natures. He is the father of those of the 
angelic nature ( Job 2:1 ; 38:7 ; Heb. 2:9 ), 
and of the human nature ( Luke 3:38 ), 
as well as of the "NEW CREATURES" 
who shall be made partakers of his own 
divine nature. ( 2 Pet. 1:4 ). The will 
or ENERGY of Jehovah operating upon 
spirit-substances produced and developed 
angels; operating upon earthly 
substances ( Gen. 2:7 ; 1 Cor. 15:47 ), 
man was produced. And when he would 
give us a clear conception of the generation 
of the new creatures to the divine 
nature, he represents them as begotten of 
his in the womb of the Covenant which 
he made with Abraham, which he symbolizes 
by a woman, Sarah, telling us that 
as Isaac was the heir of Abraham and 
child of promise (by Sarah), so we, as or 
like Isaac, are children of God, being 
children of the promise, or Sarah covenant. 
-See Gal. 4:23-31 ; 1 Pet. 1:3,5,23 ; 

2 Pet. 1:4. 

The same principle is illustrated in 
the fact that in the typical dispensation, 
prior to the Christian age, a child inherited 
blessings and privileges of its 
father, according to the favor and standing 
of its mother, thus again declaring 
that the mother's nature, rights, privileges 
and liberties attached to the child, 
though not of necessity the father's. See 
Gen. 21:10 ; Ex. 21:4 ; Gal. 4:30 . 

Again, Jesus' birth of a woman proves 
the same thing. The "holy thing" born 
of a woman partook of the woman's nature, 
i.e., human nature— "of the earth 
earthy." Though retaining all the purity 
and perfection of the pre-existent (spirit) 
state, the transferred germ of being (in 
harmony with this law we are examining) 
partook of the nature of the mother 
and was "made flesh" by being "born of 
a woman." Yet the "clean thing" came 
not out of the unclean race, but "proceeded 
forth and came from God" and was 
merely nourished and developed in Mary. 

It is yet further in harmony with this 
same principle that though Christ has 
been highly exalted to the divine nature, 



and is no longer human, yet it is declared 
of him that he shall be the life-giver or 
father of the whole human race, while it 
is also shown that his work for the race is 
to restore the perfection of human nature, 
which was lost for all through Adam's sin; 
thus showing that he, as father, will be on 
the divine plane, while the restored race, 
as children, will be on the human plane, 
born out of a covenant of restitution, illustrated 
by Keturah, Abraham's third wife. 



R1232 : page 5 
SECTARIAN TAXES. 



A prominent New York journal calls 
attention to the fact that of the total sum 
of $1,142,222.61 assessed in that city 
for charitable purposes for the present 
year, more than one-half will go to support 
sectarian charities, the figures standing: 

Nonsectarian, $510,092.38 

Sectarian, 632,130.23 

Total, 1,142,222.61 

This immense sum appropriated to sectarian 
purposes is made up as follows:— 

PROTESTANT EPISCOPAL. 

The Children's Fold of the 

City of New York, $17,680.00 

Protestant Episcopal House of 

Mercy, 9,134.63 

The Shepherd's Fold of the 
Protestant Episcopal Church 
in the State of New York, . . 5,000.00 

Total $31,814.63 

JEWISH. 

Hebrew Benevolent Society of 
the City of New York, $60,000.00 

ROMAN CATHOLIC. 

Association for Befriending 
Children and Young Girls . . . $7,280.00 
St. Joseph's Institution for the 
Improved Instruction of 

Deaf Mutes 20,700.00 

Foundling Asylum of the 

Sisters of Charity 252,345.60 

New York Catholic Protectory . 254,000.00 
Roman Catholic House of the 



Good Shepherd 6,000.00 

Total $540,325.60 

Thus, at the expense of the public, over 
half a million dollars per year are spent 
to prove to the world the great benevolence 
of the CHURCH OF ROME. 

We highly approve of real generosity and 
benevolence, but the people have a right 
to demand that public taxes be devoted to 
public and not to sectarian religious purposes. 
The influence of this money goes 
to spread or to support the errors of the 
systems dispensing the sum. How these 
large sums of money are spent, the public 
never knows, for no reports are required 
of these as of the city charities. 



R1231 : page 5 
SHALL NEVER DIE. 



"I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth 
in me, though he were dead, yet shall he 
live; and whosoever liveth and believeth in me 
shall never die."— John 11:26 . 

These were Jesus' words of consolation 
to Martha. They state briefly man's future 
hopes in, and because of, the redemption 
that is in Christ Jesus. Let us analyze 
the statement, and, if possible, gain 
its full import. 

The first statement— "He that believeth 
in me, though he were dead, yet shall 
he live," teaches that only believers shall 
be resurrected— made to "LIVE." This 
may appear out of harmony with other 
statements of our Lord to the effect that 
ALL in their graves shall "come forth," 
until we recognize the full force of the 
words RESURRECTION and LIVE. We have 
therefore shown that the word resurrect 
signifies to lift or raise up again to perfection, 
and that since man's fall was 
from perfection as represented in Adam, 
his resurrection would imply a bringing 
to perfection again. But many Scriptures 
indicate that while the gospel church will 
be lifted to the perfection of the new 
nature in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye, the world will be resurrected or 
brought to perfection of their human 



nature gradually— the Millennial age being 
the times of resurrection or restitution. 

By recognizing a similar fulness of 
meaning in the word "LIVE," we shall find 
that in the scripture under consideration 
we have the statement clear and easily understood, 
in harmony with all scriptures. 

To LIVE means a great deal, in its full 
import. Adam and Eve lived, i.e., had 
life in perfect measure, before sin entered. 
When death entered, and the dying commenced, 
it was a process of ceasing to 
live. So death, the opposite of life, passed 
upon all men. From the standpoint of 
God's sentence all are dead ( 2 Cor. 5:14 ; 
Matt. 8:22 ). So then, though it is true 
that all in their graves shall "come forth," 
they will come forth with a small measure 
of life, such as men now have. [The most 
hale of the race to-day enjoy but a fragment 
of perfect life.] They will still be 
measurably in death. In this condition 
all shall come to knowledge, and whosoever 
believeth in the Ransomer, though 
dead, "yet shall he LIVE." Belief in the 
ransom will be necessary to the full acquirement 
of the favor purchased— LIFE. 

In perfect accord with this view (and 
no other) is that peculiar statement of 
John 5:25 : "Verily, verily, I say unto 
you, The hour is coming when the dead 
shall hear the voice of the Son of God; 
and they that hear shall LIVE." [Sinaitic 
MS. omits "and now is."] According to 
the general conception this should read, 
they that live shall hear, but this would 
not have been true and in harmony with the 
plan; hence the peculiar and guarded expression 
used, which is only appreciable as 
we come to see more deeply into God's 
plans for that coming age. All are dead 
—under death's dominion; death has 
passed upon all. The Redeemer has 
come, the ransom has been paid, and in 
due time all the dead shall hear [be 
brought to a clear conception of it], and 
they that hear [receive or grasp it] shall 
[in due time] LIVE, reach perfection of 
life— perfection of being. 

A few who were of the dead class have 
heard, more or less distinctly, in this age, 
of the ransom price given for our release. 
Those who have heard and accepted the 
glad message of pardon through Christ 
are told that by faith they may reckon 
themselves as being already alive— as having 



"passed from death unto life," although 
they are actually still imperfect and dying 
beings and will not be actually perfected 
and fully alive until our resurrection. 

All thus by faith reckoned alive from 
Adamic death during the period of the 
gospel high-calling are privileged also to 
HEAR of a prize or high-calling offered 
during the Gospel age to believing 

sacrificers; and thus these have "access into 
THIS GRACE, wherein we stand and rejoice 

in hope of the glory of God" ( Rom. 5:2 ) 

—in hope of sharing the divine 

nature and kingdom power with our Lord 

R1232 : page 5 

and Redeemer, Jesus. 

But the due time, in which the great 
mass of the dead shall hear, will be when 
the "little flock" has attained the promised 
glory, and as members of the great 
Prophet shall teach and bless the people, 
bringing them out of their graves and 
opening sin-blooded eyes and prejudice-stopped 
ears, as it is written.— Isa. 35:5 . 

While the first resurrection, the resurrection 
of the "little flock," will be 
an instantaneous perfecting in life at the 
beginning of the Millennial Age, the resurrection 
of the world in general will be a 
slow process. All will be believers then, 
for knowledge will be so clear and complete 
that none could be in ignorance, 
and such as become obedient may progress 
upon the highway of holiness to perfection 
at its end. (See M. Dawn, Vol. I., 
page 211.) The end of this way and the 
perfection of LIFE will be attained by all the 
obedient, by the end of the Millennium. 

Now examine the second part of Jesus' 
statement: "Whosoever liveth and believeth 
in me shall never die." 

In the light of the previous statement, 
this one becomes very clear and simple. 
It is God's assurance that any who reach 
the condition of LIFE may retain it forever, 
if they shall forever continue to be 
believers. It is the promise of everlasting 
Life. He who becomes alive, actually, 
perfectly, by resurrection work completed, 
if he continues a believer in and a follower 
of Jesus shall never die— to all eternity. 



R1232 : page 5 

THE CHARACTER OF PAUL. 

Paul, in his natural character, before 
his conversion, resembles Bonaparte more 
than any other man— I mean both in his 
intellectual development and energy of 
will. He had the same inflexibility of 
purpose, the utter indifference to human 
suffering when he had once determined 
on his course, the same tireless, unconquerable 
resolution; the same fearlessness 
both of man's power and opinions, and 
that calm self-reliance and mysterious 
control over others. But the point of 
greatest resemblance is in the union of a 
strong, correct judgment, with rapidity of 
thought and sudden impulse. They thought 
quicker, yet better than other men. The 
power, too, they possessed was all practical 
power. There are many men of 
strong minds, whose forces nevertheless 
waste in reflections, or in theories for others 
to act upon. Their thought may work 
out into language, but not into action. 
They will plan better than they perform. 
But these men not only thought better, 
but they could work better than other 
men. 

The same perfect self-control and perfect 
subjection of his emotions to the 
mandates of his will are exhibited in his 
conduct when smitten to the earth, and 
blinded by the light and voice from heaven. 
John, when arrested by the same voice on 
the Isle of Patmos, fell on his face as a 
dead man, and dared not to stir or to speak 
till encouraged by the language, "Fear 
not." But Paul (or Saul) showed no 
symptoms of alarm or terror. The voice, 
the blow, the light, the glory, and the 
darkness that followed, were sufficient to 
upset the strongest mind; but he, master 
of himself and his emotions, instead of giving 
way to exclamations of fear, simply 
said, "Lord, what wilt thou have me do?" 
With his reason and judgment as steady 
and strong as ever, he knew at once that 
something was wanted of him, and ever 
ready to act, he asked what it was. 

From this time on, his track can be 
distinguished by the commotion about it, 
and the light above it. Straight back to 
Jerusalem, from which he had so recently 
come with letters to legalize his persecutions, 



he went to cast his lot in with those 

he had followed with violence and slaughter. 

His strong heart never beat one quicker 

pulsation through fear, when the lofty turrets 

of the proud city flashed on his vision. 

Neither did he steal away to the dark alleys 

and streets, where the disciples were concealed, 

and tell them secretly his faith in 

the Son of God. He strode into the synagogues, 

and before the astonished priests 

preached Christ and him crucified. He 

thundered at the door of the Sanhedrin itself, 

and shaking Jerusalem like an earthquake, 

awoke a tempest of rage and fury 

on himself. With assassins dogging his 

footsteps, he at length left the city. 

But, instead of going to places where 
he was unknown, and where his feelings 
would be less tried, he started for his native 
city, his father's house, the house of 
his boyhood, for his kindred and friends. 
To entreaties, tears, scorn and violence, 
he was alike impervious. To Antioch and 
Cyprus, along the coast of Syria and Rome, 
over the known world, he went like a 
blazing comet, waking up the nations. 
From the top of Mars' Hill, with the 
gorgeous city at his feet, and the Acropolis 
and Parthenon behind him— on the 
deck of his shattered vessel in the intervals 
of the crash of billows, in the gloomy 
walls of a prison, on the borders of the 
eternal kingdom, he speaks in the same 
calm and determined tone. Deterred by 
no danger, awed by no presence, and 

R1232 : page 6 

shrinking from no responsibility, he moves 
before us like some grand embodiment of 
power. The nations heave around him, 
and kings turn pale at his presence. Bands 
of conspirators swear to neither eat nor 
drink till they have slain him; rulers and 
priests combine against him; and people 
stone him; yet over the din of conflict and 
storm of violence his voice of eloquence 
rises clear and distinct as a trumpet call, 
as he still preaches Christ and him crucified. 
The whip is laid on his back till 
the blood starts with every blow, and then 
his mangled body is thrown into a 
dungeon. But at midnight you hear that 
same calm, strong voice, which has shaken 
the world, poured forth in a hymn of praise 
to God, and lo ! an earthquake rocks the 



prison to its foundations; the manacles fall 
from the hands of captives, the bolts withdraw 
of themselves, and the massive doors 
swing back on their hinges. 

One cannot point to a single spot in his 
career where he faltered a moment, or gave 
way to discouragement or fear. Through 
all his perilous life, he exhibited the same 
intrepidity of character and lofty spirit. 
With his eyes fixed on regions beyond the 
ken of ordinary mortals, and kindling on 
glories it was not permitted him to reveal, 

R1233 : page 6 

he pressed forward to an incorruptible 

crown, a fadeless kingdom. And then 

his death, how indescribably sublime. 

Napoleon, dying in the midst of the midnight 

storm, with the last words that fell 

from his lips a battle cry, watching in delirium 

the torn heads of his mighty 

columns, as they disappeared in the 

smoke of the conflict, is a sight that awes 

and startles us. But behold Paul, also a 

war-worn veteran, battered with many a 

scar, though in a spiritual warfare, looking 

not on the earth but on heaven. Hear 

his calm, serene voice ringing over the 

storms and commotions of life: "I am 

now ready to be offered, and the time of 

my departure is at hand. I have fought 

a good fight, I have finished my course. 

There is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. 

-- J. T. Headly. 



R1233 : page 6 

THE BINDING AND LOOSING OF SATAN. 

"And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, 
which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him 
a thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless 
pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that 
he should deceive the nations no more till the thousand 
years should be fulfilled; and after that he 
must be loosed a little season."— Rev. 20:2 . 

The careful consideration of this 
scripture gives rise to several important 
questions, the answers to which can be 
apparent to those only who have a general 
knowledge of God's revealed plan. And to 
such the text gives a clear insight into its 



deep philosophy. These questions are, 
first, Why was Satan, the great deceiver 
and enslaver of mankind, ever permitted 
to have any power? secondly, Why, 
when, and how, is he to be bound, cast into 
the pit, shut up and sealed? and finally, 
For what conceivable purpose is he to be 
loosed again prior to his destruction? Or 
why is he not destroyed at the beginning 
of the thousand years, instead of being 
bound and then loosed again for a season? 

As the first of these questions has already 
been considered at length in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. I., Chapter VII., 
which the reader will do well to review, 
we here simply call attention again to the 
fact, that while Satan, in the exercise of his 
own free will, has been for the past six 
thousand years endeavoring to accomplish 
his own designs as a rival of the 
Almighty, he has really unwittingly been 
serving a great purpose in the accomplishment 
of God's plan. God is able to, and 
does, make even the wrath of both men 
and devils to praise him— in the manifestation 
of his superior power, wisdom and 
skill in so overruling their evil deeds as to 
actually accomplish his own purposes, while 
they suppose they are thwarting God's 
plans and accomplishing their own. Under 
the long dominion of Satan's power, 
the world has been receiving its necessary 
experience and discipline, and the members 
of both the earthly and the heavenly 
phases of God's kingdom have been tried, 
developed and proved worthy of their 
future high exaltation. (See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. I., Chapter XIV.) During 
all this time evil has held high carnival, 
and evil doers— Satan and his followers- 
have been intoxicated with this seemingly 
lasting triumph. Nor do they even 
now, when the hour of their fall is so 
near, presume that their triumph is so 
shortly to end in ignominious defeat. 

The time for the binding of Satan is 
fixed at the close of the Gospel age, prior 
to the thousand years' reign of Christ, 
and is to be accomplished by the "Messenger 
of the Covenant whom ye delight 
in," and who "has the keys of death and 
hades"— our Lord Jesus, at his second 
advent:— "And I saw an angel [messenger 
—"the Messenger of the Covenant," 
Christ Jesus] come down from heaven 
[his second advent], having the key of 



the bottomless pit and a great chain in 
his hand. And He laid hold on the 
dragon, that old serpent, which is the 
Devil and Satan, and bound him a 
thousand years." (Rev. 20:1,2 ; 1:18 ; 
Mai. 3:1 .) The object of his binding 
evidently is that the world may be released 
from his bondage and brought 
under the favorable conditions of the 
reign of Christ, with nothing to oppose, 
hinder or obstruct their progress toward 
full restitution to the divine favor and 
blessings. 

According to the above scripture ( Rev. 20:1,2 ) 
the binding of Satan could not 
begin until the Angel had come down— 
until 1874, the date of our Lord's second 
advent, nor indeed until 1878, the date of 
the assumption of his power as King of 
kings. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., 
page 235.) Mark the binding process 
since that time. The power of Satan is 
the power of darkness, of ignorance and 
superstition. ( Luke 22:53 ; Col. 1:13 .) 
As the light of truth advances, the power 
that can only work in darkness is to that 
extent curtailed. Hence it is that truth, 
on every subject, but especially divine 
truth, has always met with opposition 
from the deceived and unwitting agents 
of the great adversary. Truth, therefore, 
is the great agency which is eventually to 
accomplish the complete binding of Satan. 
To some extent truth has for many centuries 
obstructed the course of error, of 
Satan's influence in the world— truths 
both of nature and religion— but they 
never bound Satan and rendered him 
powerless. If they obstructed his course 
in one direction, he either battered them 
down with persecution of one sort or 
another, or, failing in this, branched out 
and flourished in another direction. But 
the truth which is to accomplish the binding 
of Satan is described by the Revelator 
as "a great chain" in the hand of 
earth's new and rightful King. Not only 
the truths directly relating to the plan 
of God constitute this chain, but to these 
are linked every feature of truth related to 
human rights and privileges. Soon this 
mighty chain will so thoroughly compass 
the devil's dominion and influence, and 
the Lord's great army will draw it so 
tightly, that the great enemy will lie prostrate 
in the dust. And the Lord will 



cast him and all his wicked deceptions 
into the pit of oblivion, sealed for a thousand 
years;— his power to deceive and 
enslave men being completely stopped by 
the clear knowledge then prevailing. This 
will be accomplished both by the lessons 
men will learn in the terrible trouble incident 
to the final overthrow of Satan's 
power, and by the great calm and refreshment 
of the reign of Christ which will 
follow. They will be completely disgusted 
with Satan's ruling and his deceptions, 
and glad to submit to the reign of 
Christ. ( Isa. 2:3 .) This public and 
world-wide realization of the causes of 
their degradation, and the great and sudden 
revolution of public sentiment in favor of 
the Lord's ways and rulings, will constitute 
the seal which will hold the great adversary 
in the pit of oblivion for the thousand 
years. 

But here arises our third question, 
Why is he not destroyed at this juncture, 
instead of imprisoned? Surely there 
can be no hope of his recovery to righteousness 
and submission to God: he has 
been a defiant rebel for at least six thousand 
years, and if not bound would still 
continue his nefarious schemes, which he 
will do as soon as he is loosed again; and 
moreover, his destruction at the end of the 
thousand years is clearly foretold. (See 
Heb. 2:14 ; Rev. 20:9,10,14 .) The 
only conclusion, therefore, which we are 
left to draw is that God has a still further 
purpose to be served in his continued existence 
and in his loosing again at the end 
of the Millennial age. 

What, then, is that purpose? is the important 
question. Let us reflect upon the 
principles of God's dealings and the answer 
will be manifest. We have seen that 
his plan has always been to respect man's 
free agency. Man, apart from the defilements 
of sin, is a noble creature— created 
in the image of God. Therefore, he is 
not a mere machine, but is possessed of a 
free will and intelligence. In dealing with 
man individually, God therefore respects 
his endowment and acts accordingly. 
And he always gives him knowledge before 
counting him responsible for the use 
of his will, the degree of responsibility 
being proportioned to the degree of enlightenment 
and ability to perform what 
he wills. Thus it has been in the cases of 



Adam, of the Lord Jesus as a man, of the 
patriarchs and prophets, and of the Gospel 
church— the only ones who have 
been on trial as individuals. All of these 
were first enlightened, and then tested to 
prove the loyalty or disloyalty of their 
wills toward God. 

This established principle of God's 
dealings we must therefore expect to see 
carried out in the Millennial age, when 
the masses of the world will be on trial. 
And this line of policy we do see, from the 
descriptions God has given us, will be 
carried out. If Satan is bound in the 
beginning of the age so that he cannot 
deceive and mislead men, and the Kingdom 
of God is set up in power and great 
glory, and the knowledge of the Lord is 
caused to fill the earth as the waters cover 
the sea, and if "the iron rod" forces 
all to at least an outward obedience, and 
justice is laid to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet, we can readily see that 
all the circumstances will be most favorable 
for man's speedy advancement in the 
paths of righteousness. 

When Satan is bound, there will be no 
more great counterfeit systems of Christianity, 
no counterfeit of God's Kingdom, 
no plausible and misleading presentations 
of error for truth, no rewarding 
of iniquity and persecution of righteousness, 
no snares and pitfalls of vice to allure 
the weak and wayward, no liquor 
saloons or other evils now licensed by 
law. The iron rule of justice will not 

R1234 : page 6 

bend with the slightest degree of favor 
toward any evil, however loudly the cravings 
of fallen, weak humanity may 
clamor for them. The way of righteousness 
and life will be made plain both to 
the understanding and to the ability of 
even the humblest; and all will be helped 
by wholesome restraints, seasonable encouragements, 
and the speedy rewards of 
righteousness at every step of the way, 
due allowance for their weaknesses being 
made until, under the wonderful educational 
influences and assistance of that 
golden age of blessing and opportunity, 
they may all reach actual perfection- 
moral, mental and physical. 
When the whole world has been thus 



enlightened, trained and disciplined for 

a thousand years, all will have had full 

opportunity to reach actual perfection, 

and therefore actual perfection will be required 

of them. At the end of the thousand 

years Christ is to deliver up his finished 

work to the Father. ( 1 Cor. 15:24,25 .) 

And when his work is finished, 

it must be complete and perfect, lacking 

nothing. Otherwise, it would not be acceptable 

to God. 

So, in the end of the thousand years, 
when Christ has completed his work of 
reconstruction— restitution— the final test 
must be applied to prove the worthiness 
or unworthiness of each individual of the 
race to continued existence throughout 
the ages of glory to follow. And for this 
purpose, the final testing and proving 
of all, is the loosing of Satan out of his 
prison for a little season. 

How may it be accomplished? We 
answer, By relaxing the rigor of the hitherto 
iron rule which made obedience to 
divine law obligatory by prompt punishment 
of any deviation from it and prompt 
rewarding of every obedience to it. Here 
would be Satan's opportunity to again deceive 
any who desire to carry out plans 
in opposition to God's will or the 
principles of strict justice, into the idea 
that they could now do so with impunity, 
and that neither the penalties nor rewards 
of divine law are certain. Under such a 
delusion, those who at heart are not loyal 
to God, and who thus far have been controlled 
principally by the force and rigor 
of law, will manifest their real disposition; 
and likewise, those who have 
learned to love God's law and who delight 
in it, and who would not deviate 
from it to the slightest degree, even if 
there were no penalties attached to it— 
these will also be manifested. And these 
only, be they many or few, are those 
whom God by his law marks as worthy of 
continued life. Others, by preferring 
their own wills, shall thus prove their 
unworthiness of life, and together with 
Satan must be cut off— destroyed. — 
Matt. 25:41-46 . 

We are not informed as to the number 
of either class, and it is not our province 
to speculate, or to be wise above what is 
written. When some similarly inquired of 
the Lord, saying, "Lord, are there few 



that be saved?" he simply answered, 
"Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for 
many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter 
in and shall not be able, when once the 
Master has risen up and shut to the door." 
This was equivalent to saying, That is not 
your business, but God's; see that you 
make your own calling and election sure 
(the high calling), before your opportunity 
is past. We may run faithfully ourselves, 
and we may generously use all our 
influence to assist others, but must leave 
the result with God, who doeth all things 
well, who will award the favor of life to 

R1234 : page 7 

every truly loyal and obedient soul, and 
just as surely the wages of sin, which 
is death, to every other. We know 
that Satan will endeavor to deceive all— 
the number of whom is as the sand of the 
sea— but he will not succeed in deceiving 
all, and we hope very few. But if we are 
loyal to God we will most heartily approve 
the final destruction of all the disloyal- 
all rebels against his righteous government, 
be they many or few, after all the privileges 
and opportunities afforded them in 
their thousand years of trial. 

This work accomplished, the victory of 
Christ will be complete: He will see the 
fruit of the travail of his soul and be satisfied 
when he shall have brought all who 
desire righteousness and harmony with 
God to the glory of perfect and established 
character, in the divine likeness, and when 
all others, his enemies, are put under his 
feet— destroyed— ("He must reign until 
he hath put all enemies under his feet") and 
when a spotless universe of free, intelligent, 
righteous and loyal subjects of 
divine law, both human and angelic, will 
be presented to the Father and receive his 
reward of lasting life. Then follows the 
"world without end," with all the blessings 
and favors that heaven can bestow 
upon all the loyal sons and heirs of God 
—as well his sons of the human nature as 
the angelic sons and the little flock, the 
body of Christ made sons and heirs of the 
divine nature. 

Observe carefully that the deception or 
delusion which Satan is permitted to introduce 
among men who are on their 
final trial for life will not touch the 



question of right and wrong; for the 
knowledge of God— of his righteous law, 
of the blessings which that law has brought, 
and the misery which disobedience to it 
entailed upon the whole race, and the 
great cost at which they had been redeemed 
—will then fill the whole earth. 
The deception, then, must be similar to the 
deception of Eve in Eden— a deception 
either as to God's ability or as to his willingness 
to execute the already declared penalty 
of sin against divine law under full light 
and ability to keep it. And although God 
has clearly declared his intention to destroy 
such wicked ones (See Psa. 145:20 ; 
Heb. 2:14 ; 11:26-31 ), yet in their desire 
to do their own will, regardless of 
the will of God, some will be deluded 
into the idea that the penalty will not, or 
can not, be enforced against them, just as 
Eve was deluded. She first desired to disobey 
God, and that desire prepared her to 
believe the lie of Satan, that even if she did 
disobey, the declared penalty would not 
follow. And since she therefore deserved 
the penalty, because she regarded iniquity 
in her heart, God permitted her deception, 
which, so far from interfering with 
her free will to act out her real choice, 
really assisted it. She willed sin, and only 
fear hindered; and the deception permitted 
merely removed the fear and left the will free 
to act. But because she was so young in 
experience, God planned to redeem her 
life from destruction and to give her an 
experience of both the rewards and the penalties 
of his law, and a second trial for life 
in which that experience would be of 
lasting benefit. 

But in the end of the Millennial age 
the world will have had all experience, 
as well as full knowledge of God's law 
and full ability to obey it. And therefore, 
there remaineth no more a sacrifice for 
sin ( Heb. 10:26 ), and those who then 
wilfully sin against full light and opportunity 
must die the second death, from 
which there is no recovery. Some, instead 
of humbly rejoicing in the favor of life 
and the vigor of health of mind and 
body then possessed for several centuries, 
will probably begin to feel independent 
of God, through whose favor they received 
it, and to cultivate a spirit of pride, possibly 
claiming that their grand attainments 
are the results of their own efforts and of 



a process of natural evolution with which 
the redemption through the precious blood 
of Christ had nothing to do, and that the 
life now possessed is of necessity eternal: 
that God himself either could not or would 
not destroy it. Even as some now do, they 
may presume upon the love of God or 
underrate his justice, and acting upon 
such presumption proceed to carry out 
their own wills regardless of the counsel 
of the Lord. 

Let the faithful children of God not 
overlook the fact that Satan has always 
held out the hope of life to the disobedient. 
To Eve he said, "Ye shall not 
surely die;" to those whom he is now 
leading to the denial of the redemption 
through the precious blood of Christ, he 
is diligently preaching universal salvation 
and spurning the idea of a second death. 
And the deception in the close of the 
Millennial age will probably assume the 
same form. And notice that as in the deception 
of Eve theirs will not be an interference 
with their free will, but an aid 
to the manifestation of their real desires. 



R1234 : page 7 
RATHER TOO SIMPLE. 



The following is the simple way of setting 
aside the general teaching of God's 
Word by a play upon English words in 
order to prove that all mankind shall be 
everlastingly saved: 

"Does not the Bible say that to know 
God is life eternal? And does it not 
say also that all shall come to the 
knowledge of the truth? Well, then, do 
not these two statements prove the everlasting 
salvation of all men?" 

We answer,— Such an argument would 
not pass for proof to any well balanced 
mind. Very shallow indeed must be the 
brain which accepts such sophistry as 
conclusive proof. 

Let us examine these two texts closely, 
—let us not hastily draw an immature 
conclusion from a part of a statement, 
but let us take into consideration the contexts 
also. Turn to John 17:3 . Read it 
several times. Read the preceding verse 
twice. Think a little. Now read the second 



and third verses together. By this 
time you will see that the word "know" 
has the thought of appreciate or understand. 
You will have noted, also, that the expression, 
"that they might know thee," 
refers not to every one, but only to a special 
class referred to in verse 2 . And in 
verse 2 you will find this special class 

R1235 : page 7 

mentioned in contrast with "all flesh." 

Now with these discriminating thoughts 

assisting us in "rightly dividing the word 

of truth," let us read these two verses together, 

and note that they not only do 

not support the idea suggested above, but 

directly contradict it. 

It is to those whom the Father gives 
him— to those whom God's truth and 
providence have the effect of drawing to 
Christ and to righteousness— to those 
whom the Father approves, under the law 
of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus— to 
such shall be granted a full appreciation 
of God's character. Such will be heirs 
of lasting life under God's arrangement, 
and their knowledge, their intimate acquaintance 
with God, will be one of the 
evidences that they are the friends of God 
to whom he has promised lasting life, 
and that they are not his enemies, whom 
he declares shall be destroyed from among 
the people, and shall not stand in the congregation 
of the righteous.— Acts 3:23 ; 
Psa. 1:5,6 . 

Next look at the other text referred to, 
1 Tim. 2:4 . Look at the context— verses 
1 to 3 and 5 to 7 . Read these all over 
carefully together, until you get the Apostle's 
connected thought. 

While the Apostle does not counsel 
prayer for the miraculous conversion of 
the world and its rulers, nor for their lives 
to be prolonged, nor for their success in 
war, nor for the increase of their despotic 
control of the liberties of the people, he 
does recommend that when occasion offers, 
supplications, prayers, intercessions 
and thanks be expressed on behalf of any 
one, including kings and all in power, as 
well as on behalf of the Church. 

There is a two-fold reason for this: 
First, that the Church be not misunderstood 
(through exclusive attention to and 
prayer for her own people only) to be opposed 



to, or to be enemies of, those charged 
with the execution of law, but being 
rightly understood by those without, she 
may be permitted quiet and peace in 
her pursuit of godliness; and secondly, 
because such an interest in the affairs of 
our fellow-men is good and acceptable 
in the sight of God our Savior. 

Such good desires for all men, and such 
an interest in the world and the affairs of 
the world, are in perfect accord with 
God's interest and plan for mankind in 
general. For it is agreeable to God's will 
that all men (and not merely the Church 
now being selected) be saved (recovered 
out of the ignorance, prejudice, superstition 
and condemnation, which directly 
and indirectly came upon all men through 
Adam's fall and sentence, and from which 
all were redeemed by the one sacrifice of 
Christ), and that they should all come to 
a knowledge of the truth. Therefore, in 
sympathizing with the world and its affairs 
and in manifesting such a righteous interest 
and sympathy and in praying on their 
behalf, subject to the provisions of God's 
Word, you are in harmony with God's 
will and plan, though his time for working 
out all his gracious provisions for the 
world of mankind has not yet come, and 
will not come until he has first selected 
the Church, who are to be his "new creation," 
partakers of the divine nature and 
its glorious powers. 

Do you ask a proof that such is God's 
plan— that it embraces all men, that he 
wills the recovery of all men, and that 
they all come to a clear comprehension 
of the truth? It is in the fact that "There 
is one God and one Mediator between 
God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who 
gave himself a ransom for all —TO BE 
TESTIFIED in due time." 

How very evident it is, when all the 
connections are examined, that God's will, 
that all should be recovered from their 
misconceptions and delusions, and that 
they be brought to a clear knowledge of 
the truth, is for the very purpose of testing 
the wills of all by the truth, in order that 
those who will choose and delight in the 
law of God— Love— may be clearly manifested 
and separated from those who 
choose ungodliness— selfishness, etc.; that 
the "sheep" may be separated from the 
"goats."- Matt. 25:33,34,41 . 



A distinction should be recognized, as 
above shown, between the bringing to a 
full knowledge of the truth and a bringing 
to a full knowledge of God. The full 
knowledge of the truth must in due time 
come to all, and signifies a clear appreciation 
of the facts of the case— of the fact 
of sin and its condemnation, and of God's 
love and its provision of redemption for 
all, and of restitution to as many as heartily 
accept the conditions of the new 
covenant. 

The full knowledge of God is that deep 
and full appreciation of God's character 
and plan in all its minutiae, which comes 
only as a result of close, intimate acquaintance 
and communion and is possible only 
to those who, when brought to a knowledge 
of the truth, gladly and fully surrender 
themselves to God— to the consecrated, 
who as a result of full self-surrender 
receive the spirit, the disposition of God, 
which enables them to know him as others 
cannot know him. 

Yes, power over all flesh is given to our 
Lord Jesus, and when he shall exercise 
this power, all flesh shall be brought to a 
full knowledge of the truth; and when so 
enlightened all flesh shall be judged or 
tested by that truth; as it is written of 
that "due time" when all shall be enlightened 
—"My words shall judge you in that 
day." And so many as receive the truth 
and rejoice in it will, by virtue of that 
hearty obedience, come to a fuller and fuller 
appreciation of the very spirit of the 
truth, and thus shall come more and more 
intimately to know, to appreciate fully God 
himself. And for these friends of God, 
friends of God's laws, friends of righteousness, 
peace and love, and for no others, 
God has prepared and promised lasting life. 



R1235 : page 7 

AS WE EXPECTED. 



Just as we expected, some were greatly 
helped by the record of the Harvest Siftings 
in the May TOWER, and others, who hate the 
doctrine of the ransom, and who hate us 



and speak evil against us falsely for its 
sake— not openly and honorably, however, 
but with feigned words to hide the poison 
of insinuation and misrepresentation- 
were correspondingly aroused. Their acrimonious 
charge is that the editor of the 
TOWER is boastful, seeking self-exaltation 
and praise among men, and to herald his 
name and make it great and honorable. 

I reply that if seeking popularity and 
praises of men, I never would have championed 
the growingly unpopular doctrines 
of the cross. I knew, and long ago pointed 
out, the truth of Paul's words, that the 
cross is to the Jew a stumbling block and 
to the Greeks (worldly-wise) foolishness; 
and that this would be specially and increasingly 
so in this harvest time, when 
this question of the ransom is to be the 
great test question for all. A reference to 
your old TOWERS, for the past ten years, 
will corroborate this statement. Thank 
God, I was not one of those who deserted 
the cross for the sake of popularity. To 
me it is increasingly "the power of God 
and the wisdom of God."— 1 Cor. 1:23,24 . 

And so far as the statements of the 
May TOWER referred to the Editor, such 
references were made only for the sake of 
God's cause— in the interest of his truth 
and of his people, and as an offset to certain 
false statements and insinuations publicly 
uttered, which were deceiving some. 
And of what the writer has been privileged 
to do in the Master's name and for 
his cause, only so much was stated as seemed 
needful for the Lord's glory, and its every 
sentence was carefully weighed and considered, 
and is true. 

In making the statement we followed the 
example of the Apostle Paul, who, because 
of similar misrepresentations and opposition 
from brethren who had similarly deserted 
the cross, made a similar statement, 
and even went beyond and boasted 
a little.- 2 Cor. 11:1,10,16. 

But wait a moment— Upon what evidences 
are these defamatory charges based? 
Have we spoken well of Millennial Dawn? 
We have never said for it what we would 
have said had the author been some one 
else. Have we published commendations 
written by others? We did so for the 
sake of others, to attract attention to the 
truth; and even then the most personally 
complimentary items have been stricken 



out of many of your letters before publication, 
as many of the writers could testify. 

Again, consider a few facts. The two 
pamphlets, Food for Thinking Christians 
and The Tabernacle and Its Teachings, of 
which hundreds of thousands of copies 
were published— Did they have the name 
Russell stamped upon the back in gold 
letters or printed upon the side and title 
page in large display capitals? No, they 
contained no hint as to the author's name. 
And when certain enemies then criticized, 
they said they supposed the author was 

ashamed to be known. Hence, in bringing 
out Millennial Dawn, in order to give 
no occasion for the enemy the author's 
name was given. But where and how? 
Not where it would strike the eye of all, 
but where it would escape the notice of 
one-half who have the book— at the close 
of the Preface, which only about one person 
in ten ever reads. If I had sought 
honor of men would not this book, of 
which over 150,000 copies are already in 
the hands of the people, have been my 
chance to gratify such an ambition? If 

R1236 : page 7 

the charge were true, would I have let 

such wonderful opportunities pass unused? 

Others, in books of small circulation, 

avail themselves to the utmost of such opportunities 

and think nothing of it. Even 

the WATCH TOWER has the editor's name 

in very small letters, while many other 

journals make the names of their editors 

quite prominent. 

How about tracts— what are the facts? 
The fact is that the very persons who malign 
us have their names in large capital 
letters upon every little two-page tract 
they issue, while our tracts, of which 
about twelve million pages have been issued 
during the past two years, and which are 
going all over the civilized and uncivilized 
world, bear no hint of the writer's name. 
What a chance this would have been for 
these false brethren to have blown their 
trumpets, and with what bad taste comes 
the charge of self-adulation from such 
sources. What spirit prompts such mean 
insinuations in opposition to the facts, all 
may judge. By their fruits ye shall know 
them. They have forced this statement of 

facts, which no doubt they will consider 



further boasting. The Lord be the judge. 



R1237 : page 7 

THE BIBLE TRIUMPHANT.-Voltaire's 

house is now used by the Geneva Bible 
Society as a repository. The old premises 
of the British and Foreign Bible Society 
in Earl street, Blackfriars, stood 
where, in 1378, the Council forbade 
Wycliffe circulating portions of the Holy 
Scriptures, and where he uttered the 
words, "The truth shall prevail." The 
Religious Tract Society's premises are 
where Bibles were publicly burned. 



R1236 : page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Iowa. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-There are 
many things about which I should be glad 
to confer with you face to face, but as that 
seems impossible, I resort to the pen. I 
know that the work which our Lord has 
given to your hands is sufficient to take 
up all your time, or rather the Lord's time 
which he has allotted to you, and so I 
have hesitated to write. But again, I have 
thought perhaps he has reckoned in the 
time necessary to devote to the thoughts 
I wish to suggest; therefore I write. 

As you are not yet acquainted with me, 
I wish to say that I verily believe that I 
have no opinion of my own that I wish to 
peddle, but desire that I may know and understand 
the truth as it is in Christ Jesus. 
First of all I wish to tell you that the brief 
history of your doctrinal development, 
which was published in the last TOWER, 
was just what I wanted to know; and on 
account of some resemblances to my own 
experience, it was a comfort to me, for it 
seemed as if it brought you closer to me, 
and I did not feel so lonesome. For lonesomeness 
has come over me sometimes, 
most crushingly, until in mercy the Lord 
lifted me up, and I could say with him: 
"Yet I am not alone, the Father is with 
me." Following out what then seemed 
the line of duty for me, I entered the 



ministry of the M.E. Church immediately 
on completing my college course. I 
wanted to preach the whole gospel, but I 
was bothered and hampered from the beginning 
with things I could not understand, 
the chief of which was, How 
Christ was God. The brethren told me 
it was a mystery— that I had better let 
that question alone, it was "deep water." 
My father, also an M.E. preacher, had 
for years been a close Bible student; he 
conceived a plan of collecting together 
all that the Scriptures said on the various 
topics of faith and practice, so that believers 
might more easily see what they 
should believe, and what they should do. 

He was not able to carry out his plan, 
but dying, he fully set his thoughts before 
me and requested that I would work it 
out and publish a book the title of which 
should be "God's Guide For Man's Faith 
and Practice." I promised to do the work 
as he requested. He then said to me— 
"James, if you do truly study the Bible 
according to the plan I have indicated to 
you, it will take Methodism out of you." 
I answered— "I don't know about that, 
Father;" to which he rejoined— "It WILL 
do it, boy." I replied— "Very well, Father, 
if studying God's Word, and understanding 
it, takes Methodism out of me, 
all the worse for Methodism." 

As soon after his decease as possible I 
began the work. With the Bible and the 
Concordance I plodded along. I indeed 
found some, to me, strange things; but 
nothing very startling occurred until I was 
studying the person of Christ. I was considering 

1 Cor. 15:24-28 . I had read 
that scripture perhaps a hundred times 
before, but now it seemed to say something 
never before seen by me. "He 
shall have delivered up the kingdom to 
God, even the Father: when he shall have 
put down all rule and all authority and 
power,... then shall the Son also himself 
be subject unto him that put all things 
under him, that God may be all in all." 
Could that Scripture be true and the doctrine 
of the trinity be true? I could not 
reconcile the two. Which was right? 
Did the Bible mean what it said? or how 
was it to be "interpreted"? It was 
as if a mallet had struck between my eyes. 
For three days I was in pain— actual distress. 
Was the Bible right, or was theology 



right? I prayed without ceasing, 
that God would not let me break loose 
from the truth; for I dreaded falling into 
heresy. I realized that a conviction 
of the correctness of the Bible statement, 
as it read, and of the error of the trinity 
doctrine, was gradually taking possession 
of me, until at the end of three days, like 
an ice gorge in the Mississippi river, my 
theology broke up and went out of my heart 
and out of my head under the bright shining 
of the divine Word. Every doctrine of 
Theology, so-called, became to my mind 
an object of suspicion, but the Bible, 
in the same ratio, became unutterably 
precious. Even the doctrine of the atonement 
by the blood came to be a matter of 
doubt, and I resolved that it would have 
to stand the severest scrutiny, or I would 
not believe it. For more than two years 
I floundered in the slough of doubts, and I 
had to stop preaching, for I doubted every 
thing excepting God, and that he was the 
rewarder of them that seek him, and that 
the Bible was the revelation of his will 
and purpose. I tried to understand the 
Bible, but could make little headway. I 
studied the atonement, and came to the 
conclusion that the Unitarians were right 
on that subject— that no atonement was 
made for our sins, that Christ is merely 
our Example. 

I now realize what I did not then, 
namely, that my utter dislike or abhorrence 
of theology prejudiced me against 
even the truths it contained. I was in 
this condition when I happened on the 
little book— "Food for Thinking Christians." 
Now understand me, that all these 
weary months of doubt I never ceased to 
pray, "O! send out thy light and thy 
truth and let them lead me, let them bring 
me to thy holy hill." It seems to me today 
that it was in answer to that constant 
petition that "Food" was dropped in 
my path. I was prepared to receive much 
of it, but the atonement as there taught I 
resisted, as also the destruction of the 
wicked. But I sent to you and obtained 
"The Tabernacle and Its Teachings." 
That opened all things clearly. I there 
saw what the atonement really was, believed 
it, loved it, and from that day was 
a free man IN Christ Jesus. 

O Brother, how that precious truth rejoices 
my heart and gives peace to my 



mind to-day! I have had enough experience 
in opposition to that doctrine. I 
want no more. I am glad that you will 
republish The Tabernacle, etc., this summer. 
May I make a suggestion to you? 
On page 9 of the little book you say that 
you think the wood was used in the construction 
of the Tabernacle, altar, etc., 
only to make them as light as possible and 
portable, and then call attention to the 
Temple of Solomon, that all its furniture 
was of solid metal. I suggest that there 
was doubtless unused strength enough in 
Israel to carry the whole thing in sections 
even if solid; but is there not evidence 
enough that the wood was as necessary as 
the metals for typical use? You elsewhere 
very correctly, as I think, claim the wood 
to represent the justified man— justified 
and reckoned perfect because of his faith. 
Now if the Tabernacle and its appurtenances 
represent, in object lesson, the whole 
plan of salvation, what is there in it to 
represent that "this corruptible shall PUT 
ON incorruption, and this mortal shall put 
on immortality," unless it be that corruptible 
and perishable wood when it is covered 
—has "put on" the brass (incorruption), 
or as the little flock in the 

tabernacle, has "put on" the gold (immortality)? 
If this suggestion is valid, 
would it not be well to change the remark 
referred to? 

[The fact that the Incense Altar and 
Mercy Seat were made of wood overlaid 
with gold, while they represent that which 
is perfect and divine, seems to me to prove 
that the wood was used for lightness.— 
EDITOR.] 

In respect to the temple built by 
Solomon, I have serious doubts as to 
its being in any true sense a typical 
substitute for the tabernacle built by Moses. 
In other words it seems doubtful that 
it at all typifies the plan of redemption 
as it exists in God's mind. I could, at 
this time, more easily believe that it typifies 
the confused and self -praising ideas 
of men concerning that plan. 

I make the following suggestions. If 
they are good, let them abide, if not good, 
let the light of God dispel them into 
mists and let them be blown away. 

1st. The conception was of David's 



own mind. God never told him to do it. 
On the contrary, he objected, saying— 
"Spake I a word to any of the judges of 
Israel, whom I commanded to feed my 
people, saying, Why have ye not built me 
a house of cedars?" ( 1 Chron. 17:6 .) 
It is manifest that the work was permitted, 
not commanded. True, David claimed 
( 1 Chron. 28:19 ) that the pattern was 
given to him of God (if, indeed, that 
is not an interpolation, like Rev. 20:5 ); 
but if that be true, would it not as probably 

R1237 : page 8 

be a type, as I before suggested? 

2nd. The furniture was greatly multiplied 
— 10 tables for the shew-bread, 10 
lamp stands, 10 lavers, and "a sea" on 
the back of oxen, etc., etc. 

3d. It was built by the labor of foreigners 
(the Tyrians) and the enslaved Canaanites. 
The men of Israel were not engaged 
init. ( 2 Chron. 2:17,18; 8:7,8,9.) 
The architect, also, who had charge 
of all the work, was a man of Tyre, though 
a half-breed Israelite. And THE KING of 
Tyre helped on the work with all his 
might. How different were the builders 
and the building of the Tabernacle. The 
hands that wrought it were free. It was 
the glad work of the children themselves. 
Why did the holy spirit cause the record 
to be made, as to who were the actual 
workmen engaged on the Temple? I suggest 
that the nations immediately connected 
with Israel were each, in some 
character, typical; and this is no new idea; 
if I mistake not, it is your view also. 
Israel represents the people of God. Egypt 
represents "the world that now is," which 
"lieth in darkness." Babylon— human 
organization— human wisdom trying to 
make the world better. Tyre represents 
the kingdom of Satan. See Ezek. 28:1-10 
—an exact description of the Pope of 
Rome, who is Satan's vicegerent on the 
earth; and verses 11-19 a description of 
Satan himself. If it be objected that the 
manifestation of divine glory which filled 
the temple on the day of its dedication 
would certainly prove that Jehovah was 
the author of the building and that it 
therefore represented the divine will, I 
should think not. During the 40 years 
in the desert, the manifestation of the 



divine glory was evidence that in great 
MERCY God was with the people; but, I 
believe, never in evidence that he was 
well pleased with their works and ways. 
And there are many instances given in 
which favor was manifested to the people, 
while at the same time he was displeased 
with their works. And in this Gospel age, 
do we not know that great favor has been 
shown in years past to the believers composing 
the sects, while at the same time 
we know by his Word that sectarian 
divisions are hateful to him. 

I think, also, that David expresses the 
central thought and motive of his mind 
when he said— "The house that is to be 
built must be exceedingly magnificent for 
fame and glory throughout all countries." 
( 1 Chron. 22:5 .) The Tabernacle, like 
the body of Christ, is contemptible in the 
eyes of the world. The temple, like all 
of men's ideas, must be exceedingly magnificent 
to the world. 

Your brother in the faith of the redemption, 
J. H. GILRUTH. 

[We are glad to see so much evidence 
of study on the part of Brother G., even 
though we must dissent from his conclusions. 
We suggest that while the divine 
glory upon the Mercy Seat of the Tabernacle 
and also of the Temple did not 
prove Israelites to be in favor with God, 
it did show God's approval of the Tabernacle 
and of the Temple. Furthermore, 
let us remember that God permitted David 
to prepare materials for the Temple, 
but not to build it because he was a man 
of blood, a man of war; and because he 
had specially promised of Solomon: He 
shall build Me a house. (See 1 Chron. 17:11-15 ; 

22:5-9-19 .) The humble 
Tabernacle, whose glories were all hidden, 
typified the presence of God with his 
people in the present time, while the glorious 
Temple typified the Church in glory 
during Christ's Millennial reign. 

The building of the temple, too— the 
fact that all the materials were prepared 
and fitted for their respective places, beforehand, 
represents how God prepares 
and fits, beforehand, every member of the 
Church. And when all are selected, fitted 
and ready, the glorified Church will be 
brought together without commotion or 
friction, even as the parts of the Temple 
were put together "without the sound of a 



hammer." ( 1 Kings 6:7 .) On the contrary, 
the false temple, Babylon, fits and builds 
and tears down and puts up continually 
and with great noise— Babylon- 
confusion. 

The workers and materials coming 
largely from outside of Israel is also true 
to the facts; for God has selected most of 
the Church from among those not Israelites 
according to the flesh, out of every 
country and nation. These are co-working 
under him whom the Jewish King, 
Solomon, typified— our Lord, who sprang 
from Judah.-EDITOR.] 

page 8 

Pennsylvania. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just 
finished the TOWER. Oh! how grand. I 
would that I could, with pen, express my 
feelings, but my dear Brother, I cannot. 
Your earnest prayer to the Master made 
me feel that we all ought to go to him 
in such true, earnest, and with such faith. 
Oh, how I long to be closer to him. I 
wish I could be nearer you so I could attend 
the meetings and learn more of the 
Master. I hope the new book (Poems, 
etc.) will be what is needed, and I think 
it is just what we all want. Dear Brother, 
I feel more and more that you are right in 
regard to the Ransom, and I can see as 
the time draws nearer that all are being 
tried and many of the stars (ministers) are 
falling. May the dear Lord continue to 
bless you and Sister Russell in the good 
work, is the prayer of yours in Christian 
love, S. M. BOND. 

Ohio. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Allow 
me to address this letter to you. I inclose 
P.O. order of $20 for my Dawn 
account. 

Brother and Sister Adamsom are now 
with me and we are settled in our little 
"home." We have a good supply of 
ammunition and are ready and beginning 
the battle. The dear Lord is before us 
with encouragements and hope. We are 
finding a good many hungry and thirsty 
souls and are feeding them with the 
precious things of the Word, so beautifully 
brought together in MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

To-day is holiday here and all the city 



excepting three are celebrating. We are 
resting, praising and feasting in heavenly 
places. The TOWER came this morning 
and is commanding special attention to-day. 
We are all much interested in the 
long article, "Perils Among False Brethren." 
We see the truth and fact of the 
wonderful sifting that is now going on, 
and feel that it must continue until all 
the sons of Levi are purified and released. 
So we think it not a strange thing. 

With much love from us all here, I 
remain as ever, yours in the blessed hope 
set before us, S. D. ROGERS. 

P.S.— As soon as the next lot of Vol. 
II. of Dawn in paper is ready please 
send me about 300 and 1000 of Vol. I. 
by freight. Hope they will be ready soon. 

Please send me a copy of the new book, 
Poems and Hymns, as soon as ready. 

West Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER:-The "Gathering 
and Sittings " in May TOWER surely endears 
you more and more to us all. 

How wonderful and love-constraining 
the measures whereby the Father's plans 
are accomplished, and so effectual while 
seemingly hinged upon such slight 
circumstances. 

He that leadeth you is able abundantly 
and will keep you precious in his 
sight, and will not suffer you to be 
tempted beyond what you are able to 
bear. How can we sufficiently appreciate 
the love of God in Christ manifested to us 
in the rich provision for all who "do the 
will of the Father," in the supply of 
meat in due season. "Blessed be that 
servant; he is worthy to have charge of 
all the goods." 

Love to all the household of faith and 
to yourself and Sister Russell particularly. 
Yours, H. L. GILLIS. 

Ohio. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Brother 

Wise and myself are pushing the battle. 
Many are becoming awakened on these 
questions which are so dear to us. There 
is an increasing demand for reading matter, 
especially Old Theology Tract No. 1. 

Last evening we held a street service. 
People crowded us almost to suffocation 
for Tracts and Slips, and some wanted 
DAWN. We expect to open a building 



for meetings soon. In the midst of reproach 
and evil speaking we are "looking 
unto Jesus." Pray for us. F. DRAPER. 



R1237 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., AUGUST, 1890. NO. 9. 



THE TYPICAL TABERNACLE 
AND ITS TEACHINGS. 



ITS FURNITURE-ITS APARTMENTS-ITS 
PEOPLE. 

The Tabernacle which God commanded 
Israel to construct in the Wilderness of 
Sin, in connection with which all their 
religious services and ceremonies were instituted, 
was, Paul assures us, a shadow of 
good things to come. ( Heb. 8:5 ; 10:1 ; 
Col. 2:17 .) In fact the whole nation of 
Israel, with their laws and their religious 
services and ceremonies, were typical. 
This being true, our understanding of the 
plan and work of salvation now in progress, 
as well as their future development, 
cannot fail to be greatly enlightened by 
a careful study of that Jewish shadow 
which they repeated year by year continually 
until the Gospel age, for the edification 
of the saints.- 1 Pet. 1:12 . 

It is not simply to gain a historical 
knowledge of the Jewish forms, ceremonies 
and worship, that we come to the 
investigation of this subject, but that we 
may be edified by understanding the 

substance from an examination of the 
shadow, as God designed in arranging it. 

We will fail to attach sufficient weight 
and importance to the shadow, unless we 
realize how carefully God guided and directed 
all of its details: First, he took 
Moses up into the mount and gave him 
an illustration of just how things were to 
be made; Secondly, he charged him to 
be careful of every particular— "See, saith 
he, that thou make all things according to 
the pattern shewed to thee in the mount." 
( Heb. 8:5 ; Exod. 25:40 .) So, too, 
with all the minutiae of the service: every 
jot and tittle must be exactly performed 
in the type, because it illustrated something 
greater and more important coming 
after. And in order that these shadows 
might all be exactly performed, and that 
the people might not become careless, the 



usual penalty for any violation was death. 
For instance— 2 Sam. 6:6,7 ; Lev. 10:1,2 ; 
Exod. 28:43 ; Num. 4:15,20 
and 17:13 . 

Realizing God's care in making the 
"shadow" should not only give us confidence 
in its correctness, that not one jot 
or tittle of it shall fail until all shall be 
fulfilled ( Matt. 5:18 ), but it should also 
awaken in us so great an interest in God's 
plan as would lead us to examine closely, 
and search carefully, for the meaning of 
those shadows. And this, with God's 
promised blessing, we now propose to do, 
assured that among those who are truly 
God's consecrated ones— children begotten 
of the Spirit— "he that seeketh findeth; 
and to him that knocketh, it shall be 
opened." 

The directions given to Moses for the 
construction of the Tabernacle may be 
found in Exod. 25 to 27 , and the account 
of the performance of the work, in Exod. 35 to 40 
Briefly stated, the Tabernacle 
was a house constructed of a series of 
boards of shittim wood "overlaid" or 
plated with gold, and set on end into 
sockets of silver, and firmly fastened together 
by bars of the same wood, also 
covered with gold. 

This structure was 15 feet wide, 15 feet 
high, and 45 feet long, open at the front 
or east end. It was covered by a large 
linen cloth, with figures of cherubim 
woven into it, in blue, purple and scarlet 
colors. The open end, or front of the 
structure, was closed by a curtain of similar 
material to the covering cloth, called the 
"door," or first vail. Another cloth of 
the same materials and colors, and similarly 
woven with figures of cherubim, called 
the "Vail" (or second vail), was hung so 
that it divided the Tabernacle into two 
apartments. The first or larger apartment, 
15 feet wide and 30 feet long, was called 
"The Holy."* The second or rearmost 
apartment, 15 feet wide and 15 feet long, 
was called "The Most Holy." Over this 
Tabernacle proper was a tent to shelter it. 
It was made of a covering of cashmere cloth 
or goat's hair, another of rams' skins dyed 
red, and another of seals' skins, mistranslated 
badgers' skins. 

The Tabernacle was surrounded by a 
yard or "Court," toward the rear of which 
it stood. This court, 75 feet wide and 150 



feet long, was formed by a fence of linen 
curtains suspended from silver hooks, set 
in the tops of wooden posts 7-1/2 feet high, 
which were set in heavy sockets of copper 
(translated brass), and braced like the 
tent which covered the Tabernacle, with 
cords and pins. This enclosure was all 
holy ground, and was therefore called the 
"Holy Place"— also the "Court of the 
Tabernacle." Its opening, like the door 
of the Tabernacle, was toward the east, 
and was called the "Gate." The "Gate" 
was of linen embroidered with blue, purple 
and scarlet. It will be noticed that 
the three entrance passages, viz.: "the 
Gate" to the Court or "Holy Place," 
"the Door" to the "Holy" and "the 
Vail" to the "Most Holy," were of the 
same material and colors. 

The furniture of the Court consisted of 
but two pieces: the "Brazen Altar" and 
the "Laver." 

THE BRAZEN ALTAR. 

First on entering the gate, and immediately 
in front of it, stood the Brazen 
Altar. This altar was made of wood and 
covered with copper, and was 7-1/2 feet 
square and 4-1/2 feet high. It had various 
utensils belonging to its service— fire pans, 
called censers, for carrying the fire to the 
Incense Altar; basins to receive the blood; 
flesh-hooks, shovels, etc. 

THE LAVER. 

Next, between the Brazen Altar and 
the door of the Tabernacle, was the Laver. 
It was made of polished copper and was 
a receptacle for water for the washing of 
the priests before entering the Tabernacle. 

The furniture of the Tabernacle consisted 
of a Table, a Candlestick and an 
Incense Altar in the Holy, and the Ark 
of the Testimony in the Most Holy. 

THE TABLE OF SHEW-BREAD. 

Within the Tabernacle, on the right 
(north), stood the wooden "Table" overlaid 
with gold, and upon it were placed 
twelve cakes of unleavened bread in 
two piles, with frankincense on top of 
each pile. ( Lev. 24:6 .) The bread was 
for the priests; it was holy, and was renewed 



on the seventh or Sabbath day. 

THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK. 

Opposite the Table was the "Candlestick," 
made of pure gold, beaten work 
(hammered out), having seven branches 
and in each branch a lamp. It was the 
only light in "The Holy," for, as we 
have seen, the natural light was obscured 
by the walls and curtains, and there were 
no windows. 

THE 

"GOLDEN 

ALTAR." 

THE 

"INCENSE 

ALTAR." 

Further on, close up to "the Vail," 
stood a small altar of wood, covered with 
gold, called the "Golden Altar" or "Incense 
Altar." It had no fire upon it except 
as the priests brought it in the censers, 
which they set in the top of this Golden 
Altar, and then crumbled the incense upon 
it, giving forth fragrant perfume. 

THE ARK OF THE TESTIMONY. 

Beyond the Vail, in the Most Holy, 
there was but one piece of furniture— the 
Ark. It was a rectangular box made of 



*Frequently this, in the English translation, is 
improperly called the "holy place;" and in such 
instances the word place will be found in italics, 
indicating that it has been supplied by the translators, 
as for instance in Exod. 26:33 . This error 
is quite confusing, as "the court" was properly 
called "the holy place." When place, is not in 
italics, "the court" is always meant. See Lev. 14:13 
and 6:27 . In some instances "The Holy" 
is termed "The Tabernacle of the congregation" 
and the "Most Holy;" the "Sanctuary" is also 
sometimes called "the Holy place"— place in italics. 
Instances, Lev. 16:17,20,33 . In our mention 
of them we will call these apartments severally 
"The Court," "The Holy," and "The Most 
Holy;" surrounding which was "The Camp" of 
Israel. 

A lack of appreciation of the interest of Christians 



in these typical pictures, and of the necessity 
of uniform exactness, on the part of the translators 
of Leviticus, must have been the cause of the 
varied translations which have so aided in confusing 
the student. 

R1237 : page 2 

wood overlaid with gold, having a lid or 
cover of pure gold, called the Propitiatory, 
or "Mercy Seat." Upon it (and of the 
same piece) were two cherubs of gold 
—beaten work. Within this Ark (under 
the Propitiatory) were placed the golden 
bowl of manna, Aaron's rod that budded, 
and the two tables of the law. 
( Heb. 9:4 .) Upon the Propitiatory a 
supernatural light appeared, shining out 
between the cherubim, representing the 
divine presence. This was the only light 
in the Most Holy. 

It is noticeable that everything inside 
the Tabernacle was of gold, while in the 
Court everything was of copper. Wood, 
which was used as the basis, and was covered 
by these metals, was used, we believe, 
to make the articles of lighter weight 
than if of solid metal. This would be an 
important consideration when they traveled. 
The vessels of the Temple, representative 
of the same things, were of solid 
metals. ( 1 Kings 7:23,48 .) These two 
metals, gold and copper, were used, we 
think, to represent two different natures- 
copper representing the human nature in 
its perfection; and gold representing the 
divine nature— much alike in their appearance, 
yet different in quality, as the human 
is an image of the divine nature. 

It will be noticed that the arrangement 
of the structure formed three general 
divisions— the 

CAMP, COURT AND TABERNACLE. 

The Camp represented the condition 
of the world of mankind in sin, typified 
by the nation of Israel. These were separated 
from all holy things by the curtain 
of white linen, which to those within 
represents a wall of faith, but to those 
without, a wall of unbelief which hindered 
their view of, and access to, the holy things 
within. The only way to enter the "Holy 
Place" or "Court" was to come through 
the "Gate"— Jesus. "I am the way.... 



No man cometh unto the Father but by 
me." "I am the door."— Jno. 14:6 ; 

10:9. 

The Court represented the condition of 
Justification, entered through faith in 
Christ, the "Gate." Into this Court, only 
Levites (typical of justified believers) 
were allowed to come. These had access 
to the brazen Altar and to the Laver, and 
did service in the Court, but had no right 
as Levites (believers) to go into the Tabernacle; 
no, nor even to look into it. 
( Num. 4:19,20 .) Here in the "Court" 
all things were of copper, to indicate that 
the class admitted there were justified 
men only. 

The Tabernacle represented the condition 
of all who have changed their nature; 
that is, those who (as Levites— justified 
believers) have consecrated their human 
nature to death, and have become 
partakers of the divine nature, by being 
begotten of the Spirit. No human being, 
be he ever so full of faith, be he washed 
from every sin, and in God's sight justified 
freely from all things, reckoned perfect, 
can have any place or privilege in 
divine things unless he fully consecrate or 
sacrifice himself. He cannot even look 
into spiritual things, in the sense of appreciating 
them. "The natural man receiveth 
not the things of the Spirit,... 
neither can he know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14,12 . 

All things in the Tabernacle were of gold, 
representing the divine nature, and only 
those of the Levites who were consecrated 
to the work of sacrifice (the Priests) had 
access to the Tabernacle. So only those 
of the household of faith who are consecrated 
to sacrifice, even unto death, enter 
the divine conditions represented in the 
Tabernacle. 

The "Court" or justified human condition 
is entered by faith only; but while 
we must retain the faith that justifies, we 
must do more, if we would change our 
nature and become "new creatures," 
"partakers of the divine nature." If we 
would enter the Tabernacle or divine 
condition, we must crucify the justified 
flesh, presenting our human wills and bodies 
a living sacrifice to God; no longer to 
seek for human pleasure, honor, praise, 
etc., but to be dead to these and alive to 
the heavenly ones. Yet into this condition, 



also, we come through Christ Jesus 
our Lord, who not only opened for us the 
"gate" of justification through faith in his 
blood, but who also opened the "door" into 
the Tabernacle, "a new" way of life, as 
spirit beings, through and beyond the vail 
by the sacrifice of the justified flesh.— 
Heb. 10:20 . 

The two apartments of the Tabernacle, 
the Holy and the Most Holy, represented 
two phases or stages of the divine life. 
The "Holy" represented the present condition 
of those begotten of God through 
the Word. These, as divine minded, 

"new creatures," though still "in the 
flesh," have their real life and walk with 
God, within the vail and beyond the sight 
of the world and the unconsecrated believers. 
These enjoy the light of the 
candlestick, eat of the special food, and 
offer incense at the golden altar, acceptable 
through Christ Jesus. 

The "Most Holy" represented the perfected 
condition of such new creatures, 
when born from the dead in the resurrection. 
Then, beyond both vails— the fleshly 
mind and the fleshly body— such shall 
be glorious spiritual bodies, as well as 
spiritual-minded. They shall be like 
their Leader, and forerunner beyond the 
vail, who, having entered, hath consecrated 
for us this new and living way. 
The spiritual-minded creature in the 
"Holy" by faith looks forward through 
the rent Vail into the "Most Holy," 
catching glimpses of the glory, honor 
and immortality beyond the flesh; which 
hope is an anchor entering into that beyond 
the vail.- Heb. 6:19 ; and 10:20 . 

We see, then, that justification by faith 
brings us into a condition of peace with 
God. When our sins are forgiven, we are a 
step nearer to God, but still human —in 
the Court. If we would attain the prize of 
our high calling which is OF GOD in Christ 
Jesus, and enter through the "Holy" into 
the "Most Holy," we must follow 

IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF JESUS, 

our Leader and Head— "the High Priest 
of our profession." By faith in his ransom 
we have entered the "gate" to the 
Court— the vail of unbelief and sin is 
passed. By renouncing our human wills, 
and all our human aspirations and hopes, 



we pass the first vail, or vail of human-mindedness, 

counting our human will as 

dead; henceforth not consulting it, but 

the will of God only. 

We now find ourselves as "new creatures" 
in the "Holy"— in the first of 
"the Heavenlies" or Holies ( Eph. 2:6 . 
— Diaglott); and here we are enlightened 
by the Golden Candlestick (God's Word), 
refreshed and strengthened daily with the 
truth as represented in the Shew-bread, 
lawful only for the Priests to eat. ( Matt. 12:4 .) 
And thus enlightened and strengthened, 
we are daily offering up sacrifices at 
the "Golden Altar," acceptable to God 
through Jesus Christ— a sweet perfume to 
our Father.— 1 Pet. 2:5 .* 

Thus all the saints, the consecrated, 
are in a "heavenly" or "holy" condition 
now— "seated (at rest and communion) 
with Christ in (the first of these) 
heavenly places," but not yet in the Holiest 
of all. No, another vail must first 
be passed: As the passing of the preceding 
vail represented the death of the human 

will, so the passing of the second 
vail is the death of the human body; and 
it requires both to complete our sacrifice. 
Both fleshly mind and fleshly body must 
first be passed before we shall be in the 
"Holiest of all"— perfected as partakers 
of the divine nature and its 
spirit-conditions. 

With these thoughts as to the three 

conditions represented by these three places 
—Camp, Court and Tabernacle— let us 
notice particularly the three classes occupying 
these conditions, viz.: the Unbelieving 
World, Justified Believers, and the Saints 
or Consecrated Believers, typified respectively 
by 

ISRAELITES, LEVITES AND THE 
PRIESTHOOD. 

In understanding the significance of 
the Tabernacle service, it is necessary not 
only to get a clear idea of the structure, 
its furniture and their typical signification, 
but also of the actors and their significance 
as types. 

Israel is used in many instances to typify 
the Christian Church. For instance: 
When they left Egyptian bondage, they 
were a type of God's children who hear 
his call to come out from the world and 



engage in his worship. 

The wilderness journey represents the 
tedious pilgrimage through which many 
pass, seeking the promised Canaan rest— 
"Come unto me, and I will give you rest." 
As in the type, so in reality, the promised 
Canaan of rest is not far off, if God's children 
had faith enough to go up and enter 
in. God has made abundant provision 
for them; yet they journey through the 
wilderness of sin, seeking rest but finding 
none, because they lack faith in God's 
promises. Some wander thus a long time; 
and some never enter the Canaan rest because 
of unbelief. But while Israel, according 
to the flesh, is thus and in other ways 
used to typify the spiritual Israel, yet it 
is a totally different type, as we are now 
examining it, in its relation to the Tabernacle. 
Here, Israel unquestionably typifies 
the whole world of mankind. The 
sin-offerings, sacrifices, atonement, etc., 
made typically for them (and them only), 
were typical of better sacrifices and atonement, 
made on behalf of the whole world; 
for, "He is a propitiation for our sins, 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins 
of the whole world."— 1 John 2:2 . 

In a word, Israel was a type as well as 
the Tabernacle, Priests, Levites and sacrifices. 
And what was there done in 
symbol with and for Israel is, since the 
first advent of Christ, being carried out 
on a higher plane, and on a larger scale; 
the latter being the reality, of which that 
was the type or shadow. 

As Israel typified the world, so the tribe 
of Levites typified the "Household of 
faith," or all believers in Jesus and his 
ransom. The Priesthood, one body under 
one chief or High Priest, was typical 
of the "little flock" who with their 
"Head" or High Priest are to be Kings 
and Priests to reign on the earth. ( Rev. 5:10 .) 
Thus viewed, we see Jesus the 
High Priest not of the Aaronic order, 
which was but the type of a greater and 
grander profession or order, but the head of 
the real priesthood of which others were 
but figures.- Heb. 3:1 ; 4:14 . 

But before the under-priests, the members 
of the body of Christ, the priesthood, 
shall be united to their Head and 
begin their reign, they must first "suffer 
with him" in making the sacrifices, as we 
shall shortly see.— 2 Tim. 2:12 . 



Peter shows who were typified by the 
priests, when, addressing those who are 

sanctified, he says: ( 1 Pet. 1:2 and 2:5,9 .) 

"Ye are. ..an holy priesthood 
to offer up sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ." "Ye are. ..a royal 
priesthood." 

That the head or chief priest of this 
priesthood, this "little flock," is Jesus, is 
repeatedly mentioned by the apostles. 
We give but one quotation: "Holy brethren 
(the Royal Priesthood), partakers of 
the heavenly calling, consider the apostle 
and High Priest of our profession, Christ 
Jesus."— Heb. 3:1 . 

As we now pass to the consideration of 
the inauguration of the typical priesthood, 
we notice that the tribe of the Levites 
(typical of all the justified believers) existed 
for a long time before the Priesthood 
was instituted. So in the antitype, 
the "Royal Priesthood" began with the 
anointing of Jesus the High Priest (at 
baptism, Luke 3:22 ; Acts 10:38 ); but 
believers, justified by faith in Christ, had 
lived long before that. For instance, 
Abraham believed God, and was justified 
by his faith. ( Rom. 4:2,3 .) Though even 
the type had not yet come in his day, 
yet Abraham as a justified believer was a 
member of the "household of faith," 
typified by the Levites. But none of the 
"Royal Priesthood" were selected until 
after the Chief or High Priest of this order 
was first initiated and installed in 
office; since then the initiation and installment 
of the under-priests has been the 
special work of this Christian dispensation. 
Thus the priests now being installed 
and now sacrificing are being prepared 
as God's instruments for the blessing 
of all the families of the earth. 

R1237 : page 2 

THE PRIESTHOOD. 

THEIR TYPICAL CLOTHING, ANOINTING 

AND CONSECRATION. 

In this ceremony, as in every other relating 
to the ordination and work of the 
priesthood, it will be well to notice that 
Jesus was the first —the Leader, Captain, 
Forerunner— teaching clearly that none 
preceded him, hence that none of the patriarchs 
or prophets are of the "little 



flock," "the royal priesthood," otherwise 
called "the Bride, the Lamb's wife." 
Though they will be greatly blessed as 
the Lord's servants, their service will not 
be so grandly high as that of the priests, 
nor their honor so great; yet, as represented 
in the Levites, both their service 
and honor are great. 

"The narrow way to life" (Immortality) 
was not opened up until Jesus came. 
He was the first to walk in it. He 
"brought life and immortality to light." 
( 2 Tim. 1:10 .) And though all believers 
(Levites) shall become possessors of 
everlasting life and the world (Israel) 
also, if they will accept it during the Millennial 
age, yet only the priesthood, who 
overcome and follow their Leader in the 
narrow way to life— sacrificing the human 
—thus seeking glory, honor and immortality, 
will ever become the possessors of 
that unlimited degree of life called Immortality, 
as yet possessed only by Jehovah 
and our Lord Jesus. (See "The Plan 
of the Ages," Chapters X. and XL) 



*The word spiritual in this text is omitted by 
the oldest Greek MS., the Sinaitic MS., with evident 
propriety. Not spiritual but human rights, privileges, 
life, etc., are sacrificed. 

R1237 : page 3 

Under the Law, the ANOINTING was the 
ceremony by which the priests were installed 
in God's service. They were 
anointed to their office with a peculiar 
ointment, called the Holy Anointing Oil, 
used upon none but the Priests, and unlawful 
for any one else to have or to make. 
( Exod. 30:25-33 .) This oil typified the 
Holy Spirit of adoption whereby we, 
the real "Royal Priesthood," are sealed. 
Only the consecrated ones are ever to be 
anointed thus. Aaron, the typical High 
Priest, represented Jesus the head, and the 
Church as members of the body, of the 
great High Priest. Being but a sinful 
man like others, he has to be washed in 
order to fitly represent the purity of the 
antitype. 

Aaron was then clothed with the holy 
garments of "glory and beauty" ( Exod. 28 .), 
and then the anointing oil was 



poured on his head. Each article of this 
glorious apparel was typical of qualities 
and powers of the Great Deliverer— head 
and body— as Jehovah discerns them, looking 
down into the future to the time for 
"the manifestation of the Sons of God," 
and the fulfilment in them of his promises. 

THE HIGH PRIEST IN GARMENTS OF TYPICAL 
"GLORY AND BEAUTY." 

"And these are the garments. ..a 
breastplate, and an ephod, and an upper 
robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre 
and a girdle."— Exod. 28:4 . 

The linen "coat" represented the High 
Priest's purity, while its embroidery showed 
the outgrowth of that character in works. 
The "mitre," a strip of fine linen (typical 
of righteousness), worn around the 
forehead, to which was fastened with a 
blue lacer the golden plate, or "crown," 
shows that the crown is righteously his. 
Upon the golden plate was inscribed 
"Holiness to the Lord," thus proclaiming: 
This High Priest is entirely devoted 
to the accomplishment of Jehovah's purposes. 
The golden crown proclaims his 
royalty: He is to be "a priest upon his 
throne"— "a priest forever, after the order 
of Melchizedek." ( Psa. 110:4 .) The 
linen "girdle" indicates a righteous 
servant; linen— righteousness; girdle- 
servitude. 

The "upper robe," of blue, represented 
his faithfulness. The fringe of it was 
made of golden bells and pomegranates. 
The pomegranate, being a choice fruit, 
showed that the faithful performance of 
his work of sacrifice had borne rich fruit 
—the redemption of the forfeited life of 
the human race. The golden bells signified 
that when the High Priest appears in 
glory and beauty, the fruit of sacrificial 
work shall be made manifest to all— proclaimed 
to all the world, as in the type 
the bells proclaimed it to all Israel. This 
is indicated by the close proximity; the 
bells drawing attention to the fruit. 

The "ephod" was made of a cloth of 
purple, blue, scarlet, white and gold 
threads, interwoven skilfully and beautifully. 
It was of two parts, one hanging 
in front and the other over the back. 
These two parts were fastened together by 
two gold clasps which rested on the 



shoulders. This ephod, we believe, typified 

two covenants, the Abrahamic represented 

by the front part, and the New 

Covenant represented by the back part, 

both of which are thus shown to be dependent 

on this High Priest. They are 

laid on him; if he fails to support them 

they must fall to the ground. But, thank 

God, they are firmly clasped on him by 

the gold clasps (divine power), as well as 

bound to him by the "curious girdle" 

—a cord made of the same materials as 

the ephod. This girdle seems to say, This 

is a servant; and as this is the girdle of 

the ephod it tells us that this one is 

"The Messenger (servant) of the Covenant 

whom ye delight in."— Mai. 3:1 . 

That part of the Abrahamic covenant referring 
to the spiritual seed is represented 
as complete in God's sight, the person of 
the High Priest representing the complete 
spiritual seed as it will be clothed with 
honor and power at the beginning of the 
Millennium. Yet the Abrahamic covenant 
is partially fulfilled in the person of 
the High Priest, who is the Seed, the spiritual 
seed, which is to bless all. But as 
we have previously seen, this covenant 
has two phases, the heavenly, or spiritual, 
and the earthly, or fleshly, the literal descendants 
of Abraham. The latter was the 
only one recognized by Abraham, the 
spiritual being hid until God's due time. 
During the Gospel Age the spiritual seed 
develops, becoming members of the body 
of the High Priest; growing up into the 
head. After this spiritual seed has been 
developed, then that phase of the covenant, 
understood by Abraham and all his 
descendants to this day, will be fulfilled. 
And its fulfilment hangs on the great spiritual 
High Priest, too. So says Paul: 
"As concerning the Gospel [the spiritual 
part of the covenant] they [the literal 
seed] are enemies for your sakes; but as 
touching the election they are [still] beloved 
for the fathers' sakes. For the gifts 
and callings of God are not things he 
will repent of. For this is my covenant TO 
THEM. There shall come out of Zion [the 
spiritual Church] the deliverer [this great 
High Priest, the servant of the Covenant 
—Jesus, the head, and the "little flock," 
his body], and shall turn away ungodliness 
from Jacob."- Rom. 11:26-29 . 

So then, after the body of Christ, the spiritual 



"seed," is complete, the Abrahamic 
covenant must have a fulfilment to the 
fleshly seed; that fleshly seed must become 
great "as the sand by the sea 
shore," as the heavenly seed is likened to 
"the stars of heaven." ( Gen. 22:17 .) 
They must first be turned to righteousness 
and truth, and such shall then become an 
agency through which the spiritual seed 
will operate, to bless all mankind with 
truth and knowledge. 

Thus the earthly phase of the Abrahamic 
covenant is seen still to depend on 
and to be upheld by the Great High 
Priest, who is also the mediator of the 
"New Covenant" which Jesus sealed or 
ratified with his own blood, in which sacrifice 
the members of his BODY have been 
privileged to join with him; and they 
will be also privileged to share with him 
in conferring upon mankind the blessings 
of that "New Covenant," when the day 
of sacrifice is ended and the reign of 
glory begins. ( Jer. 31:31 ; Ezek. 11:19 
and 36:24 ; Rom. 11:27 .) This New 
Covenant is typified by the back part of 
the ephod. 

The scarlet, blue, purple, etc., which 
composed the ephod, indicated the conditions 
of the Covenant; the scarlet showed 
how God provides redemption from 
the Adamic curse through the blood of 
the ransom; the white linen indicated the 
restoration of man to his original purity; 
the blue vouchsafes to him the ability to 
faithfully maintain his righteous character; 
the purple proclaims the restoration 
of the royalty of earth as possessed by 
Adam, earth's first monarch. All of these 
blessings woven together are made sure 
by the divine power of the anointed 
Priest, as shown by the interwoven thread 
of gold. Thus, Jehovah has laid both of 
these covenants, as they relate to men, upon 
one who is both mighty and willing to 
execute these glorious covenanted blessings 
—"in due time." 

The breastplate of judgment was placed 
on the front of the ephod. It was suspended 
by a gold chain from the clasps 
on the shoulder, and was fastened to the 
ephod by a lacer, through golden rings— 
this fastening being so concealed underneath 
that to the casual observer it might 
appear to be a part of the ephod. ( Exod. 28:26-28 .) 
This breastplate represented 



beautifully the Law: It was not a part of 
the Abrahamic covenant (ephod) but "it 
was added" to it. ( Gal. 3:19 .) As the 
Israelite regarded them (not seeing the 
hidden connection), the covenant to 
Abraham and "the law, which was 430 years 
after," were all one. But Paul shows us 
that there are two parts— two seeds— to 
this covenant, the spiritual and the natural; 
and that the Covenant and the Law 
were distinct, "to the end that the promise 
might be sure to all the see; not to 
that only which is of the Law, but to that 
also which is of the Faith." — Rom. 4:16 . 

This Law emblem (the breastplate) 
was one of the most beautiful of the High 
Priest's garments. It was made of the 
same materials as the ephod. It had in 
it, set in gold, twelve precious jewels, in 
which were engraved the names of the 
twelve tribes. It was bound on his heart, 
indicating that it was precious to him. 
As a "breastplate of righteousness" it 
covered him. That which condemned 
all imperfect ones was his pleasure— "I 
delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, 
thy law is within my heart."— Psa. 40:8 . 

The breast-plate was two spans long 
and one wide, folded in the middle, i.e., 
a span long and a span wide, double. The 
size, a span, indicated that the Law of 
God is the full measure of a perfect man's 
ability. Jesus, being perfect, was the only 
one who ever kept it fully, while the 
"little flock," his Body, has his righteousness 
imputed to them. 

Its being double, of the same size and 
measure, represents the letter and the 

spirit of the law. The front part contained 
the jewels and was hung by the 
gold chain to the gold clasps of the ephod; 
the under part was fastened to the 
ephod. This latter, tied to the ephod 
(covenant), seems to represent the law in 
letter as presented to fleshly Israel. The 
front part seems to illustrate the spirit 
of the law fulfilled in us, "who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit." ( Rom. 8:4 .) The two are really 
ONE when rightly seen, yet the front 
part, only, bears the precious jewels. Pure 
gold being a symbol of divine things, the 
dependence of this part of the Law by a 
gold chain, from the gold clasps, seems to 
teach that the Law is divine; and we 
know that it is by divine strength that we 



walk not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit. It is this phase of the Law which 
bears the "jewels," set in gold, representative 
of the true Israel. "They shall be 
mine in the day that I come to make up 
my jewels." Thus embedded in gold 
(the divine nature) and upheld by the 
golden chain of divine promises, what 
wonder that "the righteousness of the 
Law is fulfilled in us." 

As Aaron stood there clothed in those 
beautiful robes so typically significant, and 
anointed with the holy oil, his head represented 
Jesus— the head of the priesthood, 
and his body represented the Church complete 
in him. How impressive and significant 
a type of the world's High Priest, undefiled, 
and clothed with power and authority 
to carry out Jehovah's covenants! 

We see the BODY again typified individually 
by the under-priests, who wore bonnets 
covering their own heads, to indicate 
that they were not the head of the Priesthood, 
but members of the body. God 
gave Jesus "to be the head over all things 
to the church which is his body." ( Eph. 1:22,23 .) 
It is for this reason that Paul 
insists that a woman's head should be 
covered, as indicating that she is not the 
head; the husband and wife being typical 
of Jesus and his Bride— the Church of 
the first-born. These under-priests were 
robed in linen garments and wore girdles. 
Their robes represented the imputed 
righteousness of Jesus, and their girdles 
showed that they also are servants of 
righteousness. 

As Aaron had the holy oil poured upon 
his head, so our Head, Jesus, was anointed 
with the antitypical oil— the Holy Spirit 
—when he was thirty years of age, 
on the banks of Jordan, at the time of 
his consecration. There he was "anointed 
with the oil of gladness above his 
fellows"— as head over all his joint-heirs. 
A measure of the Spirit is given to every 
man who thus consecrates; but Jehovah 
gave "not the Spirit by measure unto 
him." ( John 3:34 .) John saw and bore 
record that our High Priest was thus 
anointed ( John 1:32 ; Luke 4:1 ), and 
Peter adds his testimony ( Acts 10:38 ), 
"How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth 
with the Holy Spirit and with power." 

The anointing oil was poured only upon 
the head. The under priests were not 



anointed individually. Since they were 
recognized as members of the High 
Priest's body, they received their anointing 
through the head. Hence only those 
who are in Christ Jesus are partakers of 
the anointing which seals all those who 
shall be recognized as the heirs of God's 
promises, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
their Lord. 

The oil "ran down even unto the skirts 
of his garments" ( Psa. 133:2 ), thus representing 
how all the members of his 
body are to be partakers of the same 
anointing after their head. "The anointing 
which ye have received of him abideth 
in you." ( 1 John 2:27 .) This oil 
began to reach the body on the day of 
Pentecost, and flows on down through this 
Gospel Age, anointing all who are truly 
baptized into Christ, to be, with their 
Head, kings and priests unto God, and to 
reign a thousand years.— Rev. 20:6 . 

We thus see that Aaron, robed and 
anointed, represented the entire Christ— 
"the seed," in which God is about to 
bless all the families of the earth. But 
let us not forget that we have been viewing 
the Great Deliverer from God's 
standpoint, and with him looking down 
to the time of his manifestation— the dawn 
of the Millennial Day— when all the 
members have come into the body, and 
when the "holy oil" has run down "even 
to the skirts of his garments," anointing 
every member. Then he will begin 
the work of blessing mankind. For the 
glorious reign of this Kingly Priest, we 
constantly pray— "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth." 

R1237 : page 4 

CONSECRATING THE PRIESTHOOD. 

The consecration of the Priesthood 
( Lev. 8:14,33 ,) was typical of the consecration 
of the human nature of Jesus 
and his body, the Church, to the will of 
Jehovah— the obedience of Jesus, even 
unto death, and the obedience of the 
members of his body suffering the same 
with him. The whole body represented 
by Aaron's sons, as well as the Head represented 
personally by Aaron himself, are, 
by the antitypical sacrifices being made 
during the Gospel Age, CONSECRATED for 



their future work as kings and priests, to 

restore and rule and bless mankind. 

When this consecration is made, they 

have given their ALL. But their extremity 

is Jehovah's opportunity; and when 

they have consecrated all they had to destruction, 

and become joint-sacrificers with 

Jesus, their Redeemer, they are begotten 

of God to a new nature— spiritual; and 

not only so, but to the highest order of 

spiritual existence— the divine nature; and 

as such they are owned as spiritual sons of 

God.- Gal. 4:4,7 , and 2 Pet. 1:4 . 

This type shows these two natures: 
the new or divine nature is represented 
in Aaron and his sons, while the human 
nature is represented by a bullock. The 
bullock for the sin offering was brought, 
"and Aaron and his sons laid their hands 
upon the head" of it, thus saying, This 
sacrifice represents us. From that moment, 
all that happened to the bullock 
represents what was to be done to Jesus 
and to his body, the Church, as human 
beings. The bullock is delivered up to 
"the Law" (represented by Moses), to 
meet its demands against mankind in general. 
To meet the demands of the law, 
it must be slain— "And Moses slew it." 
He then applied the blood to the horns 
of the altar. The "finger" of the 

"Law" thus pointed out that the altar of 
earthly sacrifices was acceptable to God 
by reason of the shed blood (the life given), 
and that all who realize the power of 
the altar (horns are symbols of power) 
must recognize first the blood which sanctified 
it. The blood poured at the base 
of the altar shows that through the blood 
of the sacrifice (life given) even the earth 
was purchased back from the curse. See 
Eph. 1:14 : "Unto the redemption of 
the purchased possession." 

And Moses took the bullock, his hide, 
flesh, etc., and burnt them with fire without 
the camp. ( V. 17 .) Thus the humanity 
of the Christ complete— head and 
body— is made "a sin offering," suffering 
the destruction to which the world was 
doomed, and from which, by this sacrifice, 
it shall ultimately be delivered. But while 
their humanity is destroyed, as a vile 
thing in the eyes of the world, as represented 
by the burning of the bullock 
without the camp, God accepts the heart 
devotion which prompts the sacrifice, 



which says, "Lo, I come to do thy will, 
O God;" "I delight to do thy will, O 
my God." This is represented by the 
offering on the altar, of the fat and parts 
of the inward life-producing organism, 
as a "sweet savor" unto the Lord. 

Other features of the same consecration 
are shown by the two rams mentioned in 
verses 1 8 and 22 . The first mentioned is 
the ram for the burnt-offering. Aaron 
and his sons laid their hands upon its 
head, thus indicating that it represented 
them. It was killed; its blood sprinkled 
on the altar; and Moses "cut the ram 
into two pieces, and washed the inwards 
and legs in water" and "burnt the head 
and pieces, and the fat." Thus Jesus and 
his body, the Church, are being presented 
before God on the altar, during the entire 
Gospel Age. The head was laid there 
first, and since then all who are "dead 
with him," and cleansed, as in the type, 
by the washing of water— through the 
Word. Its burning on the altar shows 
how God accepts this sacrifice. It is "a 
sweet-smelling savor." 

The second ram, "the ram of consecration," 
shows what effect the sacrifice 
will have upon us, as the first showed how 
God received it. Aaron and his sons laid 
their hands upon its head— it represented 
them. And Moses slew it and took its 
blood (consecrated life) and put it upon 
each separately, thus showing that our 
consecration is an individual work. And 
he put it upon the tip of the right ear, 
and upon the thumb of the right hand, 
and upon the great toe of the right foot. 
Thus by our consecration we are enabled 
to have the "hearing of faith," and to appreciate 
God's promises as none but the 
consecrated can. Our hands are consecrated, 
so that whatsoever our hands find 
to do, we do it with our might as unto the 
Lord. Our feet are consecrated, so that 
henceforth we "walk not as other Gentiles," 
but "walk in newness of life," 

"walk by faith," "walk in the spirit," 

"walk in the light," and even "as ye 
received Christ, so walk in him."— 
Vs. 23,24 . 

The choice portions of the ram, its 
"inwards" and "fat," representing our 
best powers, were taken in the hands of 
the priests and waved; passed to and fro, 
before the Lord, representing the fact that 



a consecrated offering is not given to 
the Lord for a moment, a day, or a year, 
but that continually we keep our affections 
and powers uplifted before our 
Father, never ceasing until accepted of 
him as having finished our course. And 
Moses took them off their hands, God's 
acceptance being shown by fire. So we 
may not lay down or cease to offer our 
every power in God's service while we 
have them, and until all are consumed in 
his service. When the love ("fat") of 
our inmost being is laid upon the altar, it 
helps to increase the fire of God's acceptance. 
The more love there is connected 
with our consecration to God, the 
more quickly will it be accepted by him. 

Upon this "waive offering," while in 
their hands, were laid three cakes from a 
basketful. This offering was laid by Moses 
upon the hands of both the High Priest 
and the under priests. 

The first unleavened cake represented 
the actual purity of Jesus as a man, and 
the imputed purity of the Church as men, 
as attested by the Law (Moses). The 
second unleavened cake, mingled with oil, 
represented the indwelling spirit of God 
— sanctification. The third, a wafer, was 
mingled with honey, and represented our 
faith in the exceeding sweet and precious 
promises of glory, honor and immortality. 

Without these elements, it is impossible 
for our consecration to be complete, 
and hence acceptable, viz., Justification 
(purity), Sanctification by the Spirit 
through the belief of the truth, and faith 
in the promised Glorification. This consecration 
is in progress during the entire 
Gospel Age. 

The anointing oil mingled with the 
blood of consecration was sprinkled over 
them ( vs. 30 ), showing how we may know 
that our consecration is accepted— the 
Holy Spirit of God (the oil) blending 
with and witnessing to the spirit of sacrifice 
in the consecrated man (the blood), 
that he is a son of God.— Rom. 8:16 . 

The boiling of the flesh of consecration 
( vs. 3 1 ) was no part of the sacrifice; it 
was merely the preparing of the portion 
which they ate. It was all to be disposed 
of ( v. 32 ), showing how we are to be entirely 
consecrated and none of our time 
or powers wasted. 

The seven days of consecration ( vs. 33 and 35 ) 



show again that we are consecrated 

to God's service, not a part of our 

time only, but all of it. Seven is a complete 

number in Scripture, and signifies 

all, or the whole of whatever it is applied 

to— ("Seven Seals," "Trumpets," 

"Plagues," etc.). Verse 36 shows the 

completion of the work of consecration. 

There never was a time when it was 
more necessary than now, that all who are 
consecrated as priests should see to it that 
we "be dead with him," and our every 
ability waved before God, that he may 
accept and make use of our talents to his 
glory. Especially is this a matter of interest 
to those who believe that very soon 
all the members of the body will be accepted 
with the Head, a sweet savor to 
God; and that the work of self-sacrifice 
being then finished, the glorious work of 
blessing men and fulfilling the Covenant 
of God will begin. And if we fail to be 
among the priests now, during the time of 
consecration, we cannot expect to be 
of them when they begin their service for 
the people in the Kingdom, when these 
same priests (now despised of men but a 
"sweet savor to God,") shall have the 
title of King added, and with their head, 
Jesus, rule and bless all nations. ( Rev. 20:6 .) 
Do we earnestly desire to be among 
those who will sing to the praise of our 
great High Priest, "Thou hast made us 
unto our God Kings and Priests, and we 
shall reign on the earth"? If so, let us 
be fully consecrated now, for it is only 
"If we suffer with him we shall also reign 
with him."— 2 Tim. 2:12 . 

R1237 : page 4 

THE GREAT "DAY OF ATONEMENT." 
- LEV. 16:3-33 .-- 

In considering these types we must, to 
appreciate them, remember that each is a 
picture, by itself, of one particular part of 
the work of the world's High Priest; and 
so with the various ceremonies of the 
Day of Atonement. To understand it 
clearly, we must realize that while Jesus is 
our (the Church's) High Priest, yet in the 
more full and complete sense he is the 
Head, and we are the members of the 
body, of the world's High Priest, just as 
Aaron was High Priest or chief of the 



under priests, while in a general sense, 
the whole priesthood was one, designed to 
minister for Israel, who typified the world. 

These Levitical pictures primarily referring 
to the Head, when fully considered, 
refer to the body complete. For instance, 
the ceremony of anointing commenced 
with the Head, but the anointing 
applied to all the body during the 
entire Gospel Age, as we have seen. As 
the consecrating of the priesthood includes 
all the members of the body, and 
requires all of the Gospel Age to complete 
it, so also with the sin-offering, or the 
sacrifice of atonement: it commenced 
with the Head, and we the members of 
his body "fill up the measure of the sufferings 
of Christ which are behind." 
And these sufferings require all of the 
Gospel Age to complete them. The Day 
of Atonement, which in the type was but 
a twenty-four hour day, we see then in 
the antitype to be the entire Gospel Age. 
And with its close the sacrificing ceases 
and the glory and blessing commence, 
and the great High Priest of the world 
(Jesus and his bride, made ONE, Head 
and members complete), shall stand forth 
crowned a King and Priest after the 
Melchizedek order: King of Peace— a 
Priest upon his throne. 

There he will stand before the world 
(manifest, recognized but unseen by natural 
sight), not only as King and Priest, but 
also as the great Prophet— "A prophet 
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you 
of your brethren, like unto me [Moses]; 
every soul which will not hear that 
prophet shall be destroyed from among 
the people." When brought to perfect 
knowledge and ability, perfect obedience 
will be required, and all who will not 
render it will be cut off from life— the 
second death.— Acts 3:22,23 . 

In the end of the Jewish Age, Jesus 
offered himself individually to Israel as 
prophet, priest and king, typical or illustrative 
of the whole Body. As prophet, 
he taught them; as priest, "he offered up 
himself" ( Heb. 7:27 ); and as king he 
rode into their city at the close of his 
ministry. But they did not receive him 
in any of these offices. During the 
Gospel Age, his church or body has acknowledged 
him as "a teacher sent from 
God"— the great Prophet; as the "High 



Priest of our profession;" and as the 
rightful King. The Word of God teaches, 
however, that it is not by the Church 
only that he is accepted, but that he (together 
with his Body, the church) shall be 
the Prophet for the people, the Priest for 
all the people, and the King over all 
people, nations and tongues; "Lord of 
all," Priest of all, and Prophet or teacher 
of all. 

In the type of the Priests' consecration, 
we saw Aaron and his sons representing 
Jesus and his body as "new creatures," 
and a bullock representing their humanity; 
but in the type now to be considered, 
we find Aaron alone representing the entire 
Anointed One (head and body); and 
two different sacrifices, a bullock and a 
goat, are here used to represent the separateness, 
yet similarity in suffering, of the 
Body and its Head, as the "sin-offering." 
The bullock represented Jesus at 
the age of thirty years-the PERFECT MAN 
who gave himself and died on our behalf. 
The High Priest, as we have already seen, 
represented the "new" nature of Jesus, 
the anointed head, and also all whom 
God foreknew as members of his body. 
The distinction which is here made between 
the human and the "new creature" 
should be clearly understood and remembered. 
(See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 
I., Chap. X., and Vol. II., page 126.) 
"The man Christ Jesus, who gave himself" 
at thirty years of age, was he who 
was previously rich (of a higher nature), 
but who for our sakes became poor; that 
is, became a man, that he might give the 
ransom for men— a perfect man's life.— 

1 Cor. 15:21 . 

Since the penalty of man's sin was 
death, he must become a man, be "made 
flesh," or he never could redeem man. 
A man had sinned, and the penalty was 
death, and if Jesus would pay the penalty 
he must be of the same nature (but undefiled, 
separate from sin), and die, that 
mankind might in due time be liberated 
from death. To do this, the man Jesus 
made sacrifice "of all that he had" — 
glory as a perfect man, honor as a perfect 
man could claim it, and finally life as a 
perfect man. And this was all he had (except 
God's promise of a new nature and 
the hope which the promise generated), 
since he had exchanged his spiritual being 



or existence for the human which he made 
"a sin-offering" and which was typified 
by the bullock. 

But since to be our ransom his humanity 
must take our place in death, that 
humanity can never again be restored. 
If it were, we, the redeemed, would again 

R1237 : page 5 

come under the condemnation of death. 
But, thanks be to God, it remains a sacrifice 
forever, that we may be forever free from 
Adamic guilt and death. If, then, the 
Father would ever confer upon Jesus any 
honor, glory or life as a reward for his 
obedience even unto death, it must be a 
glory, honor and life on some other plane 
of being than the human, so as not to interfere 
with our ransom-price. 

Such was the promise of Jehovah to 
him, viz.: that he would highly exalt him 
above the human plane, and above his 
pre-human condition; above all angels, 
principalities and powers, to his own right 
hand (condition of chief favor, next to 
Jehovah), and make him a partaker of immortality 
—the divine nature. For these 
and other joys set before him, Jesus endured 
the cross, despising the shame, and is set 
down at the right hand of the Majesty on 
high.-Heb. 1:3 . 

The new nature which was received instead 
of the human, and as a reward for 
its sacrifice, is what is here typified by the 
Priest. While it is true that the sacrifice 
of the human was not finished until the 
cross, and that the divine nature was not 
fully received until the resurrection, three 
days later, yet, in God's reckoning— and 
as shown in this type— the death of Jesus 
(the bullock) was complete when Jesus 
presented himself a living sacrifice at 
baptism. There he reckoned himself 
dead —dead to all human aims or hopes 
of human glory, honor or life, in the 
same sense that we are exhorted to reckon 
ourselves dead indeed to the world, 
but alive as new creatures unto God.— 
Rom. 6:11 . 

This acceptance of Jesus by Jehovah at 
the time of consecration, as though dead 
indeed, was indicated by the anointing 
with the Holy Spirit— the earnest or guaranty 
of what he should receive when 
death had actually taken place. 



Thus considered, we see that the death 
of the bullock typified the offering by 
Jesus of himself, when he consecrated 
himself. This is in harmony with Paul's 
statement, that when Jesus consecrated, 
saying— "Lo, I come [as in the volume 
of the Scriptures it is written of me] to 
do thy will, O God"— to die, and redeem 
many— there he took away the first [i.e. 
set aside the typical sacrifices] that he 
might establish [or fulfil] the real sacrifice 
for sin. ( Heb. 10:7,9,14 .) Yes, 
there the slaying of the bullock occurred, 
and the three years of Jesus' ministry 
showed that all human will was dead, and 
the body reckoned so, from the moment 
of consecration. 

Jesus, the Anointed, filled with the Spirit, 
was the new, divine creature (though not 
perfected as divine— until the resurrection); 
and that relationship he always claimed, 
saying, The works that I do are not mine 
[as a man] but the Father that dwelleth 
in me, he doeth the works; the word 
which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's 
which sent me. ( John 14:10,24 .) 
Not my will [as a man] but thine [Father 
—the divine] be done [in and to this 
earthen vessel consecrated to death].— 
Mark 15:36 . 

When the bullock was slain [when Jesus 
consecrated], the work was done in 
"the Court," which we have seen typified 
the plane of human perfection or justification, 
the condition of faith in and 
harmony with God, the highest attainment 
of the flesh. Jesus was in this condition, 
a perfect man, when he offered himself 
(the bullock in the type) to God. 

Bearing in mind these distinctions, let 
us examine carefully the work of the typical 
Atonement Day, that we may more 
clearly understand the reality. Aaron 
was washed, in order to fitly represent the 
sinlessness of the "new creature." ("No 
one who has been begotten by God practices 
sin; because his seed abides in him, 
and he cannot sin, because he has been 
begotten by God."— 1 John 3:9 .— Diaglott.) 
The new nature cannot sin, and it 
keeps a constant watch over the old nature, 
reckoned dead, lest it come to life 
again. Aaron was clothed for the service 
of the Day of Atonement, not in his 
usual garments of glory and beauty, but 
in garments of sacrifice, with the "linen 



garments," emblems of purity— the righteousness 

of saints. The robe of linen 

was an earnest of the glorious robe to 

follow; the "linen girdle" represented 

him as a servant, though not so powerful 

as when at the close of the Day of Atonement 

he should be girdled with the "curious 

girdle" of the ephod; the mitre of 

linen, being the same as that belonging to 

the glorious apparel, proclaims his perfect 

righteousness now, as then. 

So the High Priest, the divine-minded, 
spirit-begotten one, though not yet born 
of the Spirit, was ready and able to accomplish 
the sacrifice of the atonement, 
and proceeded to do it as typified in Aaron. 
"Thus shall Aaron come into the Holy 
Place [the Most Holy] with a young bullock 
for a sin-offering and a ram for a 
burnt-offering. And Aaron shall offer 
his bullock of the sin-offering which is for 
[represents] himself, and make an atonement 
for himself [the members of his body 
—the under priests] and for his house 
[all believers, the entire "household of 
faith"— the Levites]. And he shall kill 
the bullock of the sin-offering which is for 
[represents] himself. And he shall take 
a censer full of burning coals of fire from 
off the altar before the Lord, and his 
hands full of sweet incense beaten small 
[powdered], and bring it within the vail 
[the first vail or "door"]. And he shall 
put the incense upon the fire before the 
Lord [the censer of coals of fire was set 
into the top of the golden altar in the 
"Holy," and the incense crumbled over 
it, gradually, yielded a smoke of sweet 
perfume], that the cloud of the incense 
[penetrating beyond the second vail] may 
cover the mercy-seat that is upon the testimony 
[or which covers the Law], that he 
die not."- Vs. 3,6,11-13 . 

Looking through the type to the antitype, 
let us now, step by step, compare 
the doings of Jesus with the prophetic 
picture. When Jesus had consecrated, he 
immediately took the sacrificed human life 
[blood of the bullock] to present it before 
God as the ransom of ours. But first, 
before entering the "Most Holy" [perfect 
spiritual condition], he must tarry in 
the "Holy" [spirit-begotten condition], 
where the offering of his perfect humanity 
is acceptable— a sweet perfume before 
Jehovah. 



As the High Priest took with him, along 
with the blood, fire from off the altar, 
and his two hands full of sweet incense 
to cause the perfume, so Jesus' fulfilment of 
his vow of consecration, during the three 
and a half years of his ministry, was a 
sweet and acceptable perfume to the Father, 
attesting at once the completeness 
of the consecration and the perfection 
of the sacrifice. The sweet incense 
beaten small represented the perfection 
of the man Jesus. The fire from the 
Brazen Altar represented the trials to 
which he was subject; and when the perfections 
of his being (incense) came in contact 
with the trials of life (fire), he yielded 
perfect obedience to the divine will— a 
sweet perfume. Thus is shown his temptation 
in all points, yet without sin. It 
was all consumed in the fire; so he yielded 
all in obedience. It was his "two 
hands full" which he offered, thus representing 
his full capacity and ability as being 
tested and required and yielded. 

But while Jesus as a "new creature" 
was thus within the "Holy," enjoying 
the light of the golden candlestick, fed 
by the bread of truth, and offering acceptable 
incense to Jehovah, let us look 
out into the "Court," and yet further 
out, beyond the Camp, and see another 
work progressing simultaneously. We 
last saw the bullock dead, in the Court; 
now the fat of it has been placed upon 
the Brazen Altar and with it the kidneys 
and various life-producing organs. They 
are burning furiously, for a bullock has 
much fat. A cloud of smoke, called "a 
sweet savor to God," rises in the sight 
of all who are in the "Court," viz.: 
Levites— believers. 

This represents how Jesus' sacrifice 
appeared to believing men. They saw 
the devotion, the self-sacrifice, the loving 
zeal (fat) ascending to God as a sweet 
and acceptable sacrifice. They well knew 
that with him God was ever well pleased. 
They knew from what they saw in the 
"Court" (in the flesh) that he was acceptable, 
though they could not see the 
sacrifice in its full grandeur and perfection 
as it appeared in Jehovah's sight (in the 
"Holy") a sweet incense on the Golden 
Altar. 

And while these two fires are burning 
—in the "Court" the "fat," and in the 



"Holy" the "incense," and their perfumes 
ascending at the same time, there is 
another fire "outside the camp." There 
the body of flesh is being destroyed. 
( Ver. 27 .) This represents Jesus' work 
as viewed by the world; to them it seemed 
foolish that he should spend his life in 
sacrifice. They saw not the spirit of 
obedience which prompted, as the Father 
saw it; they saw not the loving perfections 
as the believers (in the "Court" condition) 
saw them. No, nor did they see in 
him their ideal hero and leader; they saw 
only those elements of his character which 
condemned him, not being in condition 
to love and admire him. To them he was 
odious— an outcast— despised and rejected; 
and they hid their faces from him, 
as the Israelites turned from the burning 
carcass in the type. 

We see, then, how Jesus' life for three 
and a half years fills all three of these pictures: 
His sacrifice of perfect manhood 
was, in the sight of the world, foolishness 
and detestable; in the sight of believers, 
a sacrifice acceptable to God; in the sight 
of Jehovah, "a sweet incense." They 
all ended at once— at the cross. The 
bullock was entirely disposed of, the incense 
all offered, when Jesus cried, "It is 
finished," and died. Thus the man Christ 
Jesus gave himself a ransom for all. 

The incense from the Golden Altar 
having preceded him and been satisfactory, 
the High Priest passed under the 
second "Vail" into the "Most Holy." 
So with Jesus; having for three and a 
half years offered acceptable incense in the 
Holy, or consecrated condition, he passed 
beyond "the Vail, that is to say, his 
flesh." For three days he was under the 
Vail, in death; then he arose in the perfection 
of the divine nature beyond the 
flesh, "the express image of the Father's 
person." He was "put to death in the 
flesh, but quickened (made alive) in 

spirit," "sown a natural (human) body, 
raised a spiritual body." He was then 
in the "Most Holy" condition, the perfection 
of spiritual being. 

The next step was to present the blood 
( ver. 14 )— the evidence of the redemption 
—for "ye were redeemed... with 
the precious blood (sacrificed life) of 
Christ." ( 1 Pet. 1:19 .) This going into 
the presence of the Mercy Seat and 



sprinkling or presenting the blood was 
evidently fulfilled by Jesus when he, after 
forty days, ascended up on high, "there 
to appear in the presence of God FOR US," 
presenting on our behalf, and as the price 
of our redemption, the value and merit 
of the sacrifice just finished. 

We now leave the High Priest before 
the "mercy seat" while we go out to 
"the court" to witness another work. 
We quote: "And he shall take of the 
congregation of the children of Israel 
two kids of the goats for a sin-offering. 
And he shall take the two goats and present 
them before the Lord at the door 
of the Tabernacle. And Aaron shall cast 
lots upon the two goats; one lot for the 
Lord and the other for the scape-goat. 
And Aaron shall bring the goat upon 
which the Lord's lot fell and offer him 
for a sin-offering. But the goat on which 
the lot fell to be the scape-goat shall be 
presented alive before the Lord to make 
an atonement with him, to let him go for 
a scape-goat into the wilderness."— 
Vs. 5-10. 

These two goats, taken from Israel and 
brought into the "Court," typified or 
represented all who, coming from the 
world and accepting of Jesus' redemption, 
consecrate their lives to God's 
service. First taken from the "Camp" 
or world condition, they are brought into 
the "Court" or justified condition. 
There they present themselves before the 
Lord (represented by the goats at the door 
of the Tabernacle), desiring to become 
dead with Christ as human beings, and to 
enter the heavenly or spiritual condition 
as Jesus did; first, the spiritual mind, and 
secondly, the spiritual body— the "Holy" 
and the "Most Holy." 

But as not all who say, Lord! Lord! 
shall enter the Kingdom, so, too, some of 
those who say, "Lord, here I consecrate 
my all," promise more than they ever 
perform. They know not what they 
promise or what it costs of denial of self, 
to take up the cross daily and follow the 
bullock —to "go to him without the camp 
[to the utter disregard and destruction of 
the human hopes, etc.], bearing the reproach 
with him." ( Heb. 13:13 .) In 
this type, both classes of those who covenant 
to become dead with Christ are represented: 
those who do really follow in 



his footsteps as he hath set us an example, 
and those who, "through fear of [this] 
death, are all their lifetime subject to 
bondage." ( Heb. 2:15 .) The first class 
is the "Lord's goat," the second is 
the "scape-goat." Both of these classes 
[goats], as we shall see, will have a part in 
the atonement work; in bringing the world 
into complete harmony with God and his 
Law, when this "Day of Atonement," 
the Gospel Age, is ended. But only the 
first class ("the Lord's goat"), who follow 
the Leader, are a part of the 

"sin-offering." 

The casting of lots to see which goat 
would be the "Lord's" and which the 
"scapegoat" indicates that God has no 
choice as to which of them shall win the 
prize. It shows that God does not arbitrarily 
select which of the consecrated 
shall become partakers of the divine 
nature and joint-heirs with Christ our 
Lord. Every believer who presents himself 
is acceptable, and he who keeps his 
covenant and performs the sacrifice is represented 
in the "Lord's goat." Those 
who draw back are represented in the 
"scapegoat." 

To return to the High Priest: After 
having sprinkled the "mercy seat" [literally, 

R1237 : page 6 

the Propitiatory, or place of satisfaction] 
with the blood of the bullock 
seven times (perfectly), "Then shall he 
kill the goat of the sin-offering, that is 
for the people, and bring his blood within 
the Vail, and do with that blood as he did 
with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle 
it upon the Mercy Seat and before the 
Mercy Seat." ( Vss. 14,15 .) In a word, 
all that was done with the bullock was repeated 
with the "Lord's goat." It was 
killed by the same High Priest; its blood 
was sprinkled just the same; its fat, etc., 
burned on the altar in the Court also. 
[It is worthy of notice that a prime bullock 
is always very fat, while a goat is a 
very lean animal. So Jesus, as represented 
by the bullock, had a great abundance of 
the fat of zeal and love, for his sacrifice, 
while his followers, represented by the 
goat, are lean in comparison.] The body 
of the "Lord's goat" was burned in like 
manner as that of the bullock— "outside 



the camp." 

Paul explains that only those animals 
which were sin-offerings were burnt outside 
the camp. And then he adds, "Let 
us go to him without the camp, bearing 
the reproach with him." ( Heb. 13:11,12 .) 
Thus is furnished us unquestionable 
evidence not only that the followers 
of Jesus are represented by this "Lord's 
goat," but also that their sacrifice, reckoned 
in with that of their Head, Jesus, 
constitutes part of the sin-offering. "The 
reproaches of them that reproached thee 
are fallen upon me."— Psa. 69:9 . 

The "Lord's goat" represented all of 
the Lord's "little flock" of faithful followers. 
They are all alike; they all come 
by the same "narrow way;" so what is 
true of the company as a whole, is true of 
each one in it. Therefore the "Lord's 
goat" typifies each one and his sacrifice, 
except that the whole must be complete 
and the sacrifice of all ended, before the 
"blood" of the goat (representative of 
the entire Body of Christ) will be presented 
on the Mercy Seat. 

The blood sprinkled on and before the 
Mercy Seat was in the design of a cross, 
with the top or head of the cross on the 
Mercy Seat. This is shown by the description: 
"He shall sprinkle it with his 
finger upon the Mercy Seat eastward (toward 
the "Vail") and before (across, in 
front of) the Mercy Seat." This is the 
full end of the sin-offerings for the sins 
of the world. The bullock, as we have 
seen, was the sin-offering for the "household 
of faith" (the under-priests and Levites), 
and the goat was the sin-offering 
"for the people," Israel— type of all the 
world who desire to be God's people. 

Thus we see that this entire Gospel Age 
is an age of suffering and death, to those 
who sacrifice the human nature in order to 
become partakers of the divine. Just as 
soon as the sacrifice of Jesus on behalf of 
his "body" and "house" was complete 
and presented before the Father, came the 
evidence of his acceptance in the Pentecostal 
baptism. And his anointing (symbolized 
by the oil), which came upon the 
church, continues ever since on all the 
living members of the High Priest's body. 
This impartation of the divine mind to 
those consecrated ones was the energy in 
them which killed each, as the "Lord's 



goat." This coming of the Holy Spirit, 
the Lord's power or "hand," at Pentecost, 
is shown in the type ( vs. 15 ) by the High 
Priest coming to the door of the Tabernacle 
and laying his hands upon the 
"Lord's goat" and killing it. Just as the 
Spirit of the Father enabled Jesus to sacrifice 
himself, represented by the killing of the 
bullock, so it is the same spirit, the Spirit, 
power or influence of God, through 
Christ, the spirit or influence of the truth, 
upon the Lord's goat class, which enables 
them to crucify themselves as men— to 
kill the goat— in hope of the promised 
glory, honor and immortality of the divine 
nature. 

It was thus, for instance, that Paul, 
when possessed of this spirit of the Leader 
and Head, could reckon all things but 
loss and dross that he might win [a membership 
in] Christ and be found in him. 
Inspired by this hope and spirit he could 
say: "I [the new creature] live, yet not 
I" [the old creature represented in the 
consecrated goat]; it is being consumed 
with the reproach and contempt of the 
world outside the camp. Paul's earthly 
affections and powers had all been presented 
to God, a living sacrifice; thereafter 
it was Christ living in him, the hope 
of glory— Christ's mind, crucifying and 
keeping under the depraved but justified 
human nature and its will. 

While actually in the world, he was not 
of it; and to such an extent was this true 
that he could say: "The life which I 
now live, I live by the faith of the Son 
of God." Yes, by faith he had become 
a partaker of the divine nature, and was 
in the "Holy," feeding on the "holy 
bread," and enlightened continually 
by the light from the "Golden Candlestick." 
Thus furnished with knowledge 
and strength, he was able to offer "incense" 
acceptable to God through Jesus 
Christ: i.e., Paul's sacrifice, because of 
Jesus' merit imputed to it, was acceptable 
to God. Thus he kept the goat nature 
always sacrificed. So, too, the same 
thing has been done by the other members 
of this "Lord's goat" company, 
though none have been so widely known. 
Paul's sacrifice sent up a very rich perfume; 
his was a sacrifice of very sweet 
odor to God, yet like ours was acceptable 
to God, not on account of its own value, 



but because of being offered upon and partaking 
of the merit of Christ the Redeemer, 
the Golden Altar. 

As the goat filled up that which was 
behind of the sin-offering, completing 
the sacrifice begun by the bullock, so does 
the "little flock," following after Jesus, 
"fill up that which is behind of the afflictions 
of Christ." (Col. 1:24.) Not 
that our sacrifices are really valuable, as 
was our Lord's, for he alone was perfect 
and suitable for a ransom, for a sin-offering; 
the acceptableness of our offerings is 
through his merit first imputed to us, justifying 
us, and then through the grace 
which permits us to offer our justified 
selves in with our Lord's perfect sacrifice, 
that we may share also in his future work 
of blessing all with restitution. 

The hour must some time come when 
the sacrifice of the last members of this 
"Lord's goat" will be consumed and 
the sin-offering forever ended. That we 
are now in the close of the "Day of 
Atonement," and that the last members 
of the Lord's goat are now on the altar, 
we firmly believe from evidences elsewhere 
given. Soon the last members of His 
Body shall pass beyond the second Vail- 
beyond the flesh— into the perfection of 
the divine nature, already commenced in 
the new mind or will which controls these 
mortal bodies. The passing of the second 
Vail means to the body what it meant 
to the head; it means, in the presenting 
of the blood of the goat, what it 
meant in the presenting of the blood of 
the bullock. The body of the Priest 
passing the second Vail, bearing the blood 
of the goat, represents the passing of the 
Body of Christ entirely beyond human 
conditions into the perfection of the divine 
nature, when we shall be like Christ 
Jesus who now is "the express image of the 
Father's person." O blessed hope! "I 
shall be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness," 
was spoken prophetically for Jesus; 
and how sublime the promise that "we 
shall be like him." If we may but win 
this prize for which we run, then- 
Perish every fond ambition, 

All we've sought of earth or known; 
Yet how rich is our condition, 

Heavenly prospects now we own. 
The Most Holy reached, the evidence 
of the sacrifice of the BODY for the people 



will be presented, as typified by the blood 
of the goat sprinkled on the Mercy Seat. 
When presented it will be accepted for 
"the people," as was that of our glorious 
Leader accepted for himself [his body] 
and house [the household of faith]. Thus 
the reconciling work will be accomplished; 
sin and condemnation will be fully 
covered for all, and the great work of giving 
to the world the grand results of that 
atonement will speedily follow its completion; 
just as the blessing of Pentecost 
upon the "body" and "household" 
speedily followed the acceptance of Jesus' 
sacrifice after he passed beyond the Vail 
of flesh and presented our ransom-sacrifice 
before God. The sprinkling of all 
things with the blood shows that the 
"blood" is full satisfaction, and also indicates 
that the work with the scape-goat, 
which followed, was not part of the sin-offering 
and was not needful to complete 
the "reconciling." Hence in it we must 
see some other object and significance. 

THE SCAPE-GOAT. 

"And when he had made an end of 
reconciling the Holy ["Most Holy"] 
and the Tabernacle of the congregation 
[the "Holy"] and the Altar [in the 
"Court"] he shall bring the live goat: 
and Aaron shall lay both his hands upon 
the head of the live goat [scape-goat] and 
confess over him all the iniquities of 
the children of Israel [typical of the 
world], and all their transgressions in all 
their sins, putting them upon the head of 
the goat, and shall send him away by the 
hand of a fit man [any one convenient] 
into the wilderness."— Vs. 20-22 . 

As before expressed, we understand that 
this "scape-goat" which was presented 
for sacrifice with the other, but failed to 
sacrifice, and to walk in the steps of the 
bullock, represents a very large class of 
God's children who have made the covenant 
to become dead to the world, and to 
sacrifice their justified human nature, but 
who fail to actually do so. 

While this "scape-goat" class has existed 
throughout this Gospel Age, the one 
goat and the work done with it, at the 
close of the "Day of Atonement," is 
representative in a general sense of the 
dealing with each individual of that company 



during the age, though it specially 
illustrates this class in the end of the age 
of sacrifice. 

Let us look first at God's proposed 
dealing with members of this company 
who will be living when the work of sin-offering 
is complete— the last members of 
the scape-goat company— and then see 
how it will apply to the preceding members 
of the same class. 

Let us remind you that we are now 
dealing with things future, after the "sin-offering.' 
The Lord's goat is not yet 
wholly consumed, consequently the "little 
flock," represented by the body of the 
Priest, has not yet gone beyond the second 
"Vail" into the condition of spirit 
perfection; and the special work with the 
living "scape-goat" is after this. 

Other Scriptures ( Rev. 7:9,13-17 and 

1 Cor. 3:15 ) show us that there will be a 
"great company" who during this age 
have entered the race for the grand prize 
of joint-heirship with Jesus, who fail to 
"so run" as to obtain it; and that they, 
though "castaways" as regards the prize 
( 1 Cor. 9:27 ), are nevertheless objects of 
the Lord's affection and love, who, by his 
providences in the circumstances of life, 
will cause them to come through "great 
tribulation," thus accomplishing for them 

"the destruction of the flesh, that the 
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord 
Jesus." ( 1 Cor. 5:5 .) Notice, they consecrated 
their justified human life, and 
God accepted of the consecration and 
reckoned them, according to their covenant, 
dead as human beings and alive as 
new —spiritual— creatures. But, by their 
failure to carry out the contract, they are 
cut off from the Priesthood, from membership 
in the Body of Christ— "Every 
branch in me that beareth not fruit, he 
taketh it away."— John 15:2 . 

These are in a pitiable condition: they 
have failed to win the prize, therefore cannot 
have the divine nature; nor can they 
have restitution to perfect humanity with 
the world, for in their consecration, all 
human rights and privileges were exchanged 
for divine hopes— for the opportunity 
to run for the divine nature. But 
though not faithful and not overcomers, 
the Lord loves them, and will deliver 
those who through fear of death (fear of 
contempt— fear of the reproach borne by 



the bullock and goat, beyond the Camp 
—in the Wilderness, the separated, or 
dead condition) were all their life time 
subject to bondage— bondage of fear of 
men and men's traditions and opinions 
which always bring a snare, and keep back 
from full obedience to God— even unto 
death.- Heb. 2:15 . 

Through the favor of the High Priest, 
this great company are to go into "great 
tribulations" and have the flesh destroyed. 
This will not make of them "overcomers" 
nor give them membership in 
the Body-the Bride of Christ. It will 
not give them a place on the throne as 
Kings and Priests, but a position "before 
the throne," as perfect spiritual 
beings, though not of the highest order 
of the spiritual— the divine; not possessed 
of the Crown of life, Immortality, 
yet "like unto the angels." These shall 
serve God in his Temple, though they will 
not be members of that symbolic Temple 
which is the Christ.- Rev. 7:14,15 . 

This class will be sent to the Wilderness 
condition of separation from the world, 
forced thither by "the man of opportunity" 
—adverse circumstances— there to be 
buffeted by adversity until they learn the 
vanity, deceitfulness and utter worthlessness 
of the world's approval, and until 
all human hopes and ambitions die, and 
they are ready to say, God's will, not 
mine, be done. The world is ever ready 
to scorn and cast out the chastened and 
afflicted ones, though they earnestly covet 
its deceiving smile and its empty honors. 
The body of the scape-goat was not 

burned in the wilderness; only sin-offerings 
(the bullock and the Lord's goat) 
were burned. ( Heb. 13:11 .) The burning 
of the sin-offering represented the 
steady, continuous submission of that class 
to the fiery ordeal of suffering— "faithful 
(willing sacrifices) unto death." Both 
classes suffer even unto death of the human 
will and body; but the first class die 
willingly; they are destroyed by continual 
crucifying of the flesh, as shown in 
the symbol by fire burning continuously 
until there is nothing more to burn. The 
second class is simply sent to the wilderness 
and there left to die unwillingly. Their 
love of the world's approval perishes with 

R1237 : page 7 



the world's neglect and scorn and reproach; 
and their spiritual nature ripens 
and blooms into life. 

Not only will this be true markedly 
with the last members of this scape-goat 
class shortly, but the same has been fulfilled 
to some extent all along; for there 
has always been a class, and a large one, 
which yielded to death only by compulsion; 
which, instead of willingly sacrificing, 
suffered "destruction of the flesh." 
( 1 Cor. 5:5 .) The classes represented by 
both goats have been developing side by 
side throughout the age. 

When the "little flock" have all gone 
beyond the Vail, the hand of the Lord 
will set free those bound ones, "who, 
through fear of death [to the world], are 
all their lifetime subject to bondage," by 
overthrowing the many theories, creeds 
and traditions of men and great nominal 
church organizations, in and to and by 
which they are held and hindered from 
hearing and obeying the Lord's voice. 

Forced into freedom by "Babylon's" 
fall, while realizing that the great prize 
has been lost, they will then hear the 
High Priest's voice and find themselves 
forced into the Wilderness condition 
of separation and flesh destruction. At 
no other time, perhaps, have there been so 
many consecrated ones bound as at present; 
but through all the age there have 
been some. 

All the consecrated ones, of both classes, 
pass through great trials and afflictions, 
yet by one class they are esteemed 
light afflictions, taken joyfully, which they 
rejoice to be accounted worthy to suffer. 
Theirs is a willing sacrifice, like that of 
the Head. To the other class, they are 
burdensome, great afflictions, almost without 
joy— an enforced destruction of the 
flesh. And proportionately different are 
their positions and rewards at the end of 
the race. 

THE BURNT OFFERING. 

"And Aaron shall come into the Tabernacle 
of the congregation [the "Holy"] 
and shall put off the linen garments which 
he put on when he went into the Holy 
place [the "Most Holy"] and he shall 
leave them there; and he shall wash his 



flesh with water in the holy place [the 

"Court"] and put on his [usual] garments 

[the garments of glory and beauty] 

and come forth and offer his Burnt-offering 

and the Burnt-offering of the people, 

and make [another illustration] an atonement 

for himself [the body— the church 

—the "little flock"] and for the people. 

- Vss. 23 and 24 . 

The burnt-offering consisted of two 
rams ( Vss. 3 and 5 .): one representing 
the bullock and the other the Lord's 
goat. These, being alike, show the harmony 
and oneness of the sacrifices made 
by Jesus and his footstep-followers; that 
in God's sight they are all one sacrifice. 
"For both he that sanctifieth [Jesus] and 
they who are sanctified [the little flock] 
are all one; for which cause he is 
not ashamed to call them brethren."— 

Heb. 2:11 . 

This is further shown in the treatment 
of each of these sacrifices. The rams of 
"burnt-offering" were cut in pieces and 
washed and the pieces laid unto the head 
upon the altar and burned, making sweet 
perfume— a burnt-offering of sweet savor 
unto Jehovah. Since both rams were thus 
treated, it shows that in Jehovah's estimation 
they are all parts of one sacrifice; 
the members joined to the head, acceptable 
as a whole, as the atonement for the 
sins of the world— thus satisfying the 
claims of justice on behalf of the whole 
world of sinners. As the sin-offerings 
illustrate the necessary crucifixion and 
death of the Redeemer, so the burnt-offering 
following illustrates God's manifested 
acceptance of the same sacrifice. So 
let us not forget that God does not manifest 

his acceptance of the "better sacrifices" 
than bulls and goats, until that 
sin-offering is complete and the true High 
Priest is robed in the honor and glory of 
his office, represented in the change of 
garments. During the time of making 
the sin-offering he wore only the white 
linen garments; afterward (and usually) 
he wore the glorious garments illustrative 
of the honor and glory conferred on him. 
During the Gospel age the sin-offerings 
progress and no honor is bestowed upon 
the priests, but at its close comes the outward 
manifestation of God's approval 
and the acceptance of it in the putting of 
glory and honor upon the priests who 



made the sacrifice, and in the blessing of 

the people for whose sins they atoned. 

The burnt-offering must be burned on 
the altar in the "Court," thus teaching 
that God will manifest his acceptance of 
the sacrifice of the whole body (head and 
pieces or members) in the sight of all in 
the "Court" condition, viz.: to all believers. 
But before this manifestation to 
believers, of God's acceptance of the 
work, is accomplished, the "scape-goat 
company" are sent away, and the robes 
of the Priest changed. As the white robes 
worn throughout the work of sacrifice 

covered the body and represented the justification 
of the body, their purity in God's 
sight through Christ, so now the garments 
of glory and beauty represent the glories 
of position and work in the future, after 
the new creatures have been perfected, 
after they have gone beyond the "Vail." 
The washing with water seems to show 
that though the white garments are laid 
aside, the body now clothed in majesty 
of power is still pure and that the sins of 
the people for which atonement had been 
made do not attach to or contaminate the 
purity of the priest. Thus ends this type 
of the development of the priesthood and 
the satisfaction for the world's sins. 

We tarry to glance at a few verses of 
this chapter ( Lev. 16 ) not directly connected 
with the narrative. 

Vs. 17 . "There shall be no man in the 
tabernacle of the congregation when he 
goeth in to make an atonement in the 
holy place [the "Most Holy"] until he 
come out, and have made an atonement 
for himself, and for his household, and for 
all the congregation of Israel." This 
limitation applies only to this special day, 
for the Apostle says— "The priests went 
always into the first tabernacle [the 
"Holy"] accomplishing the service, but 
into the second [tabernacle— the "Most 
Holy"] went the high priest alone, once 
every year" [on this "Day of Atonement," 
which was repeated annually]. 
- Heb. 9:7 . 

The privileges of the Tabernacle are 
only for those who are priests— members 
of the body of the Head Priest— so that 
whether as now, in the first of these heavenly 
conditions (spiritual minded, new 
creatures in Christ Jesus), or whether as 
we hope to be soon, in the second or perfected 



spiritual condition, it will in 
either or both cases be because we are in 
Christ Jesus, new creatures— no longer 
men. "For ye are not in the flesh [human], 
but in the spirit [spiritual, new 
creatures], if so be that the Spirit of God 
dwell in you."— Rom. 8:9 . 

Vs. 28 . "And he that burneth them 
[the bullock and the goat of sin-offering] 
shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh 
in water, and afterward he shall come into 
the camp." This seems to teach that 
those principally instrumental in reproaching, 
reviling and destroying the humanity 
both of Jesus [the bullock] and his 
"little flock" [the goat] will have no 

special punishment for it, because they 
did it ignorantly— at the same time accomplishing 
God's plan. "Father, forgive 
them, they know not what they do," 
was a truthful prayer and from one whom 
the Father heard always. They may wash 
and be clean and come into the camp— 
i.e. into the same condition as the remainder 
of the world, all of whom are sinners, 
and all of whom are ransomed from 
Adamic depravity and death. 

Vs. 26 . "And he that let go the goat for 
the scape-goat shall wash his clothes and 
bathe his flesh in water, and afterward 
come into the camp." This teaches the 
same lesson relative to those who shall be 
instrumental in bringing the trouble, and 
consequent destruction of the flesh, upon 
the "great company," represented by 
the scape-goat. 

THE BLESSINGS FOLLOWING THE 
"DAY OF ATONEMENT" 
SACRIFICE. 

In the type the "Day of Atonement" 
thus ended; and, typically cleansed from 
sin, Israel was reckoned no longer defiled 
and separated from God, but now made 
at-one with God. Justice no longer 
condemned, but bade them realize God's 
reconciled presence in their midst, to bless 
and protect and direct into the Canaan 
of rest and peace. 

In the Antitype, the "Day of Atonement" 
is this Gospel Age, during which 
Jesus and his body, the Church (through 
his redemption and favor), make sacrifice 
to justice, in full satisfaction of the 
Adamic sin. When the work of reconciliation 



is complete, God will recognize 
mankind and place his sanctuary among 
men. Then will be fulfilled that which 
was written: "The Tabernacle of God 
[the glorified Church] is with men, and 
he will dwell with them, and they shall be 
[become] his people, and God himself 
shall be with them and be their God. 
And God shall wipe away all tears from 
their eyes; and there shall be no more 
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither 
shall there be any more pain, for the 
former things [the reign of Satan, sin and 
death] are passed away. And he that sat 
upon the throne said, Behold, I make all 
things new."— Rev. 21:3-5 . 

But while all these blessings shall result 
from the establishment of God's residence, 
or sanctuary, among men ["I will 
make the place of my feet glorious;"— 
"earth is my footstool"], yet its blessing 
will be a gradual work, requiring the Millennial 
Age for its full accomplishment; 
i.e., death, pain, and tears will be in 
process of destruction (wiping away), but 
not completed until the end of the Millennial 
Age. 

The gradual process by which man will 
be brought into perfection of being and 
fulness of harmony with Jehovah is well 
illustrated in the typical sacrifices of 
Israel, made after the Day of Atonement, 
the antitypes of which will be fulfilled 
during the next age. 

To rightly divide and understand these 
typical sacrifices, it must be recognized 
that the present Gospel Age is the Day of 
Atonement toward God for the general 
sin of mankind; and that all sacrifices 
coming after the Day of Atonement in 
the type, represent fulfilments or antitypes 
due after the Gospel Age is ended— during 
the Millennial Age— when the world 
of sinners may become reconciled to, or 
at-one with, God. 

Thus we may see that at-one-ment has 
two parts— first, Justice at-one with, and 
not any longer condemning and destroying, 
Adam and his children on account of 
his sin; and secondly, the sinner being 
brought to at-one-ment with God's righteous 
laws, recognizing them and obeying 
them. The first of these phases of at-one-ment, 
or reconciliation, is brought about 
entirely by the Priest's sacrifice in the 

"Day of Atonement" sacrifices. * 



The other— the reconciling of the world 
to God, or the bringing of them into full 
at-one-ment and harmony with God, will 
be accomplished during the next age by 
the "Royal Priesthood," who, typified 
by Moses, will be the Great Prophet whom 
the Lord will raise up to teach and to 
govern the people, and if they will not 
give heed to him, they shall be cut off from 
life— die the second death.— Acts 3:23 . 

Be it clearly seen that though the saints, 
the followers of Jesus, are permitted as represented 
in the Lord's goat to share in and 
be members of the sin-offering on behalf 
of the world, it is not because of their 
being by nature purer or better than the 
world; for the entire race of Adam was condemned 
in him; and of them "there is 
none righteous, no, not one" ( Rom. 3:10 ), 
and none could give a ransom for his 
brother.- Psa. 4:97 . 

They share in the sacrifice for sins as a 
favor, in order that by so doing they may 
share with Jesus the promised divine 
nature and be his companions and joint-heirs. 
To permit and enable them to 
offer themselves acceptable sacrifices, 
the benefits of Jesus' death were applied 
to these first, justifying or cleansing them. 
Thus it is his death that blesses the world 
through his body, the Church. 



*The sacrifices relative to the consecration of 
the priests, and parts of two types yet to be 
considered, we regard, of course, as being the same 

sacrifices as those above mentioned as taking 
place on the Day of Atonement— they all being 
merely different views or pictures of the same 
sacrifices. 



R1237 : page 7 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Iowa. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been 
thinking that perhaps I ought to be better 
known to you, and that I have not the 
advantage of that spiritual sympathy which 
so builds up the brethren who neglect 
not the assembling of themselves together, 
which bodily assembling has now, to some 



of us, to be substituted by letters. I saw 
you and heard you at the meeting in 
April, and perhaps you will recall me 
personally. I had then many, many things 
I wanted to talk with you about, but I found 
it impossible to wait over until you would 
have leisure. But how I was blessed and 
strengthened by that meeting ! I have been 
a careful reader of the WATCH TOWER and 
both volumes of "DAWN," and the spirit 
of that assembly and the inspiration of the 
meeting— the seeing, for the first time, 
faces of men and women who believe as I 
do and whose hope was also my hope— was 
indeed blessed. I know that you are very 
busy with that which the Master has intrusted 
to your hand, and I write this 
letter, knowing that occasional words of 
sympathy and love are encouraging, and 
that a word from me may help to build 
you up. I cannot tell you now what the 
words have done for me, which the Master 
has spoken by you through the TOWER 
and DAWN. For several years I was in 
the pastorate of the M.E. Church and a 
member of the Upper Iowa Conference. 
The study of the Bible took Methodism 
out of me long before I knew of your writings. 
I associated a few months with the 
Campbellites; but they were not the people 
my heart yearned for, and their doctrines 
and practices were out of harmony 
with THE WORD. I turned my attention 
to the Plymouth Brethren— read 
their literature, but they are the worst 
"hide-bound" of any, though they do 
have some truth and are zealous for the 
atonement. 

To one looking at me from the outside 
only, I would seem to be a wanderer, having 

R1237 : page 8 

had little stability, having had no 

fixed home since leaving the M.E. Church. 

But God knows differently, and I am 

persuaded that you also can understand 

how that a man whose daily prayer was, 

"O! send out thy light and thy truth, 

and let them lead me," would become 

very peculiar in the eyes of those who 

are asleep in Zion. I have had some extremely 

painful experiences which would 

not have fallen upon me had I remained 

a pastor in the Church. But I am comforted 

as was our brother Paul, that these 



light afflictions work out for us a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory. And since I have learned to walk 
in the light as he is in the light, I have 
also grasped the meaning of Phil. 4:7 , 
THE PEACE OF GOD. 

I have seven children, none of them yet 
self-supporting, and as my salary stopped 
when I stopped preaching for the people, I 
have had enough to do to feed and clothe 
them. I have earnestly desired to be at work 
wholly in the Gospel, but the care of 
my family has tied me to my business, 
but my heart was all the time with the 
Lord. 

Religiously I am alone, excepting the 
sympathy of wife and children, and the 
Lord is good to us in our little family 
Bible readings every morning. 

R1238 : page 8 

If you are very busy do not stop to 
answer this letter, only do not forget a friend 
of all those who love the Lord in deed and 
in truth. Your brother in faith and hope, 
J. H. GILRUTH. 

page 8 

Indiana. 

DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:-Although it 
has been quite a long time since the meeting 
at Allegheny, which all enjoyed so 
much, I thought you might be pleased to 
know of the blessed effect of that meeting 
upon some who were not there. My 
husband came home so full of the Holy 
Spirit that I immediately realized my 
need of a deeper work in my heart. He, 
through the Holy Spirit, brought me to 
see what a blessed privilege I had of 
making a complete consecration, and 
strange as it may be, I have been until 
now trying to feel the evidence that I was 
accepted. I did not receive the evidence as 
long as I was expecting it, but just as I determined 
to stand on his promises without a 
sensible evidence, then the peace that passeth 
all understanding filled my soul, and he 
has made me to rejoice in his mighty love. 

These words express my feelings— 
"Oh! bliss of the purified, 
Bliss of the free, 

I plunge in the crimson tide 
Opened for me." 



My prayers are ever with you, and all 
the Lord's children. Oh! how sweet it 
is to feel his presence and protecting 
care. I am so glad that the messengers 
ever found us, and now I feel like carrying 
the glad tidings to some others of the 
Lord's children who are still in Egyptian 
darkness. 

I know that you will rejoice with me 
in my new-found treasure. 

Your Sister in His service, Mrs. N. OWEN. 

New York. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 

—Indeed it is a pleasant surprise that 
our blessed Lord has helped you to 
prepare a volume of poems and hymns for 
us hungering souls, and I have so much 
wanted something of the kind from you, 
but when I was writing I could not think 
to ask it. Praise the Lord, his guidance 
is so wonderful, faithful and plain. 

The bit of history entitled Harvest 
Gathering and Sifting is very interesting 
and satisfactory to me; 'tis no offence, 
but with thankfulness I read and re-read. 
May the Lord continue his help in the 
glorious work to his willing and obedient 
servants. 

I enclose one dollar, for which please 
send me one hymn book, one hundred 
envelopes and one volume of paper bound 
DAWN, Vol. I., and I will be thankful. 
Mrs. A. H. TEFFT. 

Indiana. 

DEAR WATCH TOWERr-Enclosed please 
find $1.50 for ten volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Every one wants both volumes, 
and the third also as soon as it is out. 
All that I have sold to thus far want the 
third volume— some of those that have already 
read the first and second are quite 
impatient for the third. I am not able to 
canvass for MILLENNIAL DAWN, but will 
recommend and sell it as I have opportunity. 
I send enclosed a letter from a 
friend, which speaks for itself. Please 
send the books in paper cover without 
delay. Mrs. H. B. LUCAS. 

[The letter referred to will be interesting 
to you all, hence we give it below.] 

MY DEAR FRIEND: -I have read and I 
am now re-reading "MILLENNIAL DAWN." 
It is not my own book, I borrowed it from 
a party who got it through you. I now 



want it for myself, for it is a "book to 
keep," to study and ponder. I have 
studied the Bible more or less from childhood, 
and many things of course were very 
plain; but many more very much hidden 
in mystery. This book is indeed a "helping 
hand." The Bible opens up grandly 
in the light of unfolding prophecy. I 
never felt such a grand sweep of happiness 
and perfect peace enwrap my whole 
being as while I have been reading this 
author's ideas. They seem sound. I am 
going through more slowly this time, with 
the Bible in my hand. The first time I 
was too much entranced to stop to hunt 
quotations. I rushed on and on at full 
gallop. Once the book fell on my lap 
and while the tears were actually drenching 
my face, I began singing the blessed 
old hymn, 
"All hail the power of Jesus' name, 
Let angels prostrate fall! 

Bring forth the royal diadem, 
And crown him Lord of all." 

Blessing and glory and honor and praise 
belong to him forever. I am living in a 
new world; even old things have become 
new. I never doubted God's love, nor 
wavered in my faith, but I went on blindly, 
as it were, believing all would come 
out right. But the view I have now is so 
much broader and grander and fuller of 
love than I could ever see before. I 
thought for many years that we were near 
the end of the gospel age, but I counted 
differently and made it farther off than 
this author. Surely, the "dawning" is 
very near, if we are not actually in it. I 
would love to talk with you of these things. 
Can't you come up and spend a few days? 
We can have all the time to talk. I want 
a copy of these books and the third volume 
too. Can you give me any information, 
or can you get it for me? Are you 
agent for them? I must have them! 

How full of sweet comfort is the Bible! 
Come up and let us talk over all these 
grand and glorious things. RHODA. 

Georgia. 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-Mr. C. K. L., 

a friend of mine, came into my office and 

said that no money could pay for the 

benefit he had received from the truth contained 

in the DAWN, Vol. I., and handed 

me $20.00 which I inclose herein, and 



requested me to purchase DAWNS and 
distribute them. Please send me the 
DAWNS, Vol. I., to that amount, including 
two or three of Vol. II. 
Yours fraternally, F. T. LOCKHART. 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 
—I cannot refrain from writing you— 
your articles in the last TOWER: "Perils 
Among False Brethren," "Harvest Gathering 
and Sittings" and "Sifting the 
Wheat," were so very helpful and timely 
to me and also to others, I desire you to 
know how highly they are appreciated. 

You perhaps know that Brother 

has, at times, had his faith in the ransom 
nearly shipwrecked by Mr. Adams' theories, 
but now he is satisfied, and says he 
will work harder for the Master than he 
has ever before in spreading the truth. 

Your plain, pointed history was very 
helpful. I have read the articles referred 
to in the May TOWER three times and see 
very plainly the leading of the Divine 
Master. I did not before understand the 
travail that gave birth to "Tabernacle and 
its Teachings." As soon as I studied it, 
I was sure its origin was divine. So this 
was the key that opened up all the dark 
things, the hidden things, in the day of 
the Lord's preparation. May God still 
keep you where he can use you for his 
work— his great work. May self be crucified, 
and only Christ appear. 

Many will yet fall. One other we had supposed 
to be with us has gone back to man's 
inherent immortality. Who shall be able to 
stand? I desire to work along with you, 
helping, never hindering, in the great 
harvest work, now calling for every willing 
hand. 

Brother is much pleased with the 

May TOWER. Though in poor health he 
is faithfully doing what he can in the 
harvest work. He lives for one object. 
I sometimes think his work is nearly done. 

I will send you five dollars to help in 
publishing the third volume of DAWN. 

Sincerely yours in the Master, 
MRS. J. H. PATTERSON. 

R1238 : page 8 

Pennsylvania. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-For the 



enclosed have the kindness to mail to my 
address one copy each of the first and 
second volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
These are "perilous times"— the "sifting" 
process continues and it is our desire 
to walk in the light, God helping us. 

There are only three of us here who are 
striving to enter in at the straight gate, and 
we are regarded as "peculiar" among 
the professed church people. Pray for us, 
that our running may not be in vain. Will 
you kindly mail a copy of the May number 
of the TOWER, prominently marking 
the article: "Harvest Gathering and Sittings" 

to Mr. . This man, once in the 

way, may possibly not have gone so far 
back as to reach "outer darkness." 

May God bless you in your good work 
and reward you in due season. 

Yours in the name of the Master, 
E. C. REMMEL. 

page 8 

Oregon. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Bibles 
and Testaments came, and we are very 
thankful to have them. It is wonderful 
how our Heavenly Father answers prayer. 
We were badly served by the American 
Bible Society, while at Walla Walla. We 
could have supplied many DAWN readers 
there with Bibles, and attempted to negotiate 
with that concern to supply the 
demand, not expecting any remuneration 
for our trouble. Would they do this? 
No, it would seem as though they preferred 
that those people be without the bread of 
life, than to fill any orders for us, because, 
they said, "You are going over the country 
selling the book, MILLENNIAL DAWN." Did 
we drop the matter here? No; we did 
just as we have learned to do with all 
other things— we took it to the Lord in 
prayer. And shortly we received the 
sample from you with prices so very cheap 
for such beautiful Bibles and Testaments. 
We praise his holy name, and are thankful 
for such a wonderful manifestation of 
God's mercy, love and readiness in giving 
us whatsoever we ask. Enclosed you 
will find money order and a small order 
for books. Yours with greeting to all in 
Christ the Lord, H. H. HYATT. 

Wisconsin. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Many 
thanks for your warning that although 
"the morning cometh"— "also the night" 
or what may be called the increased darkness 
preceding the morning. "It is always 
darkest just before day." As an 
evidence of the darkness— a would-be 
repetition of the dark ages— the following 
clipping from a paper dated May 3 1st, 
1890, is a very fair illustration:— 

"Bishop O'Farrell, of New Jersey, has 
announced in the churches of his diocese 
that he will not confirm any children who 
attend the public schools unless their 
parents can show good reasons for not 
sending them to the parochial schools." 

With the political aspects, so incongruous, 
we have nothing to do. Apparently 
the Church and State will again be 
united, with the beautiful mother and 
her obedient and no longer protesting 
beautiful daughters at the head. 

Let us now work while it is called to-day, 
for soon the night cometh (when the above 
prediction is verified) in which no man 
can work. Human agencies will then be 
unavailing and it will require the power 
of our Lord and his saints, no longer 
men, but spiritual beings, to do the work 
required. 

Yours in Christ, W. M. WRIGHT. 

Virginia. 
TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, DEAR SIRS:- 

Nearly a year ago a little pink tract came 
into my possession some way, I have forgotten 
how. The title, "Calamities, and 
why God permits them," attracted my 
attention, as it was only a short time after 
the Johnstown calamity. I have always 
been a skeptic from childhood, and no 
amount of praying and trying to believe 
did me any good. Even when called 
on to die, as I supposed, I could not believe. 
Or perhaps I really believed, but 
could not get that peace described by 
Christians as so glorious. I have invested 
in all the books which I thought might 
cure me. I could not help but believe in 
evolution, to the exclusion of revelation, 
or even of divinity. Well, I laid the little 
pink tract on my table, thinking I would 
read it the first time I had time. I picked 
it up several times, but did not become 
interested enough to read it; but every 
time I overhauled my table and straightened 



up books and papers, etc., I found 
the little tract. How it always got back 
there I cannot tell, for I thought a dozen 
times that I had disposed of it. To-night 
I saw it on the table again. I opened it, 
got interested and found something I had 
never found before. Well, I cannot describe 
it, but I want to know more of Christ. 
Please send me the "Plan of the Ages," 
in paper. Would be glad if you would 
send me some more tracts of the kind I 
need. I will read and hand to others. 
Respectfully, J. M. P . 

England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your letter 
came duly to hand, also the 100 DAWNS, 
Vol. I. My friend informs me from 
Sheffield that he has received the 50 
DAWNS ordered, also. I should be glad if 
you would send me as soon as you can the 
remainder of the order, as I am out of 
the tracts, Protestants, Awake! The Lord 
willing, I purpose spending a week about 
the middle of next month at Keswick 
Holiness Convention. Many thousands 
of earnest Christians from all parts of 
Great Britain attend it, and I thought it 
would be a good opportunity for scattering 
some "Hail" and also selling DAWN. 
I was up there a few weeks ago and arranged 
with a bookseller to sell them for 
me and gave him one to read himself. So 
I enclose you L2 for 40 copies of Vol. I. 
and 20 copies of Vol. II.— colporteur rate, 
and I should be glad if you would for the 
remainder put in 2000 Arp Slips. I will 
get a small slip printed by this bookseller 
with his name and address and a few 
words of recommendation, and I may have 
a few large posters printed, and I trust by 
these means to sell a good many. I will 
take a lot more with me, to be ready 
should they sell well. The tracts, Protestants, 
Awake! kindly include, as they 
would do well to circulate freely with the 
Arp Slips. 

I see by the May TOWER that you, like 
all God's saints, have had to buy the 
truth and pay for it. Well, praise the 
Lord! having paid the price we know 
some little of its value. But hallelujah! 
it is cheap at any price. Our experience 
during the past few years has been on the 
same lines. And all who love and serve 
God will have tribulation in this age; but 



they that know God put their trust in 
him. I have had to part from some of 
my former dearest friends, or rather they 
have taken themselves off and shun me as 
a heretic. But we can pray for them like 
our blessed Master who said, "Father, 
forgive them, for they know not what they 
do." It has comforted me a good deal, 
since I have seen that with spiritual Israel, 
like fleshly Israel, "blindness in part hath 
happened to them." So I bear with them, 
knowing that the trial of my faith is precious 
in his sight; and by his grace I mean 
to run the race which he has set before us, 
following the footsteps of our blessed 
Redeemer. 

We have a good number of true, earnest 
saints around us who know the truth 
and have been set free, and are spreading 
the seed of truth wherever they go, and 
God is blessing us. 

My wife and sister-in-law, with the 
saints assembled here, join in warmest 
Christian love to yourself and dear wife 
and the saints that with you are looking 
for that blessed hope, the glorious revelation 
of our Savior, Jesus Christ. May 
God abundantly bless you. 

Ever yours, CHARLES W. ELAM. 



R1238 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1890. NO. 10. 



page 1 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

We have reduced the price of the Missionary 
Envelopes, so as to induce as large 
a use of them as possible. We will deliver 
them to you at 25 cents a hundred, or 
$2.00 a thousand. By this very low price, 
which is less than cost, it is hoped to 
stimulate the spread of truth in this form. 



R1239 : page 1 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

This is the title of our new book. It 
is a volume of 494 pages, neatly bound, 
with red edges, in embossed cloth cover. 

It contains 151 choice religious Poems 
and 333 select Hymns, many of which are 
from the well known pens of Whittier, Doudney, 
Titbury, Browning, Mackay, Bryant, 
Havergal, Reed, Janvier, Bonar, Guinness, 
Wince, Smith, Heber, Brown, Upham, 
Watts, Newton, Cowper, Bottome, Doddridge, 
Kelly, Pierpont, Taylor, Bliss, Oberlin, 
Toplady, Gates, Crosby, Wittenmeyer, 
Hastings, Grant, Palmer, Guyon, Phelps, 
Stennett, Brewer, Bowring and many others, 
including some by Sister Russell. 

For a helping hand to lead our hearts 
very close to the Lord, in quiet, solitary 
meditations, and in songs of praise and 
worship, alone or in little assemblages of 
believers, we know of none so helpful as 
this volume of Poems and Hymns of Dawn. 

The retail price through bookstores and 
news-agents is the same as the volumes of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN in cloth binding, 
namely: One dollar a copy. The wholesale 
rate is fifty cents a copy.— ALL WATCH 
TOWER subscribers are supplied at the 
wholesale rate, for any desired quantity, 
without extra charge for postage. 

The price is made thus low because we 
desire that all of the saints may have the 
assistance of this helping hand in their 



communion and devotion. It is good to 
know the truth; it is blessed to obey it; 
and it is then sweet to feed upon it in 
communion and worship. In order that 
the poor of the flock may enjoy the same 
opportunities for communion and growth 
in grace, we renew our offer to supply a 
copy to any who have been on our TOWER 
list for the past year as the Lord's poor, 
if they will write for it, saying that they 
are too poor to afford to purchase the 
volume. 

Let us here remark, what some do not 
appear to understand, that we are now 
supplying Millennial Dawn in cloth binding 
to TOWER subscribers at half the retail 
price— fifty cents per copy— with no 
extra charge for postage. Order as many 
copies as you desire for your own use and 
for loaning to friends and neighbors. 



R1238 : page 1 

EXCEPT A CORN OF WHEAT DIE. 

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a kernel 
of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth 
alone, but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit."— 
John 12:24. 

It has been urged by some that this 
statement proves that the Lord's work for 
mankind was not that of a substitute. We 
hold the very contrary to be the fact: that 
it does teach substitution exactly. 

The words were used a few days before 
our Lord's crucifixion, about the time 
that he began to show the disciples ( Matt. 16:21-23 ) 
how he must suffer many things 
and be killed and be raised again the third 
day, when Peter rebuked him and said, 
"Be it far from thee, Lord," this shall 
not be unto thee, and was in turn rebuked. 
The Lord, in furnishing a reason for his 
death, drew an illustration from nature, 
likening himself to the seed grain whose 
death becomes a source of life to many 
grains of like kind. 

It was the man Christ Jesus who gave 
himself into death, as the necessary means 
under God's plan of bringing other men 
into being. It is too well known to be 
disputed, that if a grain of wheat is 
planted and dies, it brings forth other grains 



like itself, and never produces grains of 
another kind or sort. Then so surely as 
it was the man Jesus who died, it will 
be a race of men like he was when he 
died that in due time will be developed as 
the result of his death. 

The grain of wheat which dies never 
revives, never rises; it is gone forever, it 
has ceased to be; its life is given as a substitute 
for the lives of the grains which receive 
its life and nature instead of it. The 
seed grain gives up its existence as a grain 
that the others may become living grains. 
It goes into nonentity as the others were, 
that they may exist. The Lord's illustration 
is a perfect one, and in full harmony 
with his repeated statement that he would 
lay down his life for the life of the world— 
that he would give his life a ransom (a 
corresponding price) for all. 

Our Lord teaches that having left the 
higher nature and become a man, a 
"kernel of wheat," it was not his purpose 
to abide or continue to live as a 
man. Had he chosen to do so he might 
indeed have preserved his life; he needed 
not to die. But then the very object of 
his taking the human nature (that he 
might become the life-giver to all of 
Adam's death-sentenced race who would 
desire it upon God's conditions) would 
fail of accomplishment. He as the "kernel 
of wheat" might indeed preserve himself, 
as his life was not forfeited, and no cause 
of death was found in him, but thus 
he alone would have life and the race 
of Adam would continue dead or dying, 
under sentence of death without one hope 
of life. Only in one way could the 
many be brought to life— by the death 
of the one in whom was the germ of life. 
And our Lord Jesus himself was that one, 
the only kernel which had a germ of life, 
the only man who had a right to life since 
Adam lost his right by disobedience. 

We have already shown at length that 
to secure for mankind forever the rights 
and privileges of restitution to perfect 
manhood, our Lord's laying down of 
manhood and its rights and privileges was 
forever; that he did not take them back in 
his resurrection; that on the contrary he 
was "put to death in flesh, but made alive 
in spirit," a new creature, of the divine 
nature, spirit and not flesh, heavenly and 
not earthly. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 



Vol. I., page 175, and Vol. II., page 107.) 
This illustration of the kernel of wheat 
shows only the death of the man Christ 
Jesus as our ransom price; it does not 
show his previous condition as a spirit being, 
before he became a man; nor does 
it show his subsequent exaltation far 
above manhood and far above angels and 
principalities and powers, to be a sharer 
of the highest of all natures— the divine 
nature. But it shows well what the 
Master used it to illustrate, viz.: his death 
as a man to give life to many men. 

As the grains which spring up as a result 
of his death receive from him only 
that which he surrenders for them, so all 
the blessings which result directly from 
our Lord's death are human and earthly 
rights, privileges and blessings— those 
lost in Adam are the ones redeemed for 
all by Christ. And it is those very blessings 
that he will restore to all the worthy in 
the "times of restitution of all things." 

How, then, is it that the Church, called 
and drawn during the Gospel age by the 
Father, is offered and is to receive spiritual 
and heavenly blessings through Christ, and 
not a restitution of the earthly favors lost 
in Adam? 

We answer, that is an additional favor 
granted now, or as the Apostle puts it, 
"favor upon favor;" a special call which 
ends with the close of the present age. 
But all thus called to the additional favor 
must first share in the favor of restitution, 
which Christ purchased for all. Justification 
in the present age is the equivalent 
of restitution in the next age, only that it is 
a restitution received by faith instead of an 
actual restitution. Restitution will be the 
making of men actually right or perfect 
as men, the actual restoring to them of all 
that was lost in and by reason of sin. 
Justification is the reckoning of men as 
right or as though perfectly restored to all 
the grand qualities and privileges lost by 
reason of sin. 

As the restored race, in the end of the 
Millennium, will be fully back to harmony 
with God, as though there never had been 
any fall or condemnation, so those now 
justified (or reckoned restored, right and 
perfect) are treated as though there had never 
been a fall or condemnation. They are 
justified freely from all things— justified 
by his blood who redeemed them. They are 



thus restored to the human rights in advance 
of the world in general, though 
only by faith. 

God's object in justifying us, through 
faith in the ransom, is to make us ready 
or fit to have offered to us the additional 
favor referred to above. That additional 
favor is the offer that the justified may, 
during the Gospel age, follow the example 
of their Lord Jesus and offer up (sacrifice) 
their justified selves— their justified manhood, 
after the example of the man Christ 
Jesus, with the promise to such as do so 
that they shall be counted in with their 
Master in the sacrifice (though his sacrifice, 
not ours, possesses the merit or value 
which pays for the sins of the whole 
world), and that as he was raised up from 
death, no more a man, but highly exalted 
to the divine nature, so they shall also be 
made sharers of the same high honor and 
glory with him, and under him as their 
Lord. 

Now (says the Apostle, referring to 
the Gospel age) is the day of this great 
offer of this great salvation: "Now is the 
acceptable time"— the time when God 
agreed to accept such sacrifices— justified 
through faith in Jesus' blood and presented 
in his name and merit. 

Brethren, I beseech all who have presented 
themselves thus and who have been 
received as holy and acceptable in Christ, 
that ye make good your covenant of sacrifice 
—even unto death, and that you let 
no man beguile you of this reward which 
God hath promised, by turning aside your 
pure minds from the simplicity of these 
good tidings, to human philosophizing and 
theorizing. For other hopes are merely the 
earthly, the human, though the promises 
made to the heavenly class be misapplied 
to them. 



R1239 :page 1 

THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD. 



In our present trial-state, while we walk 
by faith and not by sight, the question as 
to the leadings of divine providence is 
often a perplexing one to many. In many 
instances the discerning and experienced 
children of God can see very serious errors 



in the course of some who suppose 
they are following the leadings of divine 
providence, but who in fact are far astray 
from the Lord's expressed will. 

Ah! says one, there was a peculiar coincidence 
in my life, or a peculiar train of 
circumstances which indicated to me my 

R1239 : page 2 

course of action, and I am so persuaded 
that the leading was of the Lord, that 
nothing can move me from my course. 
Who has not met some instances where 
the delusion was so strong that even the 
Word of God had no power to dispel it? 
The subject, therefore, is one worthy of 
very careful consideration; for certain it 
is that God does lead, direct and discipline 
his children not only by his written 
word, but also by making the circumstances 
of life work together for their good. 

But how, then, shall we account for the 
misleadings as well as the true leadings of 
some who, we have abundant reason to 
believe, are God's children. From the 
Scriptures we learn not only that all 
things shall work together for good to 
them that love God, to the called according 
to his purpose, that God's eye is upon 
all their ways, and that not a hair of their 
heads shall fall to the ground without his 
notice, but we also learn that the prince 
of this world has power to deceive and to 
lead astray many, and that if it were possible, 
he would deceive even the very elect. 

The elect, therefore, are the only class 
who cannot be deceived. God is pledged 
to see to it that they shall not be deceived 
either by circumstances, appearances or 
perversions of his Word. Who are these 
favored elect ones who are so guarded and 
protected on every side, that no weapon 
that is formed against them can by any 
means prosper? ( Isa. 54:17 .) We answer, 
they are the called and faithful and 
chosen ones. Many are called, but few 
are faithful to the conditions of the call, 
and few, therefore, are chosen. We are 
told that a thousand of the called ones 
shall fall at our side and ten thousand at 
our right hand, but that that which shall 
cause their fall will not come near the elect. 
They cannot be moved. 

In the fullest sense no one is elected to 
membership in the body of Christ until 



he has finished his course of self-sacrifice, 
even unto death. And yet from the moment 
of consecration we are reckoned as 
of the elect, and treated as such to the 
end, unless at some point in our course 
we prove unworthy of the favor, and as 
unfruitful branches are lopped off from 
our connection with the vine, which is 
Christ. 

Consequently, those assurances of preservation 
in the midst of the pestilences 
and flying arrows of this evil day are only 
to the called and faithful— to those who 
have heeded the heavenly calling, presented 
their bodies living sacrifices, and who, 
true to their covenant, are keeping the 
sacrifice on the altar. These cannot fall; 
it is impossible to deceive them; and no 
weapon that is formed against them can 
prosper. So in this day when the pestilence 
of infidelity is raging, and the sanitary 
condition of the public mind forebodes 
a wide prevalence of the disease, 
and when the disease is taking on its most 
insidious and destructive forms, every 
consecrated child of God needs to look 
well to the spiritual condition of his system 
in general, to see that self-will is indeed 
dead, and that in simplicity of heart 
he is walking in the Master's footprints. 

We need to bear in mind that the glorified 
church is to be but a little flock, 
possibly only a literal hundred and forty-four 
thousand ( Rev. 7:4 ); that in all 
probability the majority of that number 
long ago finished their course and fell 
asleep in hope of the first resurrection, 
and that only a very small and very 
choice company is now desired to complete 
the church. The heavenly Bridegroom 
desires for his bride only those 
proved faithful under all the tests applied. 
But those rejected from that position are 
not cut off from all favor; they are simply 
not wanted in that near relationship. 
Consequently their deception is permitted 
for a time; and, like unfaithful Israel, for 
a time they stumble and fall; but if not 
persistently wilful they will yet be recovered 
out of the snare of the Adversary, 
though probably not until their opportunity 
to be of the bride of Christ is past. 

Just as God permitted Satan to deceive 
Eve as to the result of her disobedience 
when she really desired to disobey God; 
as he permitted circumstances and surroundings 



to deceive unworthy Israel, who 

were too proud to receive the humble Nazarene 

as the promised Messiah and King, 

and to blind them to the spiritual blessings 

of the Gospel Age, reserved for the 

meek and faithful few; as he has for centuries 

permitted the delusions and deceptive 

appearances of Antichrist to flourish 

and deceive all who loved the world 

and desired the mere outward forms of 

godliness, so that the faithful few only 

would follow Christ through privations and 

persecutions; and as in the end of the 

Millennial Age he will again permit all 

those unworthy of life, because at heart 

disloyal to God, to be deceived with the 

delusive hope of life, regardless of that 

merit which alone can secure it; so we 

must not be surprised to find some now 

fully persuaded to a course contrary to the 

expressed will of God, on account of certain 

deceptions and delusions which have 

power over them because of some unfaithfulness 

on their part toward God and the 

covenant of consecration they had made 

with him. 

While, therefore, the saints may and do 
rejoice in the manifest leadings of divine 
providence in the shaping of their course 
and their guidance in it toward the prize 
of their high calling, according to the 
precious promises above referred to, if 
they would not be deceived by a permitted 
counterfeit leading of the adversary, 
which will seem to be in the right direction, 
but which will actually be misleading, 
they must look well to it that they 
are carefully fulfilling the conditions under 
which alone such promises of safe 
leading can be claimed. They must see 
to it that they are still abiding in Christ, 
that they are faithful to their covenant of 
self-sacrifice, and hence still of the elect 
body of Christ, to whom the safe and sure 
leading is promised by him who will never 
leave us nor forsake us, so long as we 
humbly and faithfully abide in him. 
"There is a way which seemeth right unto 
a man, but the end thereof are the 
ways of death" ( Prov. 16:25 )— if pursued 
to the end. But we may hope that 
many, who through some unfaithfulness 
are for a time beguiled into error of doctrine 
or of practice, may yet be recovered 
from the snare of the adversary. 

And if one so ensnared should, on examination 



of his own heart, discover his 

deflection from the straight course and 

quickly repent of it, and again, from the 

standpoint of a thorough determination 

to greater faithfulness, view his course, 

God will indeed "show unto him the 

path of life" and give him grace to walk 

in it. For it is written, "If any man sin, 

we have an Advocate with the Father." 

( 1 John 2:1 .) Consequently, while there 

is need for great watchfulness and carefulness, 

there is no cause for discouragement 

on the part of any who are faithful, or 

who in view of past unfaithfulness are sincerely 

repentant and very diligent in efforts 

to overcome weaknesses and 

hindrances. 

The faithful, consecrated ones, therefore, 
may recognize the circumstances of their 
daily life, from the time of their consecration, 

R1240 : page 2 

as shaped by the Lord. If they have severe 
trials and testings of faith, of patience 
or of endurance; or if they have 
great obstacles and difficulties to surmount 
in accomplishing their fervent desire to 
do the Lord's will and the Lord's work; 
these should all be regarded as so many 
favors of God which thus afford them opportunities 
of overcoming and of proving 
their faithfulness. Or if in the faithful pursuance 
of their course an unseen hand gently 
smooths the way at times, and grants 
a sweet refreshment whereby new strength 
may be gathered for future trials, this too 
may be gratefully recognized as the same 
divine providence. 

"If [for a time] on a quiet sea 

To our haven we calmly sail, 
With grateful hearts, O God, to thee, 

We'll own the favoring gale. 

"But should the surges rise 

And rest delay to come, 
Blest be the sorrow, kind the storm, 

That drives us nearer home." 

But if because of a decline of zeal for 
God, or a waning spirituality, we find ourselves 
smoothly drifting along with little 
to disturb or oppose us, there is indeed 
great room for fear. And though God 
may permit such for a long time to thus 



drift away, and even effectually separate 
themselves from the body of Christ, as 
surely as he loves them the surges of trouble 
will by and by rise about them for their 
discipline and correction. 

Thus it will be seen that from the 
standpoint of faithfulness or unfaithfulness 
our experiences may be very differently 
regarded. Therefore, if any of the 
consecrated have been unfaithful to their 
privileges, let them beware of the leadings 
of circumstances, etc. But the faithful 
may rejoice in all things and in every 
thing give thanks; for "all things [whether 
seemingly favorable or unfavorable] 
shall work together for good to them." 
MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1240 : page 2 

THE FALL AND THE RESTITUTION. 

The fall and the restitution of all things 
are more intimately associated than some 
seem to realize. 

Some claim to believe in the "times 
of restitution" mentioned by the Apostle 
in Acts 3:17-19 , who think of it as relating 
to the physical earth. They get 
the wrong idea from the Lord's words to 
Adam when he cast him out of Eden, 
"Cursed is the ground for thy sake." 
They somehow infer that the entire earth 
was like the Garden of Eden up to that 
time, and that there God caused a blight 
to come upon it because of sin. This is 
all wrong. It represents God as doing a 
great and useless work, as if he had not 
foreseen the fall of man and had been 
surprised by that sudden turn of events. 
It was because the entire earth was in a 
very imperfect [condemnable or cursed] 
state that God specially prepared or 
planted a garden or perfect spot eastward 
in Eden,* as a suitable place for the trial 
of the perfect man he was about to create, 
and as an illustration of what the whole earth 
shall be at the close of the Millennium, 
when the worthy of mankind shall have 
been tested and brought back to perfection. 
Thus seen, the earth, at the time 
God created Adam, lacked 7000 years of 
preparation, to make it all ready for man. 

God's foreknowledge of Adam's course, 



while it was not allowed to influence 
Adam, did influence God's own conduct 
with reference to Adam. Seeing how man, 
inexperienced in the use of his great liberty, 
would soon disobey his law and 
come under its penalty, death, God arranged 
the entire plan of redemption and 
salvation with respect to this foreknowledge. 
He therefore introduced man upon 
the earth 7000 years before the earth 
would be properly ready for him, gave him 
a fair trial in the prepared "garden," and 
since, has let him have his experiences 
with sin and death in connection with the 
earth, and as a convict, to labor upon what 
God designs shall be the everlasting home 
of the obedient. 

So then, a restitution of the earth 
would be far from a blessing— it would 
mean its return to a state of chaos. 

Others who advocate an evolution doctrine 
use the word restitution with reference 
to man, and seem not to observe the 
inconsistency of such language in connection 
with other features of their theory. 
They believe that Adam was called man, 
not because he was really a man, but because 
he was the start or beginning of what 
would become a man. This evolution 
theory declares by one of its advocates 
that "If Adam fell at all, he fell upward." 

For those who hold and teach such 
views to say that they believe in restitution 
is truly ludicrous. If Adam was not 
a perfect man, if he fell upward, and if 
his race to-day is more nearly perfect 
than he was, then the last thing to be 
hoped for, and the very thing above all to 
be if possible avoided, would be a time of 
restitution. 

But how simple, consistent and plain 
all is when God's Word is the guide and 
the sophistries of error are discarded. 

The fall from divine favor by the wilful 
sin of disobedience, the sentence of 
death, the ransom once for all, the only 
hope of salvation, the 6000 years of groaning 
and dying and hoping and longing 
on the part of mankind, the coming 
of the one who redeemed all with his 
own precious blood [life] to restore all 
things which God hath promised by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began— this is the Bible testimony. 
Do you believe it? Do you believe the 
testimony of the prophets, of the Lord, 



and of the apostles? Search and see; for 
this is the story of paradise lost, redeemed 
and restored, which they all declare. 



*The word Eden signifies delight —God planted 
the garden eastward in the most delightful portion 
of the earth as to climate, etc. 



R1200 : page 2 

FROM RUSSIA TO PALESTINE. 



In consequence of the enforcing of an 
edict unfavorable to the Jews by the government 
of Russia, vast numbers of that 
people are emigrating to Brazil and to 
Palestine. The matter has attracted world-wide 
attention through the secular press, 
so that it is only needful to make mention 
of it in a general way as another step in 
the direction that all events are pointing— 
to the fulfilment of God's prophecy concerning 
the events of the Day of the Lord 
in which we are living. 



R1241 : page 2 

A NEW REQUIREMENT FOR CATHOLICS. 

Under this heading, the Chicago Herald 
of Sept. 1st says: 

"With the re-opening of the parochial schools to-day 
a new policy is to be inaugurated by the clergy 
of the archdiocese in relation to children attending 
the public schools. Hitherto there has been 
comparative liberality extended in the admission of 
children attending public schools to the sacraments 
of confirmation and communion. A few months' 
attendance at the parochial school was all that was 
thought necessary to insure a child's being instructed 
in religion sufficiently to be admitted to the 
sacraments. And, in some cases, even attendance 
at Sunday-school was considered adequate. But 
from to-day all this is to be changed. 

"Children will not be allowed to receive the sacraments 
without previously attending for at least 
twelve months a parochial school." 

Can this be the fulfilment of prophecy 
of Rev. 16:4-7 , when the third angel 
poured his vial into the rivers (universities 



and colleges of learning), and into 
the fountains (the common schools and 
lesser institutions of learning, and perhaps 
including the books and newspapers) of 
water (knowledge, pure water, the truth, 
or knowledge of the truly muddy water, 
the truth or knowledge of it obscured by 
traditions of men), and they became blood 
(symbolic of strife and perhaps actual 
war)? W. M. WRIGHT. 



R1240 : page 3 

A SAINT IN THE SHADOW. 



I walk through darkened paths, yet know 

My Father marks the way I go. 

I cannot see his tender smile, 

But feel his clasping hand the while; 

And since he heeds the sparrow's fall, 

I trust his love, in spite of all. 

Borne through the dark by loving arms, 
I sometimes shrink with vague alarms, 
Yet closer cling that I may hear 
The voice that whispers in mine ear. 
"O trembling soul," it says to me, 
"Rest in the love that clings to thee!" 

I cannot tell if long the way 
By which I go, through night to day; 
But, soon or late, I know my feet 
Will walk in sunshine, broad and sweet; 
And, soon or late, before mine eyes 
The radiant hills of peace uprise. 
— Selected. 



R1237 : page 3 

THE TABERNACLE'S 
TEACHINGS. 



(CONTINUED FROM THE AUGUST TOWER.) 



ANOTHER TYPE 

OF THE DAY OF ATONEMENT SACRIFICES. 

LEVITICUS 9 . 

This chapter seems to give a more condensed 



picture of the work and sacrifices 
of the Day of Atonement than the one 
already examined ( 16 .), and in addition, 
it furnishes certain features which, after 
the consideration of the sixteenth, will be 
of interest to us. It is another picture of 
the Atonement. 

"And Moses saith, This is the thing 
which the Lord commanded that ye 
should do: and the glory of the Lord 
shall appear unto you. And Moses said 
unto Aaron, Go unto the Altar and offer 
thy sin-offering and thy burnt-offering 
and make an atonement for thyself [the 
members of his body required it] and for 
the people" [the world]. 

This shows how Jesus [the bullock sacrifice 
for sins] was sufficient to redeem 
both his body, the "little flock," and 
also the whole world of mankind. Our 
share in the sin-offering could have been 
dispensed with entirely; we might have 
been saved from death and restored to 
perfection of human nature, just as all 
mankind will be. But it pleased Jehovah 
not only to choose Jesus to this great 
work of sacrifice, but also to make him 
the Captain or Head of his "Church, 
which is his Body," who, as well as their 
Captain, should be made perfect as SPIRITUAL 
beings, by suffering as sin-offerings, 
in the flesh. 

Paul, referring to our intimate relationship 
to our Head, says: "Blessed be the 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings 
in heavenly places [the "Holy" 
and the "Most Holy"] in Christ; according 
as he hath CHOSEN US in him before the 
foundation of the world— to the praise of 
the glory of his grace, wherein he hath 
[justified or] made us accepted in the 
beloved." ( Eph. 1:4,6 .) God "called 
you by our gospel to the obtaining of the 
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ" ( 2 Thes. 2:14 ), 
so that "if we suffer with him, we 
shall also reign with him."— 2 Tim. 2:12 . 

To continue— After offering his own 
sacrifice once for all, he was to "offer 
the offering of the people [the goat], and 
make an atonement for them [all Israel] 
as Jehovah commanded." (This arrangement 
for our having part in the sacrifice 
of atonement was a part of our Father's 
original plan, as Paul also attests.) 

"Aaron therefore went unto the altar 



and slew the calf [Heb., young bullock] 
of the sin-offering which was for [instead 
of, a substitute for] himself. And the sons 
of Aaron brought the blood unto him, and 
he dipped his finger in the blood and put it 
on the horns of the altar; but the fat, [etc.] 
the flesh and the hide he burned with fire 
without the camp. And he slew the 
burnt-offering [a ram], and Aaron's sons 
presented unto him the blood, which he 
sprinkled round about upon the altar. 
And they presented the burnt-offering 
unto him; and he did wash the inwards 
and the legs, and burnt them upon the 
burnt-offering on the altar, with the pieces 
thereof and the head." (Much the same 
account as in the 16th chapter , and having 
the same significance. See August TOWER.) 

Thus the burnt-offering of Jesus has 
been burning all through the Gospel Age, 
giving evidence to all in the "Court" of 
God's acceptance of him and the acceptance 
of all the members of the body- 
laid to the head, on the altar. 

"And he brought the people's offering, 
and took the goat which was the sin-offering 
for the people [not for the Priests and 
Levites] and slew it and offered it for sin 
as the first," i.e., treated it exactly as he 
treated the bullock. This goat is the same 
as the "Lord's goat" in the other picture, 
the scape-goat and the other features 
being omitted in this more general view. 
It is, however, confirmatory of the teaching, 
that only those who follow the Lord's 
footsteps are participants in the sin-offering. 

"And he brought the burnt-offering 
and offered it according to the [usual] 
manner. And he brought the meat-offering, 
and took a handful of it and offered 
it upon the altar beside the burnt-sacrifice 
of the morning." 

"He slew also the bullock and the 
ram for a sacrifice of peace-offerings which 
was for the people." The peace-offering, 
as already described, represents a vow or 
covenant. By this peace-offering, made 
in connection with the sin-offering of the 
High Priest, is signified the covenants 
and promises based on the sin-offering. 
In the type, the peace was established between 
Jehovah and Israel on this wise: 
The sin-offering having been made, also 
the burnt-offering showing the acceptableness 
of it to God, there was peace between 
Jehovah and Israel because their 



former Adamic sin was typically removed; 
and they were obligated to now live obedient 
to a covenant based on their forgiveness 
— i.e. they were to keep the Law— that 
he that doeth those things should live by 
(or as a reward for keeping) them. But 
as our sin-sacrifices are better than the 
typical ones, so with the peace-offering or 
covenant established by those sacrifices: 
it is a better covenant. Thus in this sacrifice 
of peace, or covenant-offering, the 
Priest is seen to serve unto the example 
and shadow of spiritual things— the mediator 
of a better covenant ( Heb. 8:6-13 ), 
under which all people shall be blessed 
with RESTITUTION, and thus be enabled to 
obey the perfect law and live forever. 

"And Aaron lifted up his hand toward 
the people and blessed them and came 
down from offering of the sin-offering, 
and the burnt-offering and peace-offerings." 
Thus in the type we see illustrated 
the fact that though the blessing is not 
fully due to come upon the people until 
all sacrifices are finished, yet a measure of 
blessing comes upon mankind from the 
members of the Priest, even now during 
the age of sacrifice, before we all go into 
the "Most Holy" or spiritual condition. 

"And Moses and Aaron went into the 
tabernacle of the congregation, and came 
out and blessed the people." 

When this day (age) of sacrifice is over, 
the complete Priest (head and body) will 
appear before God, and give evidence of 
having met all the claims of the law against 
the people (the world). It will be noticed 
that while the Type of Lev. 16 th divides 
the work of the Atonement Day, and 
shows all the particulars of how the Lord's 
sacrifice first makes ours worthy of acceptance, 
etc., this type shows the entire work 
of the Gospel age as successive offerings, 
yet joined really in one— all the sufferings 
of Christ, when ended, followed at once 
by restitution blessings. The going in of 
Moses, also, seems to say, The Law is fully 
satisfied and its righteousness vindicated in 
the sacrifice of Christ. The Law (represented 
in the type by Moses) will testify on 
behalf of the world, that it is justified to 
life through the sacrifices of the Priest 
who "offered up himself." 

When presented, the entire sacrifice was 
"holy, acceptable to God," and Moses 
and Aaron came out, and together they 



blessed the people. So in the incoming 
age, the Christ will bless all the families 
of the earth ( Gal. 3:8,16,29 ; Gen. 12:3 ), 
yet not by setting aside or ignoring 
the Law of God and excusing sin, but by 
restoring men to perfection of humanity, 
in which condition they will be able to 
keep the perfect Law of God, and be 
blessed by it. Blessed by the Priest, made 
perfect and able to keep the Law, its condition 
of "do and live" will be a great 
blessing to all men; for whosoever will 
may then obey and live forever in happiness 
and communion with Jehovah. 

"And the glory of the Lord appeared 
unto all the people." As the blessing 
progresses (restoring and elevating the 
race mentally and physically) the results 
will become manifest. The people— the 
world in general— will recognize God's 
gracious love, more and more each day. 
Thus it will be, that "the glory of the 
Lord will be revealed, and all flesh shall 
see it together." ( Isa. 40:5 .) They will 
come to see, gradually, the length and 
breadth and height and depth of the love of 
God, which surpasseth all understanding. 

It is worthy of note that the blessing 
here mentioned was not a blessing to the 
under-priests. No; they were represented 
in the blesser— in Aaron. The blessing 
came on all the people of Israel, who, in 
type, represented the world. It is this 
blessing of the world by the "SEED"— 
the entire Christ, after all the afflictions 
are filled up by the Body ( Col. 1:24 ) 
—that Paul refers to, saying, "The 
whole creation [humanity] groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together.. .waiting 
for the manifestation of the sons of God." 
Before they can experience deliverance 
from the bondage of corruption [sin and 
death] and restoration to the liberty of 
sons of God [freedom from condemnation, 
sin and death, etc.], as enjoyed by God's 
first human son, Adam ( Luke 3:38 ), the 
Atonement Day sacrifices must be finished, 
and the priests who sacrificed must be 
clothed with the royal, divine authority 
and power to thus set them free. 

It is doubtless this same blessing of all 
the people— salvation from death and its 
sting, sin— that Paul refers to, saying: 
"UNTO THEM THAT LOOK FOR HIM 
SHALL HE APPEAR THE SECOND TIME WITHOUT 
SIN [without any contamination from 



those sins borne for sinners] unto salvation." 

( Heb. 9:28 .) The world has seen 

the Priest— head and body— suffer as a sin-offering); 

during this age: Jesus was manifested 

to the Jews in the flesh (as a sin-offering); 

and as Paul could say, so can 

all the followers in his footsteps say, 

"Christ is manifest in our mortal flesh." 

( 2 Cor. 4:11 .) As the whole Christ has 

thus been manifest and suffered in the 

flesh, so they shall also be "glorified together" 

before the world; for the glory 

[the blessing and salvation] of the Lord 

shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it 

together." When he shall appear, we also 

shall appear with him in glory. ~ 

Col. 3:4 . 

But this great High Priest of the world 
will be recognized only by "them that 
look for him." If he were to appear in the 
flesh, in the sky, or elsewhere, it would be 
an appearance to all, whether looking for 
him or not; but we have already seen 
that the Scriptures teach that the Head 
has been perfected as a spirit being, and 
that his "little flock" shall be made "like 
him," spirit beings, of the divine nature, 
which no man hath seen nor can see. 
( 1 Tim. 6:16 .) We have seen that the way 
in which the world will see the glorified 
Church will be by mental perception, in 
the same sense that a blind person may 
properly be said to see. In the same 
sense we now see the prize, the "crown 
of life," "while we look not at the things 
which are seen, but at the things which 
are not seen [by physical sight]; for the 
things which are seen are temporal, but 
the things which are not seen are eternal." 
( 2 Cor. 4:18.) It is in this way that the 
entire Church of this age has been "looking 
unto Jesus;" thus "we see Jesus."— 
Heb. 2:9 and 12:2 . 

This is the only way in which the human 
can see or recognize things on the 
spiritual plane. Jesus expressed this same 
idea to the disciples, that they who recognized 
his spirit or mind, and thus knew 
him, would be acquainted with the Father 
also in the same way. "If ye had 
known me, ye should have known my 
Father also; and from henceforth ye 
know him and have seen him." This is 
the only sense in which the world will 
ever see God, for "no man hath seen 
God at any time" ["whom no man hath 



seen, nor can see"]— "the only begotten 

Son, he hath declared him." ( 1 Tim. 6:16 ; 

John 1:18 .) Jesus revealed or 

caused his disciples to see him by making 

known his character— revealing him 

as the God of Love. 

It was in the same way that the Papal 
system was shown by Luther and others, 
and seen by many, as the Antichrist; or as 
Paul had foretold, that wicked system— 
the man of sin, was then revealed. 

Thus it is that Jesus, the head (now 
present to gather the jewels), is being now 
revealed to the living members of the 
"little flock," though others know not of 
his presence.— Luke 17:26-30 . 

Thus also it will be in the Millennial 
day, when the complete Christ— the Priest 
—is revealed; he will be revealed only 
to those that look for him, and only those 
shall see him. They will see him, not by 
physical sight, but as we now see all spiritual 
things— Jesus, the Father, the prize, 
etc.— by the eye of faith. Men will not see 
the Christ by physical sight, for the same 
reason that they will never see Jehovah; 
because on a different plane of being- 
one spirit, the other flesh. But we (the 
little flock) shall see him as he is, for we 
shall be like him.— 1 John 3:2 . 

But, though only those who look shall 
be able to recognize the Christ as the deliverer 
who will save them from the dominion 
of death, yet this will embrace all 
the world, for the manner of revelation 
will be such that ultimately all must see. 
Every eye shall see him; and all in their 
graves, being then awakened, even they 
that pierced him will realize that they 
crucified the Lord of glory. "He shall 
be revealed [In the sky? No!] in flaming 
fire [judgments], taking vengeance on those 
that know not [acknowledge not] God, and 
that obey not the gospel of Christ." It will 
not take long for all mankind to recognize 
him under such circumstances. Now the 

R1237 : page 4 

good suffer; then shall ye discern between 

him that serveth the Lord, and him that 

serveth him not; for in that day the distinction 

will be manifested. ( Mai. 3:15-18 .) 

Then all, seeing clearly, may 

accept of him and have everlasting life; 

for "We trust in the living God, who is 



the Savior of all men, specially of those 
that believe."-- 1 Tim. 4:10 . 

This the types illustrate— "And as it is 
appointed unto men [Aaron and his successors, 
who were only types of the High 
Priest of the new creation] once to die 
[typically, as represented in the animal 
slain], and after this [following as a result 
of those sacrifices] the judgment [of God, 
manifesting approval or disapproval of 
the sacrifice], so Christ [head and body, 
the true, Royal Priesthood] was once 
offered [never will it be repeated] to bear 
the sins of many ["every man"]; and 
unto them that look for him, he shall appear 
the second time, without sin [not 
blemished by the sins borne, nor to repeat 
the sin-offering, but] unto salvation"— 
to give the redeemed life to all who desire 
it upon God's conditions of faith and 
obedience.- Heb. 9:27,28 . 

Every time a Priest went into the Most 
Holy on the Atonement Day he risked 
his life; for if his sacrifice had been imperfect 
he would have died as he passed 
the second Vail. Neither would he have 
been accepted into the Most Holy himself, 
nor would his imperfect sacrifice have been 
acceptable as an atonement for the sins of 
the people. Hence any failure meant his 
death, and the continuance in condemnation 
of all whose sins he attempted to cover 
or propitiate. This was the "judgment." 
Jesus, our Priest, passed this judgment successfully; 
his sacrifice was acceptable, as 
evidenced in his sending the blessing at 
Pentecost, which was a guarantee or assurance 
that ultimately he [and we in him] 
would come forth to bless the people— the 
world, for whose sins he fully and acceptably 
atoned. 

Many have been looking in an indefinite 
way for a good time to come, for the 
removal in some manner of the curse of 
sin and dying and general evil; but they 
have not understood the long delay. They 
do not realize that the sacrifice of the Day 
of Atonement is necessary before the glory 
and blessing can come. "The whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together 
until now, waiting [though in ignorance] 
for the manifestation of the sons of 
God."- Rom. 8:19,22 . 

"And there came a fire out from before 
the Lord, and consumed upon the 
altar the burnt-offering and the fat, which, 



when all the people saw, they shouted and 
fell on their faces"— worshipped. This 
is the same thought expressed in another 
form. The fire symbolizes God's acceptance; 
its recognition by the people shows 
that the world will realize the sacrifice 
and its value in God's estimation as the 
price of their liberty from death and the 
grave; and when they realize it, they will 
worship Jehovah and his representative, 
the Priest. 

How beautifully these types teach a 
restitution, and a full ransom for all the 
people, and a blessing to come upon all. 
Nothing in the types seems to make a distinction 
between the living and the dead, 
and some may be inclined to infer that 
when the sacrifices of the High Priest are 
over, and the blessing commences, only 
those who are then living will be greatly 
benefited. But we answer, Nay, in God's 
estimation the living and the dead are alike; 
he speaks of them all as dead; all died in 
Adam, and all the little spark of life 
which any man possesses is really but one 
stage of dying. It is a dead race because 
of the sin of Adam, and it will be a race 
justified at the close of the Day of Atonement, 
to the same life he enjoyed and 
forfeited; and all who will, may have 
back life, liberty, favor of God and all 
that was lost, whether they have gone all 
the way down into death, or whether they 
still linger on the brink— in "the valley of 
the shadow of death." 

This is the object of the sin-offerings; 
to release mankind from the dominion of 
death and restore them to the perfection 
of being which is essential to perfect 
happiness and at-one-ment with the Creator. 
This is the blessing which comes to 
all the families of the earth through The 
Seed of Abraham. This is the good news 
which was preached to Abraham, as we 
read: "God, foreseeing that he would 
justify the heathen [all mankind— Gentiles] 
through faith, preached before the 
gospel [good tidings] to Abraham, saying, 
In thee, and in thy seed, shall all nations 
be blessed [justified]. ..which Seed is 
Christ [primarily the head, and secondarily 
the body]; and if ye be Christ's [members] 
then are ye Abraham's seed, and 
heirs according to the promise" referred 
to— viz.: that these may bless all the 
families of the earth. ( Gal. 3:16,19 .) 



But the Seed must be complete before the 
blessing comes, as shown in the type just 
considered:— The sin-offering must be 
ended before all the blessings resulting 
can flow out. 

While the sacrifices of the people (Israel 
—the world) belong to the next age, 
and will then be presented to the Priests, 
yet in a certain sense this has a very 
slight beginning now. Thus it is that 
the worldly man possessed of wealth is 
in that sense a steward of God's things, 
and can use that "mammon" and with 
it make for himself friends; that when 
this age of Satan's rule is ended, and the 
reign of Christ commences, in which he 
shall no longer be a steward, then those 
whom he thus favored will bless him. If the 
worldly stewards of wealth (the mammon 
or god of this age) were wise, they would 
use more of their means thus. For whosoever 
shall give even a cup of cold water unto 
one of the least of these (Priests) shall by 
no means lose his reward when the kingdom 
of Christ is organized and its rule 
begins.- Luke 16:1-8 and Matt. 10:42 . 

The restriction that the High Priest alone 
went into the Most Holy once a year to 
make an atonement should not be misunderstood 
to mean that he and the under-priests 
never went in thither during succeeding 
days— after the Atonement Day 
had made full reconciliation for sins. 
On the contrary, the High Priest went 
in there often in after days. It was into 
the Most Holy that the High Priest went 
whenever he would inquire for Israel, using 
the breast-plate of Judgment, the Urim 
and Thummim. Again, whenever they 
broke camp, which was often, the Priests 
went in and took down the Vails and 
wrapped up the Ark, and all the holy vessels, 
before the Levites could carry them. 
-Num. 4:5-16 . 

Again, whenever an Israelite offered a 
sin-offering unto the priests (after the 
"Day of Atonement" sacrifices were 
over), they all ate it in the Most Holy. 
( Num. 18:10 .) So with the antitype, 
after the present "Day of Atonement" 
is over; the "Royal Priesthood" shall be 
in the Most Holy or perfect spiritual condition, 
and there accept (eat) the sacrifices 
for sin, brought by the world for 
their own transgressions— not the Adamic 
sins which were canceled on the Day of 



Atonement. There, in the perfect spiritual 
condition, the priesthood shall instruct 
in every matter, as represented in 
the decisions and answers given to Israel 
by the Urim and Thummim. 

R1237 : page 4 

SACRIFICES, SUBSEQUENT TO THE 
DAY OF ATONEMENT. 

Those sacrifices which do not belong to 
the class we denominate the "Day of 
Atonement sacrifices" illustrate offerings 
and sacrifices which belong to the Millennial 
Age. 

As in the type the Day of Atonement 
sacrifices preceded all others, and were a 
basis of general forgiveness and acceptance 
with God for all Israel, but were 
followed by other sacrifices after that day, 
for individual sins, termed "sin-offerings," 
"trespass-offerings," etc., so it will be in 
the antitype. After the sacrifices of this 
Gospel Age shall have brought the world 
into a justified condition, there will still be 
sins and trespasses committed, which will 
require confession and reconciliation, making 
these after-sacrifices necessary. 

The Atonement Day sacrifices represent 
the cancellation of Adamic sin by the sacrifice 
of the Christ, but during the Millennium, 
while the benefits of that atonement 
are being applied to the world, while they 
are being gradually restored to actual perfection 
and life and harmony with God, 
errors will be committed, for which they 
will be in some measure individually responsible. 
For such they must make 
some amend, accompanied by repentance, 
before they can be again in harmony with 
God through Christ their Mediator. 

Consecration will be also in order in the 
next age, though, owing to the changed 
government of the world, consecration will 
no longer, as now, mean unto death, but 
on the contrary it will be unto life, for 
with the close of Satan's reign comes the 
end of pain, sorrow and death, except upon 
evil-doers. Consecration must always 
be a voluntary presentation of one's powers, 
and hence this is represented in some 
of the sacrifices after the Atonement-Day. 

As the basis of all forgiveness of sins in 
the next age will be the "Day of Atonement 
sacrifices," it would be appropriate 



in the type for the sinner to bring some 
sacrifice which would indicate a recognition 
of those sacrifices, as the ground 
for forgiveness anew. And so we find 
that all offerings of the people after the 
Day of Atonement were of a kind which 
pointed back to, or recognized, the sacrifices 
of that day. These offerings might 
be of cattle, or sheep, or fowl (turtle 
doves or young pigeons), or of fine flour, 
the article offered depending on the ability 
of the offerer. 

During the Millennial Age all men 
"will come to a knowledge of the truth," 
and be saved from the curse of Adamic 
death. ( 1 Tim. 2:4 .) When we remember 
that this death includes all the sickness, 
pain and imperfection to which humanity 
is now subject, we see that God's 
plan includes a full restoration to human 
perfection; but perfection will come gradually, 
and it will require the co-operation 
of the sinner's WILL to ever reach it. He 
must do what he can to climb up again to 
perfection, and will have all the assistance 
necessary. This is shown by these sacrifices 
in general; they were to be according 
to every man's ability. If very much 
degraded by sin and very imperfect, he 
must, when he comes to a knowledge of 
the truth, present himself to God. If thus 
poor and degraded he may bring a dove, 
or pigeon; when less degraded, a goat; 
and when perfect as a man his offering may 
be a bullock. Just as a bullock was used to 
typify the perfect humanity (much fat) 
of Jesus' sacrifice, and as a goat (wayward 
and lean) was used to represent our 
imperfect human nature in the sacrifices 
of this Atonement Day, so those animals 
similarly represent the offerers (Israel- 
typical of the then believing world) in 
their consecrations. But it should be remembered 
that these Burnt offerings and 
Peace offerings of the future represent the 
people as consecrating —giving themselves 
to the Lord. They do not represent atonement 
sacrifices as the sin offerings of 
the Atonement Day do. 

When the whole world has been brought 
to perfection there will be no longer any 
who are poor in this sense— in the sense of 
deficiency of mental, moral or physical 
ability; all will be perfect men and their 
offerings will be their perfect selves, typified 
by bullocks. David, speaking of this, 



says: "Then shalt thou be pleased with the 
sacrifices of righteousness (of right doing), 
with burnt offering and whole burnt offering 
then shall they offer bullocks (perfect 
sacrifices) upon thine altar." ( Psa. 51:19 .) 
Yet that David's language should not be 
understood to teach the restoration of the 
literal, bloody, typical sacrifices is evident, 
for in the same connection he says, 
"Thou desirest not sacrifice" (the typical) 
broken spirit; and a contrite heart, O 
God, thou wilt not despise." All these 
sacrifices must be of the free will and desire 
of the offerer.— Lev. 1:3 . 

The completeness of consecration is 
shown by the death of the animal; that 
is, each member of the race must consecrate 
his will; but it will be followed 
neither by the destruction of the human 
nature (the burning of the flesh outside the 
camp) nor by the taking of the life into a 
new nature— into the Most Holy; only 
the High Priest enters there, as shown in 
the Atonement sacrifices. No; when consecrated, 
they are accepted as human beings, 
their right to life as such having 
been purchased by the High Priest, in the 
members of whose body all the overcoming 
Church is represented. Their consecration 
represents their appreciation of their 
ransom and their acquiescence to the law 
of God as the condition upon which they 
shall continue to live everlastingly in harmony 
and favor with him. 

THEIR BURNT OFFERINGS. 

The burnt offerings of the Priests were 
to be kept up continually on the Altar, 
and the fire never suffered to die out. 
"This is the law of the Burnt Offering; 
it is the Burnt Offering because of the 
burning upon the Altar all night unto the 
morning, and the fire of the Altar shall 
be burning in it. ..It shall not be put 
out, and the Priest shall burn wood on it 
every morning, and lay the burnt offering 
in order upon it... The fire shall ever 
be burning upon the Altar; it shall never 
go out"- Lev. 6:9,12,13 . 

Thus is represented to the mind of each 
offerer the fact that the Altar was already 
sanctified or set apart, and their offerings 
acceptable because of God's acceptance 
of the Atonement Day sacrifices. To this 
Altar the Israelite brought his free will 



offering as narrated in Lev. 1 . It was 
made in the usual way; the animal, cut in 
pieces and washed, was laid, the pieces 
to the head, on the Altar, and wholly 
burnt, a sacrifice of sweet savor unto the 
Lord. This would serve to typify a thankful 
prayer to Jehovah— an acknowledgment 
of his mercy, wisdom and love, as 
manifested in the broken body of the 
Christ— their ransom. 

THEIR TRESPASS OR SIN OFFERINGS. 

"If a soul [being] commit a trespass 
and sin through ignorance in the holy 
things of the Lord;. ..if he sin and 
commit any of these things which are forbidden 

R1237 : page 5 

to be done by the Commandments 
of the Lord, though he wist it not, yet is 
he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity." 
"And he shall bring a ram without blemish 
out of the flock," and money according 
to the Priest's estimation of the trespass, 
with a FIFTH MORE, and this shall be 
their offering. And the priest shall make 
an atonement for him. And if any sin 
knowingly and damage or defraud his 
neighbor, he shall restore it in the principal, 
and shall add the fifth part more 
thereto [twenty per cent, interest] and 
give it to the wronged one. And he shall 
bring a ram for the trespass offering unto 
the Lord.- Lev. 5:15-19 ; and 6:1-7 . 

This teaches that for every wrong, restoration 
must be made with interest, and 
a repentance or asking forgiveness of the 
Lord through the Church (Priesthood); 
their recognition of their own imperfections 
and the value of their ransom being 
shown by the ram presented. 

But notice the difference between the 
treatment of this sin-offering and the sin-offerings 
of the Day of Atonement: The 
latter were offered to God (Justice) in the 
Holy as the ransom or purchase-price of 
sinners; the former were offered to the 
Priests who, during the Atonement Day, 
had purchased the people. The acknowledgement 
of the people will be made to 
their Redeemer. The Priest took a part and 
offered it to the Lord as a memorial, as a 
recognition that the whole plan of redemption 
as executed on the Atonement 



Day (Gospel Age) was his, appropriating 
to himself (eating) the remainder. 

The offerings of the Atonement Day, 
we have seen, were always burned ( Lev. 6:30 ; 

Heb. 13:11 ), but the after sin-offerings 
are not to be burned, but eaten by the 
Priests. "This is the law of the sin-offering 
....The priest that offereth it 
for sin shall eat it.... All the males 
among the priests shall eat thereof."— 

Lev. 6:25-29 . 

The whole world, purchased with the 
precious blood (human life) of Christ, 
will present themselves, for forgiveness of 
trespass, to the Royal Priesthood who 
paid their ransom-price; and their acceptance 
of the gift will be the forgiveness. To 
this agree Jesus' words to his disciples: 
"He breathed on them and saith unto 
them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit. Whosesoever 
sins ye remit, they are remitted 
unto them; and whosesoever sins ye 
retain [to them] they are retained."— 
John 20:23 . 

While this "ministry of reconciliation" 
belongs in its fullest sense in the next age, 
when all the sacrifices of Atonement will 
have been completed, yet even now, any 
member of the "Royal Priesthood" may 
say to those who believe and repent, 
"Thy sins are forgiven thee"— as did our 
Head, by faith looking forward to the 
completion of the sacrifice for sins, which 
sacrifice he had begun. 

THEIR PEACE OFFERINGS. 

This offering must be of the herd or 
flock, and it might be made either in fulfilment 
of a vow (covenant), or as a willing 
"thank-offering." Part of it was to be 
brought to Jehovah by the offerer— "His 
own hands shall bring the offerings of the 
Lord made by fire; the fat with the 
breast; it shall he bring," and the priest 
shall burn the fat on the altar, and wave 
the breast before the Lord. But the 
breast shall be the priest's, also the shoulder. 
The offerer must eat the sacrifice. 
-Lev. 3 and 7:11-18,30-34. 

This seems to show, that if any man 
would come into a condition of full peace 
and harmony (as all are to do or else be 
cut off in the second death), he must eat 
or fulfil a covenant before God, of entire 
consecration to him. If, after being thus 



perfected, he again becomes defiled with 
sin, he must die (the second death), as 
shown by the touching of unclean things. 
-Lev. 7:19-21 . 

With this sacrifice there was presented 
an offering of unleavened cakes mingled 
with oil, and anointed wafers, representing 
the offerer's faith in Christ's character, 
which he will copy; and leavened 
bread indicating his acknowledgment of 
his own present imperfection at the time of 
consecration— leaven being a type of sin. 
-Lev. 7:11-13 . 

THEIR MEAT OFFERINGS. 

These, of fine flour, unleavened cakes, 
with oil, etc., were presented to the Lord 
through the priest. They probably represent 
praises and worship offered to the 
Lord by the world, through his Church. 
"Unto him be glory in the Church by 
Christ Jesus throughout all ages." ( Eph. 3:21 .) 
These were accepted by the priests. 
A sample being offered on the Altar shows 
that it was acceptable to Jehovah. 

R1237 : page 5 

OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES. 

In the preceding description we have 
purposely omitted an explanation of some 
interesting details which can now be better 
understood by those who have, through 
careful study, obtained a clear understanding 
of the general plan of the Tabernacle, 
its services, and their typical signification. 

THE POSTS which stood in the court, 
and held up the white curtains, represent 
justified believers. They are in the 
"Court," the proper place for such, as 
we have already seen. They are of wood, 
a corruptible material. This shows that 
they are not actually perfect as human 
beings; for since human perfection is 
represented by copper, those posts should 
either be made of copper, or covered 
with copper, to represent actually perfect 
human beings. They were made of wood, 
but were set into sockets of copper, which 
teaches us that, though actually imperfect, 
their standing is that of perfect human 
beings. It would be impossible more 
clearly to represent justification by faith. 

THE WHITE CURTAIN, which, held up by 



those posts, formed the Court, well illustrates 
the same justification or purity. Thus 
justified ones should continually hold up 
to the view of the world (the camp) the 
pure linen representing Christ's righteousness, 
as their covering. 

THE SILVER HOOKS, by which the posts 
held up the curtain, are symbolic of truth. 
Silver is a general symbol of truth. They 
can really and truthfully claim that Christ's 
righteousness covers all their imperfections. 
(Lev. 27:11-17 .) And it is only 
by the aid of the truth that they are able 
to hold to their justification. 

THE POSTS at the entrance of the Tabernacle 
—at the "door" of the Holy- 
were covered by the first vail. They were 
totally different from the posts in the 
court, and represent the consecrated 
saints. The difference between these and 
the posts in the "Court" shows the difference 
between the justified and the sanctified 
conditions. The consecration to 
death of a justified man we have seen to 
be the way into the "Holy"— passing 
through the death of the human will, the 
fleshly mind, the first vail. Hence 
these posts should illustrate this change; 
and so they do. They were covered with 
gold, symbol of the divine nature. Being 
set in sockets of copper represents 
how "we have this treasure [divine nature] 
in earthen vessels" ( 2 Cor. 4:7 )— 

i.e., our new nature is still based upon, 
and rests in, our justified humanity. This, 
it will be remembered, corresponds exactly 
with what we found the "Holy" to 
symbolize, viz.: our place or standing as 
new creatures, not yet perfected.— 

Exod. 26:37 . 

THE POSTS in the "Most Holy" 
were just inside the second vail, and represent 
those who pass beyond the flesh 
(vail) entirely, into the perfection of the 
spiritual condition. These posts were so 
constructed as to fully illustrate this— 
covered with gold, representing divine 
nature, but no longer set in sockets of 
copper— no longer dependent on any human 
condition; they were set in sockets 
of silver (reality, truth), which seem to 
say to us: When you come inside this 
vail you will be perfect— really and truly 
new creatures.— Exod. 26:32 . 

THE GOLDEN TABLE bearing the shewbread 
represents the church as a whole, 



including Jesus and the Apostles— all 
"holding forth the word of life." ( Phil. 2:16 .) 
The great work of the true church 
during this age is to feed, strengthen and 
enlighten all who enter the covenanted 
spiritual condition. The bride of Christ 
is to make herself ready. ( Rev. 19:7 .) 
The witnessing to the world during the 
present age is quite secondary and incidental. 
The full blessing of the world 
will follow in God's "due time." 

THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK was all of 
one piece, hammered out; there was one 
central shaft with a lamp on top, and 
three branches on each side of it, each 
bearing a lamp, making seven lamps in 
all— a perfect or complete number. This 
represents the complete Church, from the 
Head, Jesus, to and including the last 
member of the "little flock" that he is taking 
out from among men, to be partakers 
of the divine (gold) nature. Jesus says, 
"The seven candlesticks which thou sawest 
are the seven churches" ( Rev. 1:20 )— 
the one Church whose seven stages or developments 
were symbolized in the seven 
congregations of Asia minor. ( Rev. 1:11 .) 
Yes, that candlestick represents the entire 
Church of the First-born— not the nominal 
but the true church— the Royal Priesthood. 

The form of workmanship was beautiful 
—a fruit and a flower, a fruit and a 
flower following successively, which shows 
us that the true church ("whose names 
are written in heaven") is both beautiful 
and fruitful from first to last. The lamp 
part on top of each branch was shaped 
like an almond, the significance of which 
we shall see when considering Aaron's rod. 

The oil for this lamp was olive oil- 
beaten or refined; and the lamps were 
kept lighted always. Oil is a symbol of 
the Holy Spirit. The light was for the 
benefit of the priests only, and represents 
the spirit or mind of God given to enlighten 
the Church, in the deep things of God, 
which are entirely hidden from the natural 
man ( 1 Cor. 2:14 ), even though he be 
a believer— a justified man (a Levite). 
None but the truly consecrated ones, the 
Royal Priesthood, are even to see into this 
deeper light, hidden in the "Holy." These 
always have access to the "Holy;" it is 
their right and privilege; it was intended 
for them. ( Heb. 9:6 .) The Levite class 
can not see in, because of the vail of 



human-mindedness which comes between 
them and the sacred things; and the only 
way to set it aside is to consecrate and 
sacrifice wholly the human nature. 

The lights were to be trimmed and replenished 
every morning and evening by 
the High Priest— Aaron and his sons who 
succeeded him in office. ( Exod. 27:20-21 ; 
and 30:8 .) So our High Priest is 
daily filling us more and more with the 
mind of Christ, and trimming off the dross 
of the old nature. 

We are sometimes puzzled to know why 
some religious people cannot see any but 
natural things and cannot discern the 
deeper spiritual truths of the Word. They 
can see restitution for natural men, but 
cannot see the divine, heavenly calling. 
These Tabernacle lessons show us why this 
is. They are brethren of the household 
of faith, but not brethren in Christ- 
consecrated sacrificers. They are Levites 
—in the Court: they never consecrated 
as priests, and consequently cannot enter 
the "Holy," nor see the things prepared 
for the priestly class only. The natural 
"eye hath not seen, nor ear heard— 
neither have entered into the heart of 
man the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him. But God hath revealed 
them unto us [who, through consecration, 
have become "partakers of the 
divine nature,"] by his Spirit [light of the 
lamp], for the Spirit searcheth [revealeth] 
all things— yea, the deep [hidden] things 
of God."- 1 Cor. 2:9 . 

The church nominal has always included 
both the justified and sanctified classes 
—Levites and Priests. In Paul's letters 
certain parts were addressed to the justified 
class (Levites) who had not fully consecrated. 
Thus, after exhorting in Gal. 5 , 
he winds up by assuring them that the 
things he complains of are evidences that 
they do not belong to the Body of Christ, 
the Priesthood: for, he says, "They that 
are Christ's have crucified the flesh with 
the affections and lusts." ( Verse 24 .) In 
the same way he addresses the Romans (Chap. 12:1 .): 
"I beseech you, therefore, 
brethren [believers— justified by faith in 
Christ— Levites], by the mercies of God 
[manifest through Christ in our justification], 
that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice [that you consecrate wholly— 
thus becoming Priests], holy, acceptable 



unto God." Being justified freely by faith 
in Jesus, God reckons you as sinless, or 
holy; and he has agreed to accept every 
such sacrifice— "With such sacrifice he is 
ever well pleased." By so doing, you become 
Priests— members in particular of the 
High Priest's body. 

The succeeding verse tells them what 
will result from consecrating— viz., the 
transformation of their minds. Their wills 
being renewed, they will be priests— new 
creatures possessing the spirit of Christ. 
The fact that at this time they had not 
the spirit of sacrifice is an evidence that 
they were not members of Christ— for 
"if any man have not the spirit of Christ, 
he is none of his." ( Rom. 8:9 .) And 
it seems evident that by far the larger proportion 
of the early churches (much more 
so of the modern worldly mixture, the 
confused "Babylon" of the present day) 
were not consecrated, and consequently 
were not Priests, but merely Levites, doing 
the service of the sanctuary, but not 

sacrificing. 

Looking back at the type in the Law, 
we find that there were 8,580 Levites 
appointed in the typical service, while only 
five Priests were appointed for the typical 

sacrificing. ( Num. 4:36,40,44,48 ; 
Exod. 28: 1 .) It may be that this, as 
much as the other features of that shadow, 
was designed to illustrate the proportion 
of justified believers to self-sacrificing, 
consecrated ones. Though now the nominal 
church numbers millions, yet when an 
allowance is made for hypocrites, and one 
in every seventeen hundred of the remainder 
supposed to be living sacrifices (a correct 
proportion according to the type), it 
seems quite evident that the Lord did not 
make a misstatement when he said that 
those who would receive the kingdom (the 
Royal Priesthood) would be a "little 
flock."- Luke 12:32 . 

R1237 : page 6 

The fact that we see believers who are 
trying to put away their sins is not of itself 
evidence of their being Priests, for 
Levites, as well as Priests, should practice 
"circumcision of the heart"— "putting 
away the filth [sins] of the flesh." Nor 
is a spirit of meekness, gentleness, benevolence 
and morality always a result of 



consecration to God. These qualities belong 
to a perfect natural man (the image 
of God), and occasionally they partially 
survive the wreck of the fall. But such, 
in the nominal church, not infrequently 
pass for proofs of full consecration. 

Even when we see believers practicing 
self-denial in some good work of political 
or moral reform, that is not an evidence 
of consecration to God, though it 
is an evidence of consecration to a work. 
Consecration to God says, Any work, 
anywhere; Lo, "I delight to do thy will, O 
God"— thy will, in thy way, be done. 
Consecration to God, then, will insure a 
searching of his revealed plan in his 
Word, that we may be able to spend and 
be spent, for him and in his service, according 
to his arranged plan. 

Marvel not, then, that so few have ever 
seen the glorious beauties within the Tabernacle; 
only Priests can see them. The 
Levites may know of them only as they 
hear them described. They have never 
seen the hidden light and beauty; never 
eaten of the "bread of presence;" never 
offered the acceptable incense at the 
Golden Altar. No; to enjoy these, they 
must pass the Vail— into entire consecration 
to God in sacrifice, during the 
Atonement Day. 

THE GOLDEN ALTAR seems also to represent 
the entire (consecrated) church in 
the present sacrificing condition. From 
this altar ascends the sweet incense, acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ— the 
willing services of the priests: their praises, 
their willing obedience; all things 
whatsoever they do, to the glory of God. 
Those who thus offer incense acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ ( 1 Pet. 2:5 ) 
come very close to their Father— close up 
to the Vail which separates from the Most 
Holy; and if they have requests to make 
they may be presented with the incense— 
"much incense with the prayers of saints." 
( Rev. 8:3 .) The prayers of such priests 
of God are effectual. Jesus kept the incense 
continually burning, and could say 
"I know that thou hearest me always." 
( John 1 1:42 .) So we will be heard always, 
if we continually offer incense of 
faith, love and obedience to God; and 
none should expect to have requests recognized 
who do not thus keep their covenant 
—"If ye abide in me and my words 



[teachings] abide in you, ye shall ask what 
ye will and it shall be done unto you."* 
-John 15:7 . 

We have learned, through types previously 
considered, something of the glory 
of the "Most Holy" (the perfect, divine 
condition), which no man can approach 
unto ( 1 Tim. 6:16 ), but to which the 
"new creatures in Christ Jesus"— partakers 
of the divine nature— will finally come, 
when the incense-offering on the part of 
the entire Body of Christ, the Royal 
Priesthood, is finished, and the cloud of 
perfume goes before them into Jehovah's 
presence, that they may live beyond the 
Vail, being acceptable to God by Jesus 
Christ their Lord. 

THE ARK. Let us now consider what 
God designed to symbolize by the "Ark 
of the Testimony," the only article of 
furniture in the "Most Holy." (See Heb. 9:2,3 
and Diaglott foot note.) Its name 
suggests that it illustrates the embodiment 
of Jehovah's plan, which he had 
purposed in himself, before even the head 
of the Christ had been created, before the 
beginning of the creation of God, before 
the minutest development of his plan 
had taken place. It represented the purpose 
of God to develop a little flock, to 
be partakers of the divine nature and to 
be imbued with power and great glory— 
the prize of our high-calling; the joy set 
before our Lord, and all the members of 
his body. 

As before stated, it was a rectangular box 
overlaid with gold, which represents the 
divine nature. It contained the two Tables 
of the Law ( Deut. 31:24 ), and 
Aaron's Rod that budded ( Num. 17:8 ), 
and the Golden Pot of Manna ( Exod. 16:32 ). 
The Law showed how the Christ 
should meet in full all the requirements of 
God's perfect Law, and also that legal 
authority should be vested in him as the 
Law-executor. 

The righteousness of the Law was actually 
fulfilled in our Head, and it is also 
fulfilled in all those new creatures who 
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit; 
that is, who walk in obedience to the 
new mind. The infirmities of the old 
nature which we are daily crucifying, once 
settled by our ransom-price, are not 
charged to us as new creatures. 

When it is written that "the righteousness 



of the Law is fulfilled in us"— the end of 
our course (perfection) is reckoned to us, 
because we are walking toward or after 
that spiritual perfection which, when we 
reach the Ark condition in the "Most 
Holy," will be complete. 

AARON'S ROD that budded shows the 
elect character of all the body of Christ, 
as members of the royal priesthood. By 
reading Numbers 17 , the meaning of the 
budded rod will be seen to be Jehovah's 
acceptance of Aaron and his sons— the 
typical priesthood representing Christ and 
the church— as the only ones who might 
perform the priest's office of mediator. 
That rod, therefore, represented the acceptableness 
of the "Royal Priesthood" 
—the Christ, Head and Body. The rod 
budded and brought forth almonds. A 
peculiarity about the almond tree is, that 
the fruit-buds appear before the leaves; so 
with the "royal priesthood:" they sacrifice 
or bring forth fruit, before the leaves 
or professions are seen. 

THE GOLDEN POT OF MANNA represents 
immortality as being one of the possessions 
of the Christ of God. Jesus doubtless 
refers to this, when he says: "To him 
that overcometh will I give to eat of the 
hidden manna." ( Rev. 2:17 .) Manna 
was the bread which came down from 
heaven— a life-sustainer; so God through 
Christ provides life for all Israel (the 
world) that they may live forever— continually 
eating of it; but he offers to those 
who become Christ's joint-heirs, members 
of the Anointed Body, that they shall 
have a peculiar sort of manna, or life principle, 
the "hidden manna." One peculiarity 
of this pot of manna was, that it 
was incorruptible; hence, it well illustrates 
the immortal, incorruptible condition 
promised to all members of the "Seed" 
—which is the Church. The manna fed to 
Israel was not incorruptible and must be 
gathered daily. So all the obedient except 
the "little flock" of priests will be 
provided with life everlasting, but conditional, 
supplied and renewed life; while 
the little flock, who under present unfavorable 
conditions are faithful overcomers, 
will be given an incorruptible portion 
-immortality. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. I., page 181.) 

Here, then, in the golden Ark, is represented 
the glory to be revealed in the divine 



Christ; in the budded rod, God's 

chosen priesthood; in the tables of the 

Law, the righteous Judge; in the incorruptible 

manna in the golden bowl, immortality, 

divinity. 

Above this Ark, and constituting a lid, 
or head over it, was the Mercy Seat— a 
slab of solid gold, on the two ends of 
which, and of the same piece of metal, 
were formed two cherubim, with wings uplifted 
as if ready to fly— their faces looking 
inward toward the centre of the plate 
on which they stood. Here, between the 
cherubim on the Mercy Seat, a bright 
light indicated Jehovah's presence. 

To our understanding, as the Ark represents 
the Christ, so the Mercy Seat, 
Glory-light and Cherubim together represent 
Jehovah, God. As with Christ, 
so with Jehovah, he is here represented by 
things which illustrate attributes of his 
character. The light reminds us of Paul's 
words: ( 1 Tim. 6:16 ) God "only hath 
immortality, dwelling in light, which no 
man can approach unto." Humanity cannot 
enter his presence; hence, the priest-hood, 
Head and body, represented by Aaron, 
must become new creatures, "partakers 
of the divine nature" (having crucified 
and buried the human), before they 
can appear before that excellent glory. 

The slab of gold called the Mercy Seat 
(or more properly the Propitiatory, because 
on it the Priest offered the blood 
of the sacrifices which propitiated or satisfied 
God's just demands), represents the 
underlying principle of Jehovah's character 
—JUSTICE. His throne is established 
upon JUSTICE. "Righteousness and justice 
are the foundation of thy throne."— 
Psa. 89:14 ; Rev. 15:3 ; Job 36:17 and 37:23 ; 
Isa. 56:1 . 

The TWO CHERUBIM represent two elements 
of our Father's character as revealed 
in his Word, viz.: Love and Power. 
These attributes, Justice the foundation 
principle and Love and Power of the 
same quality and lifted up out of it, are 
in perfect harmony with each other. 
They are all made of one piece; they are 
thoroughly one. Neither Love nor Power 
can be exercised unless Justice is fully 
satisfied. Then they fly to help, to lift up 
and to bless. They were on the wing, 
ready, but waiting; looking inward toward 
the Mercy Seat, toward Justice, to know 



when to move. 

See the High Priest as he approaches 
with the blood of the Atonement sacrifices. 
Will he put it upon the Cherubim? 
No, neither the Power nor the Love of 
God independently require the sacrifice. 
He need not, therefore, sprinkle the Cherubim. 
It is the Justice of God that will 
by no means clear the guilty. It was Justice 
that said: "The wages of sin is 
death." When, therefore, the High Priest 
would give a ransom for sinners, it is to 
Justice that it must be paid. Hence the 
appropriateness of the ceremony of sprinkling 
the blood upon the Mercy Seat or 
PROPITIATORY. 

Love led to the whole redemptive plan. 
It was because God so loved the world 
that he sent his only begotten Son to redeem 
it by paying to Justice the ransom-price. 
So Love has been active, preparing 
for the redemption ever since sin entered; 
yes, from "before the foundation of the 
world."-- 1 Pet. 1:20 . 

"Love first contrived the way 

To save rebellious man." 

When the Atonement Day sacrifices 
(bullock and goat) are complete, Love 
tarries to see the results of its plan. As 
the blood is sprinkled, Justice cries, It is 
enough; it is finished. Then comes the 
moment when Love and Power may act, 
and swiftly they wing their flight to bless 
the ransomed race. When Justice is satisfied, 
Power starts upon its errand, which 
is co-extensive with that of Love, using 
the same agency— Christ. 

The relationship and oneness of that 
divine family— the Son and his Bride, represented 
by the Ark, in harmony and oneness 
with the Father, represented by the 
Cover— is shown in the fact that the Mercy 
Seat was the lid of the Ark, and hence a 
part— the top or head of it. As the head 
of the Church is Christ Jesus, so the head 
of the entire Christ is God. ( 1 Cor. 11:3 .) 
This is the oneness for which Jesus prayed, 
saying: Father, "I pray not for the world, 
but for those thou hast given me"— "that 
they all may be one; as thou, Father, art 
in me, and I in thee, that they also may 
be one in us, that the world may [then] 
believe."- John 17:9,21 . 

UNBLEMISHED. 



It is significant, also, that any member 
of the priesthood that had a blemish of 
eye, hand, nose, foot, or in any way, 
could not fill the office of Priest [High 
Priest]; neither any man having any superfluity, 
such as an extra finger or toe. 
This seems to teach us of the perfection 
of every member of that body; they are 
all "overcomers." And furthermore, it 
shows that when the body of Christ is 
complete, there will be no additions permitted 
—no superfluity. If, then, we are 
called, if we have heard the invitation to 
become members in particular of his Body, 
and have accepted it, let us seek to make 
our calling and election [as members of 
that "little flock"] sure, by so running 
as to obtain the prize. If we miss the 
prize some one else will win in our place, 
for the body will be complete; not one 
member will be lacking, and not one superfluous. 
Take heed, "let no man take thy 
crown." — Rev. 3:11 . 

It has been a matter of surprise to some 
that the glory and beauty of the Tabernacle 
—its golden walls, its golden and 
beautifully engraved furniture, and vails 
of curious work, were so completely covered 
and hidden from view of the people; 
having no sunlight from without, even, to 
illuminate it. But this is all in keeping 
with the lessons we have received from its 
services. As God covered the type and 
hid its beauty under curtains and rough 
unsightly skins, so the glories and beauties 
of spiritual things are seen only by 
those who enter the consecrated condition 
—the Royal Priesthood. These, too, enter 
a hidden glory which the world and 
all outside fail to appreciate. Their glory 
and also their standing as new creatures 
are hidden from their fellowmen. 

"Ah, these are of a royal line, 

All children of a King, 
Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 

And lo, for joy they sing! 

"Why do they, then, appear so mean? 

And why so much despised? 
Because of their rich robes unseen 

The world is not apprised." 



*The necessity of a clear apprehension of 



Christ's teachings as a guide to our requests and 
expectations, that we may not "ask amiss" and 
out of harmony with God's plan, is clearly shown 
by this Scripture— but seldom noticed. 



R1240 : page 6 
HEART RELIGION. 



A German woman, a Romanist, residing 
in New York, on leaving her native land 
had received from her priest a charm, 
which was to preserve her amid the perils 
of the voyage, and to protect her in a land 
of strangers. Such a charm is generally 
procured by German Catholic immigrants 
before coming to America. Sometimes it 
consists of a small crucifix; sometimes of a 
mere picture of the Saviour on the cross, 
enveloped in a leather case; sometimes of 
an image of the Virgin. In this case it 
was an image of porcelain. Its possessor 

R1240 : page 7 

having reached New York in safety, and 

thus proved the virtue of her crucifix, kept 

it suspended upon the wall of her chamber 

as an aid to devotion, if not itself an object 

of grateful adoration. But one day, 

as she was adjusting the furniture of the 

room, a sudden jar brought down the crucifix 

to the floor, and broke it into fragments. 

Alas! What could she do now? 

For a time she gave herself up to weeping 

and self-reproach. But in her grief, she 

sought counsel of a neighbor in an adjoining 

apartment. "What shall I do?" she 

cried, "for my dear Christ is broken to 

pieces." 

R1241 : page 7 

It happened that this neighbor was one 
who had experienced the grace of Christ 
in her own soul. She said to her distressed 
friend, "Do not grieve, and I will 
tell you how you may make up your loss. 
I keep the Saviour always in my heart." 

She then explained to her the Scriptures 
and invited her to go to preaching on the 
next Sabbath. The invitation was accepted; 
the eyes of the poor disconsolate 
woman were opened, and she too found a 



Christ whom she can keep always in her 
heart, and of whom no casualty can ever 
deprive her. 

Faith in the historic evidences of Christianity 
may be shaken at times by doubts 
and fears, creeds assailed or undermined, 
ecclesiastical systems exploded into fragments, 
but nothing shall ever deprive us 
of Christ, if he be in us "the hope of 
glory."— Selected. 



R1241 : page 7 

THE MEANING OF WORDS. 



"I don't take a dictionary when I 
want to know the meaning of Bible words: 
I take the Bible and look up all the texts 
in which the word of doubtful meaning 
occurs, and judge of its meaning by its 
use in the Scriptures, irrespective of the 
definition given by dictionaries." 

Thus writes one who, we doubt not, 
thinks he has stumbled upon the true 
method of study, and who does not see the 
nonsense of his conclusion. People who 
take such a position have little use for 
dictionaries or helps to accuracy of any 
sort. Ignorance is the strength of their 
position, and they not only do not wish 
to know the accurate meaning of the 
words they use, but they would like to 
keep others in the dark in order that their 
theories may not be endangered. And it 
is evident that any man who is afraid to 
have the true sense of a word understood 
has a theory to support which the true 
meaning of words would contradict and 
overthrow. Alas! that such a spirit of 
dishonesty should be found in any manner 
associated with the name Christian or 
the doctrines of Christ. 

If we read an English translation of the 
Bible and do not fully understand the 
meaning of all English words, or are in 
doubt about any, there is but one proper way 
to do— Go to some one who does know 
their meaning and inquire. This is just 
what sensible people use a dictionary for. 
Thus even if the English were the original 
tongue of the Bible, a dictionary would 
be necessary. 

But the fallacy of rejecting a dictionary 
is the more evident when we remember 



that the Bible was not written in English, 
that the English version is not the original 
Bible, but a translation of it. And the 
translators put the thoughts of the original 
as nearly as they could into the English 
language, using English words with 
their true significance as used by educated 
people and defined in dictionaries. If, 
therefore, a man relies upon the English 
translation, the best he can do is to try to 
get the exact meaning of the English text. 

But while the use of a dictionary is the 
best method of getting at the exact meaning 
of the English translation of the 
Bible, it is not infallible; for the translators, 
we find, did not always select the 
best English words to express the sentiments 
of the original. 

Unless you have a thorough knowledge 
of the original languages of the Scriptures, 
or else some confidence in the statements 
of others, you had best stick to the 
English translation and the interpretation 
of it by Webster's Dictionary. But God 
has provided some very valuable aids to 
the study of his Word in the original languages 
for persons of even ordinary 
common-school education. These are 
found in Young's Greek, Hebrew and 
English Concordance and other similar 
works, of which it is the cheapest and best 
suited to the ordinary student. This book 
is a dictionary as well as a concordance. 
It shows the Greek or Hebrew word and 
gives its meaning in English. And any 
one, therefore, who desires to be more 
accurate than the English translation and 
the English dictionary needs the original 
languages and a dictionary of them. 

To illustrate this subject, take the word 
hell in the New Testament. 

First, follow the plan suggested by the 
one whose method we criticize— look up all 
the occurrences of the word hell in the 
New Testament and see what light you 
would be likely to get. None. 

Second, take Webster's Dictionary and 
look up the meaning of the English word 
hell. There you would get much more information 
than you probably had at first, or 
could get from merely comparing the texts 
in the English Testament. You would 
find that the original meaning of hell was 

"to conceal, to hide." You would find the 
primary meaning of the word given thus: 

"The place of the dead, or of souls 



after death; the lower regions or the 
grave; called in Hebrew sheol and in 
Greek hades." 

True, Webster gives a secondary meaning, 
or another sense in which the word 
hell is used, as "The place or state of 
punishment for the wicked after death; 
the abode of evil spirits." 

The latter, however, the intelligent 
student will see, proceeds largely from the 
modern prevalent theological view and 
not from the true, primary significance of 
the word. We submit that most people 
would reach clearer views of the meaning 
of this by taking Webster's definition than 
by comparing all the texts of the Bible, 
with the ordinary and false meaning of 
the word in mind. 

Third, take Young's Concordance and 
Dictionary (a standard work by an acknowledged 
scholar, an eminent Presbyterian 
in Scotland). It will show you that 
three totally distinct Greek words, with 
totally distinct meanings, are all translated 
hell. It separates the texts and shows 
which are from each of the three Greek 
words, hades, gehenna and tartaroo, and 
gives what he, as a Greek scholar, understands 
those words to signify. He shows 
also the word from which hell in the Old 
Testament is translated— sheol. 

Here, then, after getting the different 
Greek and Hebrew words classified and 
the texts under each, is the time when a 
comparison of the several texts in each 
class will help the intelligent student to 
arrive at the true significance of any word 
by noting the usage by the inspired writers. 
And yet this is only a very limited 
comparison; and such as have the necessary 
education or other books to show the 
matter will find other texts in which the 
same Greek and Hebrew words occur and 
are translated by other words than hell, 
namely, grave and pit. And a comparison 
of the texts thus translated, with 
those translated hell, will increase the light 
many fold. 

In choosing the word hell as an illustration, 
we have taken one of the simplest, 
and not one of the most complex: other 
words in our English translation represent 
many more Greek words; for instance 
our words come and came represent 192 
Greek and Hebrew words with various 
shades of meaning. And on the other 



hand a Greek or Hebrew word is often 
translated by a great variety of English 
words. For instance, the Hebrew word 
nasa is rendered in English by 64 different 
words, and the Greek word ginomai is rendered 
by 47 different English words. 

But what could induce any one to disregard 
the exact meaning of words which 
every one knows is necessary to a correct understanding 
of any subject in any language? 
Ah! It was to support a theory— a theory 
which it was seen would not stand if the 
light were turned on, and the real meaning 
of words accepted; a theory which 
could best succeed if people were ignorant 
of the meaning of the key words, and 
would allow certain teachers to twist words 
so that death would mean life, and second 
death would mean second life. Yes, the 
theory which relies on this advice is the 
no-ransom theory; and the very word its 
teachers would most prefer should be misunderstood 
is the English word ransom 
and its equivalent antilutron and lutron 
anti of the Greek. 



R1242 : page 7 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Minnesota. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: -Opportunity presenting 
I sent the enclosed letter to a 
Brother in Christ, who yet believes in 
eternal torture; have sent him Tract No. 1, 
and if it seems wise will send him some 
of the TOWERS later. I send the letter 
as an evidence that the Lord lets me do a 
little. Christian love to all the 
household. W. E. PAGE. 

[The letter may be of interest to others, 
so we publish it below. Writing letters 
to your friends is an excellent way of 
serving them and the Truth— provided 
you have the talent for this work. Let 
each zealously use the best talents he is 
possessed of.— EDITOR.] 

DEAR BROTHER:-Your kind and highly 
esteemed letter of the 2nd inst. was 
duly received, but press of many important 
matters has prevented earlier reply. 

I have met Mr. , of whom you 



speak; he and I study the Word together 

once a week, and receive much comfort 

together. Treasures new and old are 

abundant in this "Treasure House," and 

the faithful steward must ever have something 

for the "household of faith." lam 

led to realize more and more how small 

this "household" is, and how easy it is to 

"let the things heard slip away." The 

testimony of Isaiah, applied by "our beloved 

Brother Paul" to both the Jewish 

and gospel churches, is that a "remnant 

only" will believe the report, and lay 

hold of the honors offered under each 

dispensation. As I daily learn more and 

more of our heavenly Father's mind, and 

of his purpose to have a "New Heaven 

and a New Earth in which dwell righteousness," 

and, in contrast, appreciate more 

fully present conditions, where evil reigns, 

I cannot express how my desire for the 

full consummation of our Father's plan 
grows. As you say, it seems to me that 
the thoughtful student of the Word must 
see that there are plain and specific promises 
that our Lord and Master will come 
again in person and reign; and also that 
the nations will mourn because of him on 
his arrival; that clouds and thick darkness 
will be round about him; that only "children 
of the day" will first know when he 
has arrived (as only such knew of his resurrection 
and ascension); that with the 
government on his shoulders a reign of 
righteousness will ensue from which will 
come the fulfilment of the prophecies 
that "All shall know the Lord, from the 
least even unto the greatest;" that a 
Highway of Holiness will be opened up in 
which there will be no "lions" or "wild 
beasts" and from which the "stones" 
will be removed. How like our God 
such conditions will be! How much 
higher are his ways than our ways, and his 
thoughts than our thoughts. The more 
I contemplate the ransom given by our 
Lord the more complete and ample it appears. 
He "once suffered for sins, the 
just for the unjust, that he might bring 
us to God." "By his stripes we are 
healed." "The Lord has laid upon him 
the iniquity of us all." He gave "His life 
a ransom for all." "Without shedding 
of blood there is no remission of sins." 

I rejoice not only that our Lord was a 
great example, but more in the knowledge 



that he is a great Redeemer. I realize 
that I am "not my own" but have 
been "bought with a price," even by 
the "precious blood of Christ, as of a 
lamb without blemish." Having received 
this light, I further realize what a fearful 
thing it would be to deny the "blood" 
that "bought me," and account it 
a common or unclean thing. Surely 
should any commit such sin, the "wrath 
of God must abide on him." "God is 
not mocked; that which a man soweth 
he shall also reap. He that soweth to 
the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, 
and he that soweth to the spirit shall of 
the spirit reap life everlasting." How 
fearful a thing it must be to "fall into the 
hands of the living God" unprotected by 
our dear Redeemer's robe of righteousness. 
And yet, how ample that robe is for 
ALL who accept it, though but few have 
any conception now of what our great Redeemer 
is, or what his wondrous work will 
be when he "takes His great power and 
reigns." Through the Word, we know that 
"There is one God, and one mediator between 
God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 
who gave Himself a ransom for all, to be 
testified in due time." "We trust in the 
living God who is the Savior of ALL men, 
especially of those that believe." (Glorious 
special salvation; prospective members of 
the "Little Flock" and inheritors of the 
Divine Nature.) "As in Adam ALL die, 
even so in Christ shall ALL be made 
alive." "As by the offense of one, judgment 
came upon all men unto condemnation, 
even so by the righteousness of one 
the free gift came upon all men unto justification 
of life. For as by one man's disobedience 
many were made sinners, so 
by the obedience of one shall many 
be made righteous." Thus we learn that 
while you and I and every one understanding 
God's present offerings— and 
how few such there are— are now on trial, 
having our probation; yet how glorious to 
see further that our Father's love, wisdom 
and power have made full provision so 
that in His own "due time" every 
creature shall have a full insight into 
Christ's complete work, when, if they 
but accept the ransom, IT will be ample 
enough to cover them; the gift then offered 
—perfect humanity— will be all those 
accepting it will want, and though not as 



glorious as the one now offered— the Divine 
Nature— it will be glorious and satisfactory. 
We thus learn how the logical 
conclusion, that if the ransom is a ransom 
its effects must become co-extensive with 
the effects of the fall, is, in God's providence, 
attained in fact as well as in theory. 
Thus all rejectors of God and his salvation 
will be punished on the ground of 
individual sin, apart from weakness due 
to heredity or surroundings. How we 
can appreciate anew and more fully than 
ever before that "God is love," as well 
as the message that "God is light, and 
in him is no darkness at all." 

I had intended but a line or two, 
but when contemplating these wondrous 
things, and finding myself in communion 
with a brother in Christ, I find it hard to 
leave truths so grand. W. E. PAGE. 

page 7 

London, England. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I saw and 
read the TOWER for the first time sixteen 
month ago, and I thank God that your 
preaching has not been in vain. Since then, 
by joining in with several Brethren here, 
I find from week to week, when we meet 
together to praise God and study his Word, 
we get abundantly blessed and fed. Thank 
God, we are growing in knowledge, and 

page 8 

in love of the truth, by hearing what he 
has to say to us through his Word. 

I enclose four shillings, a small offering 
to the Lord, which please do with as you 
think best. I have read January TOWER 
over again and see clearly the divine plan 
it sets forth, to those who have eyes to see 
and ears to hear, the whole plan of Jehovah 
to the whole race of mankind. We 
each have a few friends (friends of God 
we hope they will be), who, we think, 
if they will read the January TOWER, with 
God's blessing, will see some light, and so 
lay hold on the truth. Please send us 
about twenty copies (if you have so many 
to spare). May God bless you and Sister 
Russell, and all our dear brethren and 
sisters across the waters. 

Yours for Jesus sake, C. SHREEVE. 



Little Meadows. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER:-The July 
and August TOWERS have followed me 
here, also the tracts sent. I disposed of 
one package before I left home, with my 
boy colporteur's help. In July TOWER 
Bro. R.'s answer to the Iowa letter was of 
special interest to me, and still more so 
was the article, "The Undefiled One." 
It brought out to me such a clear view of 
the strong, sweet, spiritual connection between 
the Bridegroom and the glorified 
church, the Bride— besides clearing up some 
scientific points which were not clear before. 
There is not a sentence in the TOWER 
which I do not devour. I am so hungry 
for the truth, and they are feasts indeed. 
Hardly a day passes that I do not have an 
opportunity to present the truth in some 
way to others, by giving out the tracts by 
hand or by mail, and by talking the good 
tidings. 

I was invited to give a missionary talk to 
the Presbyterian M. Society here, and I 
read to them Bro. R.'s article, "I will 
draw all unto me," from July TOWER. 
Also in adult Bible Class, when the lesson 
was on the parable of Lazarus and Dives, 
I gave them our view of the parable and 
some copies of O.T. Tract, No. 1.— 
"The wages of sin," which explains that 
parable. 

Of course all this is more or less of the 
going without the camp to Christ— part 
of my sacrifice— holy and acceptable to 
God. In doing this work I have great 
joy. This scattering of the "hail" is delightful 
work and so convenient; many 
will take a tract when they will not listen 
to a conversation. 

The August TOWER came yesterday, and 
this is the first I have had of the "TABERNACLE 
TEACHINGS." It makes me more 
earnest to have the "goat" killed— willingly 
sacrificing all of the human for love 
of Christ, and the prize offered— 
Immortality. 

When I return home I will want more 
tracts. Enclosed please find two dollars 
for the tracts already received. 
MRS. M. FAIRCHILD. 

R1242 : page 8 

Northern Prison, Michigan City, Ind. 
MR. C. T. RUSSELL.-DEAR SIR:-Itis 



with sincere gratitude that I acknowledge 
the receipt of your very interesting paper, 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER. I have been 
studying MILLENNIAL DAWN together with 
the Bible, and it has thrown a new and 
cheerful light on the subject of religion 
which I have never discovered before. 
You may wonder at convicts being interested 
in such matters, but let me assure 
you that all convicts are not the hardened 
criminals they are supposed to be. The 
present state of society, with all its evil 
influences, is making many so-called criminals; 
for a very large proportion of the 
convicts, here and elsewhere, owe it to the 
saloon, which is upheld by society. I am 
42 years of age, and I had never a trouble 
in life that did not come through the saloon. 
I have spent upwards of $20,000 
in my time, and finally occupy a convict's 
cell; but how mysterious are the ways of 
the Lord. If I had not come here I should 
eventually have filled a drunkard's grave, 
but now the power of Satan is broken, and 
when I leave here next September, it will 
be to use the talent the Master has given 
me for the spread of his Gospel. 
Yours respectfully, . 

page 8 

Ohio. 

DEAR SIR:-- Your wonderful book, the 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN," has been placed 
in my hands by a friend, to read carefully 
and give my opinion of the same. 

I have read the book carefully; I have 
studied it prayerfully, and find that to 
give my opinion and be honest, I would 
have to say that I never understood 
the Bible before. A new light has been 
thrown on its pages that has become to 
me joy unspeakable. 

I have been a leader in one of the 
churches at this place for years, but to 
make public my views as I now see through 
the pages of MILLENNIAL DAWN would 
certainly place me in the attitude of a 
heretic by the church to which I belong. 
[The Lord help you to be faithful to the 
truth, Brother, to let your light shine; and 
give you grace to endure the reproaches 
of Christ] For the last ten years, I have 
given much time to the study of social 
and political economy as a pastime. I 
have certainly found in MILLENNIAL DAWN 



the only rational solution of those much 
vexed problems. 

As far as I can see, your conclusions 
are logically chained to the premises laid 
down in what we all agree to be the 
Word of God. What a revolution in 
thought! and what a dark background the 
general theology furnishes the scene less! 

I must proceed slowly along the golden 
line of truth, which, I pray God, we may 
all find at any cost. I write you this letter 
in hope that I may find out more of 
you and your "strange doctrine." I 
understand you are publishing a paper in 
the interest of the same. Please send me 
a sample copy of your paper. I should like 
also to get your suggestions as to what I 
should read of all your works. May God's 
blessings be added to you and yours, 
your work past, present and future. I am 
yours for truth, J. W. SWINDLER. 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The July 
TOWER came, as always, well filled with 
God's precious hope and promises, and it 
was very helpful in many ways. Days 
after I had read it found me still contemplating 
and feasting on its contents. As 
a result I now understand more clearly several 
of the articles it contains, and to-day I 
consider the one article, "The Undefiled 
One," alone worth more than many years' 
subscriptions. It is to me invaluable. I 
never before understood perfectly why the 
race was lost in Adam, not in Eve. With 
this light it is clear, and I see fully the 
reason why the Redeemer was undefiled 
while being born of a woman. 

Another article inquires, "Do you believe 
in the Ransom?" I answer, yes, fully, 
and may I ever rest securely there. 
Thank you for much of the light that 
has enabled me to be so sure. 

Dear Brother, preach the whole truth 
as you see it, not fearing man. It is light to 
those who are seeking for truth. Brother 
Tavender says he never saw the Ransom 
so clearly before. 

Although I should much like a personal 
letter from you, I do not expect you to 
take the time to answer my letter. The 
TOWER will come as your answer, but I 
could not forego the wish to say these 
things to you, that you may know how 
truly you are doing the good work of 



building up our most holy faith. 

I enclose an order for TOWERS, envelopes, 
tracts, etc. What remains of the 
money I send, please put into the TRACT 
FUND. 

I have some new readers of DAWN who 
are asking for explanations of spirits or 
spiritism, and of the demons our Lord cast 
out. Yours in the Life-Giver, 
MRS. J. H. PATTERSON. 

R1242 : page 8 

Ireland. 

DEAR SIR:— I received your book and 
paper safely and was glad to get them 
much sooner than I expected. I approve 
highly of the book and am very glad I 
came in contact with its pages. When 
I went over to America, about five years 
ago, and stayed in different places, a while 
here and a while there, I got acquainted 
with a man of about seventy years of age, 
whose life was spent in a most careless 
way. All this came up before him, driving 
him to deep despair, thinking he 
would have to give account for a life so 
ill spent. But one day a young man came 
in with a few books which he was selling. 
He asked the young man the name of it. 
He said, Millennial Dawn. He had heard 
before of the Millennium, so he thought he 
would buy one. The young man told him 
if he would read it and believed it, he 
would get a great blessing from it, which 
he has, for he is a different man altogether, 
no longer dreading, but longing for 
the Lord's kingdom. 

I myself was a Roman Catholic at the 
time I went to him, and after reading 
its pages I saw in it the truth; and 
whenever I found a text which looked very 
deep, I went and looked in the Bible, 
which I had never read before, and found 
it to be in harmony. 

I am very glad of the help your work 
has afforded me. I feel sure all Bible students, 
when they read it, will acknowledge 
it to be the most reasonable presentation 
of God's plan ever set forth. I 
am anxious for the third volume: send it 
as soon as ready. 

Your humble servant, ED. WALL. 

Deccan, India. 
MR. C. T. RUSSELL:-Dear Brother, I 



have read the TOWERS and tracts that you 
sent me with much interest, and wish you 
to send me the TOWER for two years, 
The MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vols. I. and II., 
in paper cover, the Emphatic Diaglott 
and Leeser's translation of the Old Testament. 
To pay for the above, I send post-office 
money order. 

I am much interested in the Old Theology, 
and wish to give it an impartial 
examination. I have Young's Analytical 
Concordance, and therefore do not need 
to send for it. I am 30 miles out in the 
jungles, preaching and teaching the word 
of life to those who are now hearing it for 
the first time. 

I am yours in the work, 
E. CHUTE, Missionary. 

[May the Lord bless this dear brother 
and show him more clearly the great 
"harvest" work now in progress.— ED.] 

page 8 

Manitoba, Canada. 

DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:-You will be 
glad to hear that we are still rejoicing in 
the truth. It becomes each day more and 
more dear to us. We are filled with gratitude 
and praise to God for all the countless 
favors we are enjoying, both temporal 
and spiritual. He has done for us exceeding 
abundantly above all that we could ask 
or think. Although we are not at liberty to 
give all our time and strength to the 
truth, the Lord has very graciously opened 
up many channels through which we may 
do a little at the work which lies nearest 
to our hearts. There are not many here 
who see and believe as we do, but then 
that makes us look the closer for the Master's 
footprints to make sure we are in the 
right way. 

Some, we find, will not read anything 
we give them, or listen to anything we 
have to say, but they go and warn others 
to beware of us. Others listen a few times 
and say, "Well, I hope it is true," then 
busy themselves with something else. 
Some who heard gladly at first and rejoiced 
with us for a while seem now to be 
more interested in other things. But, 
thank God, through the all-sufficient and 
precious blood of Jesus we have, so far, 
been able to stand. 



We have had to endure some trials since 
we came home (things don't always run 
smoothly), but the dear Lord has never 
hid his face from us. Our little boys have 
the same keen interest in God's plan that 
they have always had. I can tell them 
everything as far as I know in such a way 
that they can grasp the meaning. They 
would rather hear a Bible story anytime 
than the most thrilling fairy tale. They 
have to spend several hours every day 
herding sheep; that brings them into closer 
sympathy with the Shepherd of the 
Bible. Bro. T. is toiling on, sometimes 
on the mountain-top of joy and sometimes 
in the valley. We expect Bro. Z. 
to-morrow on his way to Ontario to begin 
the colporteur work. 

The delay of Vol. III. is giving us 
time to make our own all of the good 
things contained in Vol. II. We anticipate 
a feast when this month's TOWER comes; 
it brings us joy and comfort every month. 

We send with this our heartfelt love 
and gratitude to yourself and Brother 
Russell, not despising but greatly esteeming 
all the food and training we have received 
through you. And we know that 
God will abundantly bless you and give 
you strength to finish your work. The 
boys send their love. Yours in the glorious 
light, MRS. S. WEBB. 



R1243 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., OCTOBER, 1890. NO. 11. 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

It is astonishing with what rapidity matters 
are shaping themselves for the great 
time of trouble predicted in the Scriptures. 
When, some fourteen years ago, we 
presented the Scriptural declaration that 
the Millennium of peace and blessing would 
be introduced by forty years of trouble, 
beginning slightly in 1874 and increasing 
until social chaos should prevail in 19 14 — 
few believed, some scoffed; for the whole 
cry then was Peace! Arbitration! Harmony! 
—hoped for through increasing 
intelligence. 

Gradually the storm-clouds have been 
gathering since 1874— so gradually that 
many have failed to notice the great 
changes of public sentiment already accomplished. 
Yet many are now waking up, 
and the inquiry is heard, "Where will 
matters end if present conditions continue?" 
Ah! the answer to this query can be 
given from no earthly source. The Word 
of God is the only revelation of what lies 
behind the vail of futurity. It declares 
trouble, more general and greater than the 
earth has ever yet known ( Dan. 12:1 ); that 
troubles financial, political and religious 
will fill the earth with distress; that there 
will be no hire for man nor hire for beast, 
nor any peace to him that goeth out or to 
him that cometh in, because every man's 
hand shall be against his neighbor. ( Zech. 8:10 .) 
Yet this is not all; for in connection 
with these changes, necessary 
to prepare for the Millennium Kingdom, 
will come some physical changes to the 
earth, incidental to its preparation for increased 
fertility and for rest from storms 
and cyclones, that it may be more suitable 
for the race in the "times of restitution." 

The irregularity of the seasons begins to 
show even to infidels that it is altogether 
within the power of the Creator, when he 
is ready, to make it warmer at the poles 
and cooler at the equator. And these irregularities 
in turn show, by their effect 
upon the crops of the world, how even a 
slight change may bring about a general 



scarcity of food. And when the increasingly 

general dissatisfaction of mankind 

under present plenty and prosperity is considered, 

it is not difficult to see what is 

likely to be the general sentiment should 

a real shortage of the necessities of life 

compel economy. 

Discontent is the general malady of the 
world to-day. Selfishness is harassing the 
vitals of society, in its every class. The 
rich are generally grasping for more millions; 
the comfortably fixed are anxious 
to be wealthy; the poor and the mechanics 
are grasping for "rights" and for 
"hours" and for "more pay." All are 
having beginnings of trouble already in 
the strikes, lockouts, etc., and all are finally 
coming to see that the Peace! Peace! 
cry is a delusion, and that more trouble 
instead of less lies ahead of them. Every 
day seems to spring some new complication. 
Almost every day's dispatches in 
the daily press for the past year have 
brought fresh news of strikes or riots; sometimes 
near, sometimes far off. It is one 
time a strike of the London police or letter 
carriers, again a riot among German 
miners or Belgian workers, again it is a 
mutiny among English soldiers; and at 
home it is a never-ending record of railroad, 
mining, iron and other labor strikes. 

The only safe place for God's children 
is as far as possible out of all the strife. 
Remember the statement of the Bible, 

"Godliness with contentment is great gain," 
and lay in a large stock of both. These 
two qualities will serve to separate you 
and your aims from the worldly and their 
aims, ambitions and greeds. Rather be 
willing to be classed as "old fogy" and 
"lacking ambition," and to earn a humbler 
living with godliness and contentment 
and the great gain of peace of heart, 
communion with the Lord and some more 
time to spend in his service, doing good 
unto all as you have opportunity— especially 
to the household of faith. 

Look at the list below and choose which 
you will have as your experience. You cannot 
mix them: an attempt to do so will 
only discomfort yourself and others. Choose 
the second list and endeavor to shape your 
course accordingly. 
Ambition for self: Ambition for God: 

Selfishness, Godliness, 
Discontent, Contentment, 



Impatience, Patience, 

Pride, Meekness, 

Rudeness, Gentleness, 

Anger, Self-control, 

Malice, Brotherly kindness, 

Hatred, Strife, Love, Joy, Peace, 

Bitterness of soul. Fellowship with God. 

The Lord says to all, even to those who 
are not saints: "Seek righteousness, seek 
meekness; it may be that ye shall be hid 
in the day of the Lord's anger." Leave, in 
general, most of your grievances and 
wrongs for the Lord to make right. Trust in 
the Lord and do good, and verily thou shalt 
be fed and generally blessed.— Psa. 37:3 . 

As evidence that those who have long 
been prophesying Peace and Arbitration! 
and a gradual moulding over of public 
opinion in harmony with justice and love 
are coming to see that the masses have no 
real conception of justice and love, and 
cannot think cooly and candidly and unselfishly 
on both sides of any question 
where their interests are at stake, note the 
following from a recent article by Mr. 
Hugh O. Pentecost. After reviewing the 
situation as he sees it, he says:— 

"What the outcome will be no man can 
prophesy. Economic education may be so 
rapid that needful modifications will be 
made, or stupid indifference may lull the 
mass of the people into a carelessness that 
will be punished by complete industrial 
servitude— a mighty plutocracy living in 
unparalleled splendor, with millions of 
human drudges providing them with whatever 
their vitiated tastes may demand; or 
an increase of the power and impudence 
of the capitalists may lash an awakened 
and outraged people into fury that will 
express itself in bloody and dreadful war. 

"Will there be any considerable change 
in the situation by which the next generation 
will benefit? I believe there will. 
I think the industrial system will not last 
fifty years longer. It will be peacefully 
improved or violently overthrown to give 
place to a better. That our civilization, 
like some civilizations of the past, will be 
utterly destroyed is not probable. What 
changes come are likely to be improvements, 
and some great accomplishment for 
the social betterment of men will probably 
occur within the next fifty years. The 
only question is whether the improvement 
will come through evolution or revolution. 



Through evolution, I hope; through revolution, 
I fear." 

One fault to be found with this statement 
of the situation is, that while it no 
doubt honestly expresses its author's convictions, 
it is only a one-sided statement 
of the case. True, the light of this nineteenth 
century has introduced the labor-saving 
machinery which is so greatly to 
bless the world in the Millennium, and 
which has a tendency to compete so with 
labor that, if permitted, it would crowd 
the artisan to the wall; and it therefore 
justifies the combination of labor to preserve 
itself and secure to itself some of 
the increased advantages and blessings. 
But it is not true that this state of things 
has in any sense come about by combinations 
of capital for the purpose of oppressing 
labor. 

An unbiased view of the matter shows 
us (1), that the present situation has come 
about without intention or premeditation 
on the part of either capital or labor; (2), 
that the increase of skill and machinery 
among muscle-workers or mechanics has 
been under the lead and guidance of brain-workers, 
and that without these brain-workers 
there would, humanly speaking, 
be no such general increase of intelligence 
and improvement of condition in society 
as we see to-day. And since brains are 
the channel through which these blessings 
of God have been sent, and since in brains 
as in muscles selfishness predominates 
above love, it is not surprising that brain, 
while dispensing the increased blessings, 
took to itself the larger share. And in a 
general way men recognize this law. The 
coal-wheelers require less intelligence and 
ability than the coal-diggers, and in proportion 
as the latter class must have and 
use more intelligence, in that proportion 
they are considered as deserving better pay 
than muscle only, because unskilled labor 
is more plentiful. The fireman on a railroad 
has less responsibility and requires 
less skill and experience, or brain development, 
than the engineer, and hence, 
though he may perform more muscular exertion, 
he receives, justly, less pay. We 
say justly, because growth in skill and 
competency tend to the general good, and 
should, therefore, be encouraged by due 
reward. If a laborer received the same 
pay as a skilled brain-worker or a brain 



and muscle worker, many would be without 
ambition to improvement and excellence. 
And all men require some such 
stimulus. Without it the race as a whole 
would continually sink lower and lower 
into ignorance and sin and lack of 
self-control. 

On this principle the railroad engineer 
receives more compensation than his assistant, 
the fireman; and the civil engineer 
capable of surveying the best route 
for the building of that railroad is and 
should be much better paid than the laborer 
who grades the road; and the one 
competent to oversee the construction, 
though he may not spike a single rail, is 
justly paid more than the man who does 
the spiking, because he exercises a rarer 

R1244 : page 1 

sagacity which is worth more to his fellowmen. 

And so it goes on up to the top. 

The men who have risen from being newsboys 

or from other humble positions in 

society to be millionaires and the heads of 

great works, railroads, etc. (and there are 

several such here and in all large cities), 

must have had a mental balance and acumen 

superior to that of the majority. 

And instead of jumping to the conclusion 

that they must have acquired their wealth 

by fraud, we should rejoice that there are 

men of so great ability; even though society 

may deem it necessary to enact 

some laws to prevent so great wealth and 

such keen intellects from taking any unjust 

advantage of those who have not those 

rarer talents. 

Surely such men are a great blessing in 
some respects, even though without wholesome 
restraint they might become oppressors 
and a general evil. What would any 
great city be without some such men? 
It is the brain power of such men, their 
grasp of the needs of the country and their 
ability to manage men and money wisely 
and profitably to all concerned, that has 
in so short a time turned a wilderness into 
a vast workshop and girdled the earth with 
railroads, and that in this and a thousand 
other ways have blessed and are yet blessing 
us all with conveniences of every sort. 

Society could no more get along without 
these brainy people, these financiers and 



R1244 : page 2 

managers, than a human being could get 
along without brains. 

Nor is this a new thing. The world has 
always had such a class who rise to the 
top of society and influence just as 
naturally as cream rises to the top of 
milk. Mix it over and over again as you 
may, the distinct quality is there and as 
soon as circumstances favor it will naturally 
rise to the top again. What society 
should desire is not to destroy the cream 
class, but to keep the cream class stirred 
in among the milk class of society, among 
the people and of the people, and to prevent 
the collection of the cream element 
as a separate class— a "plutocracy," as 
Mr. Pentecost calls it. The reason that 
millionaires are more common to-day than 
ever is, that we are living in the most favorable 
age for all classes to improve. Not 
only are there more whose annual income 
can be rated at a million, but there is a 
still larger increase of the number whose 
income is a thousand dollars a year and 
still many more whose income is five hundred. 
The millionaire class has increased 
much less rapidly than other grades and 
classes, and we are glad of it. 

But does some one suggest that in the 
present enlightened day the brainy people 
who have the financiering and managing 
ability should make no use of their own superior 
genius that would specially benefit 
themselves, but should use it for the common 
benefit of their fellow creatures, and 
either accept no salary or at most the 
same pay as a laborer or a machinist? 
This would be very generous, very self-sacrificing 
surely. But if there were just 
such men do we not all know that mankind 
would not believe them, but would 
traduce them as hypocrites and claim that 
they were secretly taking some advantage? 
In this men judge others by themselves; 
and knowing themselves to be too 
selfish for such a course they could not believe 
it of others. 

Nor is there any reason for expecting 
such a course of any. Those who ask it 
are not sharing with their less skilled and 
less paid neighbors their overplus each 
week. They are wholly selfish and envious, 
though they may not realize it; for while 
grasping every dollar and hour they can 



get for the reward of their own skill, they 
would selfishly ask others to unselfishly 
share the reward of their genius with them. 
Can it not be seen by all that as an increase 
of reward is necessary to inspire 
the apprentice to skill and care to become 
a mechanic, so some stimulus is necessary 
for the brain-workers and managers of the 
world, else great railroads and mills would 
not be built to the same extent as now, 
and matters would settle into a rut from 
which no other class is capable of lifting 
them? Hence, so long as society is as it 
is, this dream element of society must not 
be injured, but merely kept stirred up for 
the common good of all. And, consequently, 
while legislation may be good 
for the purpose of preventing Trusts and 
Combinations inimical to the general welfare, 
it would be a great mistake to enact 
laws which would tend to destroy ambition 
and competition for wealth. Rather let 
that ambition operate to stimulate general 
progress and general improvement, and 
to cultivate in the same class a greater spirit 
of generosity to endow Colleges, build 
Public Libraries, found and endow Asylums 
and Homes and donate Public Parks, 
that thus they may have the ambition 
to carry on great works and enterprises 
with the desire to use the profits of their 
energy and genius for the public benefit. 
These good results might be reached by 
the enactment of a law, that at his death 
no man could dispose of more than a million 
dollars worth of money and property; 
that whatever he possessed in excess of 
that amount must go into the public treasury 
and thus lighten the taxes of all his 
fellow citizens. With such a law in operation, 
rich men would be more generous 
during life and great wealth and its great 
power could not all accumulate in the 
hands of a few families. 

LOVE AS A STIMULUS. 

Ah, yes! Love would do instead of 
ambition and selfishness to push the world 
along the highway of progress. But how 
few have pure, unadulterated love. This 
love is one of the choicest fruits of the 
spirit of God. It is not, consequently, 
to be found growing wild in the worldly 
heart. It is found only very imperfectly 
developed in Christian people, absolutely 



perfect in none, and approximately perfect 
only in a very few— the saints. And 
of these few we remember that the Lord 
declares there are not many rich or great 
or wise. This "little flock" is mainly 
composed of the poor of this world (both 
in mind and in purse), whose only riches 
are riches of faith. The world will not 
think of these, their words and examples, 
but will go on blindly, talking about love 
and practicing selfishness, hatred, malice 
and envy, and all the unlovely elements 
of the spirit which is the reverse of the 
spirit of love, until the great time of 
trouble, which God's Word predicts, 
shall be precipitated. 

GOD'S WAY. 

While presenting, above, the only course 
of peace and blessing under the present 
condition of society governed by ambition 
and selfishness, we well know that the 
moderate course will not be pursued. 
Selfishness, envy, covetousness and hatred 
are souring the hearts of all classes, except 
the few in whom the very spirit of gratitude 
and love and appreciation of the numberless 
blessings of our day lead to thankfulness 
of heart toward God, the giver of 
every good gift. Mr. Pentecost, as above 
quoted, is coming to see that his dreams as 
a Nationalist, that such a new order of 
things as is sought and as Mr. Bellamy has 
pictured, will not come about peaceably, 
but through revolution. 

Nor was Mr. Bellamy so blind as to hope 
for his pictured Millennium while men's 
hearts are as they are now. He pictures 
a world of men with changed hearts- 
hearts in which love rules as the great 
dominating principle and ambition, and 
upon that foundation he builds his speculation 
as to what might be. Ah, yes! 
make men over into perfect beings— mentally, 
morally and physically— in whose 
very beings the law of God— the law of 
love— will be the ruling, governing motive; 
alter the climate of the earth and 
those conditions producing sudden changes 
and destructive storms and blights; and 
place the perfect race under such conditions, 
and the results ought to be glorious 
—much grander even than Mr. Bellamy's 
conception. 

But who can work this grand and all-important 



change in mankind, without 
which all speculation is but a dream? 
Will the formation of a Nationalist club or 
party work such a change of heart? Nay, 
verily. Nationalism is a thought and an 
effort looking in a right direction, but no 
more. There is a chasm between where 
the race stands to-day, mired all over with 
sin and selfishness, and that ideal plane of 
holiness, love and purity, which no earthly 
power can bridge. 

Is theirs, therefore, a hopeless glance in 
the right direction? It is hopeless so far 
as human power is concerned, but, as usual, 
man's extremity will be God's opportunity. 
Their desires are even far less grand 
than what God has already promised shall 
be accomplished. "The desire of all nations 
shall come." ( Hag. 2:7 .) Righteousness, 
truth and knowledge shall fill 
the whole earth. ( Isa. 32:1 ; 11:9 .) Love 
shall be the law; the stony heart of selfishness 
will be replaced by a tender one of 
sympathy, on every part of which will be 
stamped the law of love. ( Jer. 31:33,34 ; 
Ezek. 11:19 .) And this shall be, not 
only for the fortunates who have not died, 
but for all those also who fell asleep in 
death; and it shall be, not only for a few 
short years, but forever, to as many as 
shall fully conform themselves to that law 
of love, others being cut off as thorns and 
briers whose presence is an injury to the 
good of God's then great and happy family 
on earth. 

But what lies between the present and 
that grand perfection for men? The Millennium 
—a thousand years of discipline 
under the most just and loving and sympathetic 
government conceivable; and yet 
under the strictest rule the world has ever 
known. This is God's bridge for spanning 
the chasm between the present state of sin, 
selfishness and imperfection and that future 
state of holiness, love and perfection. 
Its foundations were laid eighteen hundred 
years ago at Calvary— when "the 
man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom 
for all;" and soon it shall be testified in 
God's due time to all men, and all shall 
have the fullest opportunity of crossing 

R1245 : page 2 

over by obedience and love to perfection 
and life by the bridge of restitution, and 



such alone as will not cross will perish in 
the second death. 

But God's word reveals, too, that selfishness 
will be permitted to bring upon men 
one more final and to many an everlastingly 
profitable lesson, before the bridge 
of restitution is thrown open. This lesson 
will come in connection with the entrance 
of the world upon the restitution 
age, which as a bridge connects the present 
with the state of final perfection. In 
their rush for the coveted blessings and 
liberties God designs to give to all, selfishness 
is about to cause the great crush— the 
time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation, nor ever shall be again. 

It is toward this bridge or age of judgment 
and trial, leading to Paradise restored, 
that all men, though ignorantly, 
are heading, each determined selfishly that 
he will get there first and secure the choice 
portion in the new Canaan. The wealthy 
and the brainy are in the lead; they have 
rather the advantage at present; already 
they are on the smoother way in which progress 
is less a drudgery, and surroundings 
are more elegant. They care not who 
may follow and generally hope that all 
may get a little, but are looking out for 
themselves specially. Behind and beside 
them are the millions of the medium 
classes of mechanics, etc., and the tens 
of millions of the poorer classes, laborers, 
etc., who have tasted some of the overflow 
blessings and advantages, and who 
see whither the new era is leading. Excitedly 
they push and pull for fear that, as 
the more favored ones pass on, there shall 
be none of the milk and honey left for 
them. And the favored ones resist, claiming 
custom, privilege, and their natural 
ability to lead. Wise would it be for both 
parties if they would be less selfish and 
more generous, insisting less upon their 
supposed rights wherever principle is not 
involved. 

If they could but see it, there is bounty 
and blessing and room enough for all, and 
all will have the fullest opportunity to attain 
to all those blessings of Paradise restored. 
But they do not realize that it is 
God, through Christ, that is opening up 
the times of restitution of all things. 
They think that present day inventions 
and blessings are of men— an increase of 
human wisdom. They do not see that the 



flood of light which is now illuminating 
the world is of God, who has raised the 
curtain so that, as predicted, men are running 
to and fro and knowledge is increased. 
- Dan. 12:4 . 

A very few scattered here and there understand 
the real situation. These are 
God's holy ones, his special friends. He 
has revealed to them the real situation 
through his Word. They know what others 
are ignorant of, that the blessings now beginning 
are but a foretaste of greater ones 
yet to come, and long promised by Jehovah 
"by the mouth of all his holy prophets 
since the world began." ( Acts 3:19-21 .) 
These strive not so anxiously as 
the others for their full rights and full 
share of present blessings. They thankfully 
take what comes, acknowledging that 
every good and perfect gift comes from 
their Heavenly Father. And what they 
do get, even in the present time, thus affords 
them more pleasure than the greater 
number of comforts does to others. "The 
little that a righteous man hath is better 
than the riches of many wicked." ( Psa. 37:16 .) 
Even their faces distinguish them 
from others. Whatever their condition, 
whether sickness or health, whether very 
poor or in comfortable circumstances, these 
have peace within and realize that godliness 
with contentment is a great gain. 
Theirs is indeed a peace that the world 
can neither give nor take away. ( John 14:27 .) 
These are always rejoicing, and 
now so much the more as they see the great 
blessings of the Millennium drawing near. 
They are content to receive their share of 
coming blessings in God's way and in 
God's due time. These, if they cannot 
obtain their rights under present laws and 
regulations, will wait for justice, remembering 
the Apostle's words: "Be patient, 
brethren; the coming of the Lord draweth 
nigh"— his Kingdom will give full 
justice to all; wait for it. ( James 5:7 .) 
They remember that it is written, 
"Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith 
the Lord;" and again, "Dearly beloved, 
avenge not yourselves, but rather give place 
unto wrath;" and again, "The servant of 
the Lord must not strive, but be gentle 
unto all, apt to teach, forbearing, in meekness 
instructing those that oppose themselves." 
( 2 Tim. 2:24,25 .) They remember, 
too, the outward characteristics of 



godliness enumerated by the Apostle- 
sobriety, modesty, hospitality; not strikers, 
not greedy of filthy lucre, patient; 
not brawlers, not covetous. ( 1 Tim. 3:2,3 .) 
They remember, also, that they are 
to follow in the footsteps of the Lord 
Jesus, who was the personification of gentleness, 
humility and love. These may be 
in the very midst of the trouble and anxiety 
of the world and yet retain in their 
hearts the peace of God which passeth all 
understanding. 

God, who alone knows the outcome as 
well as the process of his plans, reveals 
the fact that the Millennial blessings will 
not come in peaceably as they might do 
if love controlled mankind. Men, believing 
that they are bringing about the 
change of dispensation, rejecting God at 
the helm of affairs, and seeking to gain by 
force the blessings longed for, must learn 
their mistake before they are ushered into 
the blessings. To bless their methods 
would be to confirm them in their error 
and to make them arrogant and proud. 
To enter the Millennium thus would be 
to their disadvantage. Accordingly, their 



CONTINUED ON EIGHTH PAGE. 

R1245 : page 8 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

(CONTINUED FROM SECOND PAGE.) 

own efforts are, under God's supervision, 
to teach men humility and their own utter 
inability to establish justice and peace in 
the world. 

Accordingly, from the Scriptures we 
read the future thus: As inventions increase, 
men will become more and more 
vain and boastful as to what human power 
and ingenuity can accomplish. They will 
more and more lose sight of God and his 
provisions and supervisions. Nature will 
become the god of science and of the 
masses, and to nature's laws, not God's, 
they will bow. But nature will deceive 
them; most unusual and "unnatural" 
changes will occur; the laws of nature 
which they thought fixed will be found 
unsettled and unreliable; for God, knowing 
the necessities of the time, has arranged 



that great convulsions and changes 

of nature's operations (necessary for the 

betterment of the earth for man in the 

time of blessing about to begin) shall occur 

at this time, to humble the pride of 

men and to teach them their dependence 

upon nature's God. 

These changes of nature will produce 
famines, pestilences, etc., at a time when 
men are boasting that such things are impossible 
because of greater facilities of communication 
and traffic, and because of the 
increased knowledge and power over disease. 
And extravagance and waste and ingratitude, 
for comforts and blessings now 
so liberally bestowed by him who sendeth 
rain and sunshine upon the just and upon 
the unjust, will receive a severe and lasting 
rebuke. 

Meanwhile the self-assurance of men, 
which presumes that they need only to 
put their theories into practice to produce 
the longed-for Millennium of peace and 
prosperity, will also receive a severe and 
lasting rebuke. A haughty spirit leads to 
a fall. The haughtiness and pride of Capital 
will be rebuked; and equally the 
haughtiness of Labor. The pride and self-confidence 
of both is leading rapidly to 
that great struggle between them in which 
both will fall. Capital will fall first, not 
under peaceful strikes and victories, but 
in a reign of terror such as visited France 
a century ago; and it, indeed, is set forth 
in Scripture as an illustration of the greater 
and wider conflict now at the door. 
Both sides will become less and less reasonable. 
Labor already is so prejudiced 
that any suggestions offered which differ 
from its preconceived ideas are attributed 
to self-interest or other unworthy and bad 
motives— pandering to Capital, bought up 
by the money of the rich, etc. That generosity 
which is willing to see and to hear 
both sides, and to judge justly, is rapidly 
giving place to envy, malice and hatred 
of all and everything which lies in the 
way of its presumed rights. To what this 
will lead it is not difficult to forecast. It 
is a murderous spirit and will lead to bloodshed 
and general havoc. 

Capital, too, is self-confident. It unwisely 
bases its expectations for the future 
upon the past. Seeing the attitude of Labor, 
Capital says there is no use attempting 
to reason with or to contract with 



Labor: we must do the best we can to 

protect ourselves. Labor shows us no 

quarter and would not hesitate to cause a 

loss of millions of dollars by a sudden 

strike for an alleged grievance. To yield 

would be to place ourselves in the hands 

of tyrants, not only malicious, but inexperienced, 

and for that reason, if for no 

other, incapable of handling great enterprises 

properly. We cannot submit to 

this and must conquer Labor effectually. 

Bad policy, gentlemen! It could be done 

in times gone by, but not now. You cannot 

conquer Labor; you will not pursue 

what would be the wiser course— Condescend 

to men of low estate, grant everything 

that is reasonable and a little more, 

and by meeting with the unreasonable be 

content to teach them gradually the general 

principles which you see they but imperfectly 

comprehend. They are but children 

in matters of finance and commerce 

and social science; be patient with them, 

for Labor is a child so giant-strong that if 

he be not thus patiently taught and often 

conceded to while getting his lesson, he 

will soon, very soon, totally destroy that 

which he has not fully comprehended is 

necessary in great part for his own comfort 

as for yours. 

And thus it will be, the Scriptures declare: 
Society with all its present arrangements, 
laws, etc., will be utterly overthrown 
in this strife. Then men in the 
midst of anarchy will attempt to rear successively 
the various social structures (Socialism, 
Nihilism, Nationalism, etc.) which 
variously they now conceive to be the one 
thing needful to perfect equality and happiness 

R1246 : page 8 

and peace and plenty. Each, as it 
is tried, will but prove a fresh failure, 
bringing new discouragements and renewals 
of the general trouble, until it has become 
apparent to all that Sin is at the 
foundation of all the trouble, and that no 
government that could be designed could 
be expected to operate perfectly in the 
hands of imperfect officers, and that perfect 
laws would not be obeyed, even in 
their spirit by imperfect people more or 
less dominated by sin and selfishness. 
Then such of mankind as really love and 
desire righteousness will be ready to hail 



Immanuel and his strong government as 
the only way to peace and prosperity. 

While our own views are not prophecy, 
but interpretations of the holy prophets of 
old, it may be interesting to our readers 
to read a brief extract from the pen of one 
who claims to be a scientific prophet and 
to note the close agreement of some of his 
"scientific" opinions and conjectures 
with the Scriptural presentation above, 
which we have been presenting for the 
past fourteen years. The extract below 
we quote from the daily Press reports. 

PROF. J. R. BUCHANAN'S VIEW. 

"In The Arena Professor Joseph Rodes 
Buchanan writes about 'The Coming 
Cataclysm of America and Europe,' which 
he places at nineteen years from the present 
time, and which 'in its magnitude 
and horror will surpass anything of which 
authentic history has preserved a record.' 
The Professor's paper is a prophecy containing 
conclusions demonstrated by the 
sciences which he has 'esoterically cultivated,' 
and the manner in which he goes 
into details convinces the reader that whatever 
there may be in the prophecy the 
prophet believes in himself. Professor 
Buchanan says that there will be a civil 
war in the United States, brought on by 
labor, race and church troubles, but chiefly 
the former, and that the aristocracy and 
money power will be overthrown, and a 
real democracy established on something 
like the lines laid down by Nationalism. 

"Thousands are to-day impressed with 
the approaching dangers. The facts that 
should alarm them are conspicuous. The 
industrial classes in both city and country 
are profoundly discontented. The 
western farmers are not alone in their suffering. 
The decline in New York has 
been so great that State Assessor Wood, 
in 1889, expressed the opinion that in a 
few decades there will be none but tenant 
farmers in his state. While the farmers 
are going down, and nearly four-fifths of 
the city of New York live in tenement 
houses, the plutocracy is going up, the 
gulf is widening between wealth and poverty 
—between the man who may be arrested 
as a tramp for being out of work, 
and the millionaire who spends $700,000 
on a stable for his horses. 



"But one thing is necessary to insure 
a conflict. The armies must be gathered 
and organized into two hostile camps, for 
mobs do not make war. The organizing 
is going on now as never before in the 
world's history. The labor party, the anti-capital 
party, will soon embrace from one 
to two millions of men, bound together 
by common interest, common sympathy 
and common hatred of everything hostile 
to their interests, with a strong conviction 
that they are an oppressed class, and small 
patience with their oppressors, while the 
consciousness of their physical power will 
encourage a defiant and uncompromising 
attitude. In such a condition the disturbances 
or mobs, which are usually local and 
temporary, electrify the mass and become 
a national convulsion. A single individual 
may become the immediate cause of 
a civil war. 

"And while man is fighting his battles, 
while democracy is overthrowing plutocracy 
in this country, and monarchy is being 
wiped out in Europe, nature will treat 
us to a terrible calamity. In the midst 
of our coming civil war the Atlantic coast 
will be wrecked by submergence and tidal 
waves.' Cities on the coast will be, according 
to the Professor, partially submerged 
and damaged beyond estimation. 
The loss of life he places at not less than 
a million persons. 

"Professor Buchanan concludes his 
very interesting article by warning all who 
have faith in his judgment to leave the 
lowlands of the Atlantic coast south of 
New England within fifteen years. He is 
in the neighborhood of 80 years old, and 
does not expect to live to witness the fulfilment 
of his prophecy. 'It is with great 
hesitation and reluctance,' he says, 'that 
I have consented to present this horrid 
panorama; but truth should be our paramount 
aim, and if there be, as I maintain, 
any science which can look into the future, 
its proper presentation is by the statement 
of the future so far in advance of the 
event as to constitute a decisive test.'" 



R1246 : page 3 
MY COMFORT. 



He holds the key of all unknown, 

And I am glad. 
If other hands should hold the key, 
Or if he trusted it to me, 

I might be sad. 

What if to-morrow's cares were here 

Without its rest? 
I would that he unlock the day, 
And, as the hours swing open, say 

"My will is best." 

The very dimness of my sight 

Makes me secure; 
For, groping in my misty way, 
I feel his hand— I hear him say, 

"My help is sure." 

I cannot trace my future way, 

But this I know: 
I have the smilings of his face, 
And all the refuge of his grace 

While here below. 

Enough; this covers all my want, 

And so I rest; 
For what I can not, he can see, 
And in his care I sure shall be 

Forever blest. 

— John Parker. 



R1246 : page 3 

THE RELATIONSHIP OF OUR LORD'S 
DEATH AND RESURRECTION TO 
GOD'S PLAN OF SALVATION. 

"Jesus, our Lord, was delivered for our offences, 
and was raised again for our justification."— 
Rom. 4:25 . 

The term justification implies either one 
of two thoughts— either the declaring or 
proving right of a person or thing which 
is right, or else the making right of a person 
or thing which is wrong. The term 
is commonly used in both senses. A man 
tries to justify himself when falsely accused: 
that is, tries to make manifest his 
righteousness and the falsity of the accusation. 
Again we say we justify an uneven 
balance when we add sufficient weight to 
the lighter side to make it an even balance. 
So the Scriptures speak of justifying 



God (Luke 7:29 ; Rom. 3:4 ; 1 Tim. 3:16), 

i.e., of making manifest his justice, 
or righteousness; and again they 
speak of justifying sinful men by making 
them righteous. Thus we see that the term 
justification, as applied to man in his relationship 
to God, is equivalent to full salvation 
or restitution to actual perfection. 
When a man is actually justified (made 
right) and is so pronounced and accepted 
of God, he will have reached actual perfection 
in every sense of the word— mental, 
moral and physical; he will be fully 
restored to the lost estate once enjoyed by 
Adam. 

There is a sense, however, in which 
some are justified now. By faith they accept 

the promise of God, of full restitution 
to the divine favor and likeness through 
Christ their Redeemer and Lord, and 
thenceforth they are reckoned of God as 
justified, and owned and treated as sons. All 
such believers are legally justified now, 
their deficiency being made up to them by 
the imputed righteousness of Christ. There 
are some very great and special advantages 
to be gained by being thus justified by 
faith now. But these we must leave for 
consideration at another time. 

This great work of actual justification, 
salvation, or restitution, is the work which 

R1247 : page 3 

God purposed to do for the world; and to 
this end both the death and the resurrection 
of Christ are all-important. 

The Word of God continually points to 
the death of Christ as the only foundation 
for the hope of the world's justification or 
salvation, saying that "When we were yet 
sinners we were reconciled to God by the 
death of his Son;" that though "All we 
like sheep had gone astray, the Lord hath 
laid upon him the iniquity of us all;" 
that "He was wounded for our transgressions, 
he was bruised for our iniquities, 
the chastisement of our peace was upon 
him, and with his stripes we are healed;" 
that we are "bought with a price," "redeemed, 
not with corruptible things, as 
silver and gold... but with the precious 
blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish 
and without spot." ( Rom. 5:10 ; Isa. 53:6,5 ; 

1 Cor. 6:20; 1 Pet. 1:18,19.) 
Our justification, without his death as our 



ransom-price, would have been legally impossible, 
since in no other way could God 
be just, and yet the justifier of fallen and 
condemned men. 

Both the death and the resurrection of 
Christ were indispensable to God's plan for 
human salvation or justification; and as 
we reflect upon the relationship of these 
marked events we get a glimpse of the philosophy 
of the wondrous plan which must 
lead every reverent soul to glorify the wisdom 
which devised it, and to realize to 
some extent how God loved the world, 
even while all were yet sinners. 

Let us notice, first, how our Lord Jesus 
was delivered for our offences; and secondly, 
what his resurrection has to do with 
our justification. 

John speaks of him as being, previous to 
his human existence, in the bosom of the Father 
—the Father's only begotten Son ( John 1:18 ). 
The Revelator says he was the 
beginning of the creation of God. ( Rev. 3:14 .) 
Yes, says John, he was in the beginning 
(the beginning of creation) with 
God. ( John 1:2 .) And Paul adds ( Col. 1:15-17 ), 
"He is the first born of every 
creature: he is before all things, and by 
him all things consist: by him were all 
things created that are in heaven, and that 
are in earth, visible and invisible, whether 
they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, 
or powers: all things were created 
by him and for him; and by him all 
things consist." To this John also adds 
his testimony ( John 1:3 ), saying, "All 
things were made by him; and without 
him was not any thing made that was 
made." 

Thus we see that, previous to his human 
existence, our blessed Lord was the honored 
agent of Jehovah in all his mighty 
works; that he was his only begotten and 
well beloved Son, his bosom friend and 
confidential companion, ever in fullest harmony, 
sympathy and co-operation with 
him. And whether we contemplate the vastness 
and grandeur of the physical universe, 
or the innumerable hosts of intelligent 
creatures, angelic and human, which, by 
the power delegated to him, he brought 
into existence, or the grandeur of the heavenly 
court and the presence of the divine 
Father, the great Emperor of the Universe, 
we are overwhelmed with a sense of 
the glory that he had with the Father before 



he humbled himself to the comparatively 
low estate of manhood. Yet he, that 
was so rich, for our sakes became poor, 
that we through his poverty might be 
made rich.— 2 Cor. 8:9 . 

Glance now at his poverty: Transformed 
from a nature and station so exalted to 
our human nature, which is of the earth, 
earthly, and the scope of whose powers is 
limited to its precincts, we see that even 
as a perfect man, which he was, his humiliation 
was very great. And though the 
earth was his, and the fulness thereof, he 
claimed not a foot of it. And though all 
the silver and gold were his, and the cattle 
upon a thousand hills, he claimed nothing. 
The foxes have holes and the birds of the 
air have nests, but the Son of man hath not 
where to lay his head. He was born of humble, 
human parentage— born in a manger, 
cradled with the beasts of the stall in the 
little town of Bethlehem and reared in the 
despised city of Nazareth. And when at 
thirty years of age he emerged from obscurity 
and began to declare his mission 
in the world, he was despised and rejected 
of men. He came unto his own people 
(the Jewish nation), but his own received 
him not. And finally they put him to an 
ignominious death as a criminal; and none 
mourned him save a few humble people 
who had in meekness and simplicity of 
heart received his teaching, and who hitherto 
hoped that this was indeed he that 
should have redeemed Israel. ( Luke 24:21 .) 
O! how deep the humiliation of the Son of 
God, and how keenly he felt it when the 
bitter dregs of ignominy were added to 
the cup of death, and in anguish of soul he 
cried, "Father, if it be possible, let this 
cup [of ignominy and shame] pass from 
me. Nevertheless, not my will but thine 
be done." 

Christ's deliverance for our offences was 
his deliverance to death, and all his previous 
humiliation from the spiritual to the 
human nature was only preparatory to the 
offering of the great sacrifice which was to 
accomplish our redemption. This our 
Lord declared when he said, "A body 
hast thou prepared me for the suffering of 
death," and "Lo, I come [being thus prepared] 
to do thy will, O God;" "In burnt 
offerings and sacrifices for sin [the typical 
sacrifices under the Mosaic law] thou hast 
no pleasure." They were not sufficient, 



but were only typical of the great sacrifice 
which he was about to make; for, says the 
Apostle, "It is not possible that the blood 
of bulls and of goats should take away 
sins."-Heb. 10:4-9 . 

We thus see that it was impossible for 
any creature, either higher or lower than 
the human nature, to release man from the 
condemnation to death. The blood of 
bulls and goats could not do it; and even 
the Son of God could not do it until first 
changed to the human nature. And since 
all men were under condemnation, no man 
(of Adamic posterity) could redeem his 
brother, or give to God a ransom for him. 
( Psa. 49:7 .) A man had sinned and was 
under the just condemnation to death, having 
forfeited his right to life; and since 
the word of Jehovah had gone forth, 
"Dying thou shalt die," there was no 
power in heaven or in earth that could release 
him from that condemnation unless 
another man could be found, who, himself 
free from sin and condemnation, would willingly 
offer his own life as a substitute for 
the condemned one, thus giving an equivalent 
or corresponding price for the condemned, 
and redeeming him from the 
curse of death. 

Such a man could never come into the 
world as the seed of Adam, since all of 
Adam's posterity inherited his condemnation; 
but such a one was promised as the 
seed of the woman. ( Gen. 3:15 .) And 
the Son of God was that one. Begotten of 
God and born of a woman, he thus partook 
of the human nature without its condemnation. 
This was indicated in the 
angel's message to Mary— "That holy thing 
which shall be born of thee shall be called 
the Son of God." ( Luke 1:35 .) Since 
by man (Adam) came death, by man also 
(the man Christ Jesus) must come the redemption 
and consequent resurrection 
from the dead.— 1 Cor. 15:21 . 

What was it, then, that Jesus gave for our 
redemption? It was his life, as he said— 
"I lay down my life for the sheep." 
( John 10:15 .) When any being gives his 
life, he is giving all that he has. No being 
can have more than one life at a time; 
when he has given his life he has passed 
out of existence, and can never exist again 
unless some higher power restores his life. 
But when did Jesus give his life? When he 
was a spiritual being, or when he was a 



human being? The Scriptures declare that 
it was after he became a man, and that for 
this purpose he became a man. His life 
as a man, his life in the flesh, his humanity, 
therefore, was what he gave for the life 
of the world, as the world's sin-offering. 
This he very clearly stated when he said, 
"My flesh I will give for the life of the 
world." ( John 6:51 .) And this price of 
our redemption he never took back; for 
when he was raised from the dead he was 
no longer human, but of the divine nature, 
being thus highly exalted, even above 
his former spiritual glory. He was put to 
death in the flesh, but quickened [made 
alive] in the spirit nature, and is henceforth 
the divine Christ.-- 1 Pet. 3:18 . 

Since all men inherited imperfection and 
consequent condemnation from Adam, 
when the life of Adam was thus redeemed 
by the death of the man Christ Jesus, they 
also share in the redemption, just as they 
had shared in the condemnation; as it is 
written ( Rom. 4:19 ), "As by one man's 
disobedience many were made sinners, so 
by the obedience of one shall many be 
made righteous." Thus the Son of God 
was delivered for our offences. And this 
expression "delivered for our offences" is 
a weighty suggestion of the love of God, 
who thus freely gave him up for us all. 
When Christians think of the sacrifice of 
Christ in giving his life for us, too often 
they seem to forget our heavenly Father's 
sacrifice in thus delivering up the precious 
Son of his love to such abject humiliation, 
suffering and death for our redemption. 
Surely herein is manifested the love of 
God to man, in that he gave his only begotten 
Son to die for us. You who have 
realized some measure of parental love 
may be able thus to gain some idea of the 
costly sacrifice on the part of our heavenly 
Father as well as of our Lord Jesus. 

We now come to the second proposition 
of our text— to the consideration of 
what our Lord's resurrection has to do 
with our justification. 

It is manifest that though we were redeemed 
from death by the precious blood 
of Christ, the purpose of God was not to 
perpetuate the life of the race in sin, but 
on the contrary to deliver them both from 
sin and from its legitimate penalty, death. 
And while the legal right to do this was 
under God's arrangement secured through 



Christ's death, the process of its accomplishment 

R1248 : page 3 

will require considerable time. 
It is written that for this purpose "God 
hath appointed a day in which he will 
judge the world in righteousness by that 
man whom he hath ordained (Jesus Christ), 
whereof he hath given assurance unto all 
men, in that he hath raised him from the 
dead" ( Acts 17:31 ); and that "He hath 
committed all judgment unto the Son." 
-John 5:22 . 

This day appointed for the world's judgment 
under Christ, the great Prophet, 
Priest and King, is to be the Millennium, 
or thousand years' reign of Christ. It will 
be the world's great judgment day. In 
the sense of sentencing merely, a judgment 
would be utterly useless and certainly in 
no sense a blessing. But in the full sense 
of the term judgment, which includes the 
thought of trial, we see a great work to be 
accomplished during the thousand years 
of Christ's reign— a work of first awakening 
from death, and then of teaching, reforming 
and disciplining the race until 
they are actually justified, made right, acceptable 
to God and worthy of everlasting 
life. This great work of Christ, during 
the thousand years of his reign, will 
be accomplished in all who willingly submit 
to his righteous authority, and all 
others shall be cut off in the second death. 
"Then cometh the end, when he shall 

R1248 : page 4 

have delivered up the kingdom to God, 
even the Father; when he shall have put 
down all rule, and all authority and power; 
for he must reign till he hath put all 
enemies under his feet."— 1 Cor. 15:24,25 . 
Many of the special features of this great 
work of restitution or justification are 
clearly pointed out by the sacred writers. 
Our Lord speaks of the awakening of all 
from death in that day, saying, "The 
hour cometh in which all that are in their 
graves shall come forth." ( John 5:28 .) 
"There shall be a resurrection of the just 
and of the unjust." ( Acts 24:15 .) They 
tell us that the knowledge of the Lord 
shall be made to fill the whole earth as the 
waters cover the sea ( Hab. 2:14 ), showing 



that great enlightening and educational influences 

will be set to work; that the world 

will be ruled with a rod of iron ( Rev. 2:27 ), 

with unbending justice, from the power 

of which none can escape; that a grand 

highway of holiness (a public thoroughfare) 

shall be cast up, and that the redeemed 

of the Lord shall walk thereon 

( Isa. 35:8,9 ; 40:3 ), showing a grand 

reversal of public sentiment in favor of 

righteousness, a glorious revival of religion 

that shall sweep over the whole world. 

They tell us further how all the stumbling-stones 

of temptation to evil shall be gathered 

out ( Isa. 62:10 ), showing that none 

of the licensed evils of the present day 

will find a place under that glorious reign 

of righteousness. And thus the way of life 

shall be made so plain that the wayfaring 

man, though unlearned, shall not stumble 

therein. ( Isa. 35:8 .) How difficult it is 

to find the way of life now! "Straight 

is the gate and narrow is the way that 

leadeth unto life, and few there be that 

find it," now; but then all shall find it. 

There will not be a thousand contradictory 

religious creeds to confuse the mind, but 

the books of divine revelation shall be 

opened, made plain, so that all can 

understand. 

Such an opening of the books is even 
now begun; not, however, before the blind 
eyes of the world, but before the anointed 
eyes of the household of faith; for already 
we perceive that we are in the gray dawn 
of that glorious day which God hath appointed. 
And much more we are told, of 
how the physical earth shall be made glorious, 
how the wilderness shall bloom and 
streams shall break forth in the deserts, 
and how the earth shall yield her increase 
instead of the brier and the thorn ( Isa. 35:1,2,6 ; 
Psa. 67:6 ; 85:11-13 ; Ezek. 34:25-27 ; 
Zech. 8:12 ), and how wholesome 
restraints and wise rulings and righteous 
discipline of rewards and punishments, 
as the individual cases may require, 
shall finally bring forth the peaceable fruits 
of righteousness in all the earth, until the 
whole earth shall smile as the garden of 
Eden and break forth into singing. 

In the resurrection of Christ, as the 
Apostle states, we have the assurance that 
this great work shall be accomplished. If 
his sacrifice had not been acceptable, had 
he in any way incurred condemnation to 



death by failure to meet the requirements 

of the law, he never could have had a resurrection 

and our hope would have perished. 

But his resurrection accomplished 

is the assurance and pledge that the great 

work of the world's resurrection and restitution 

shall also in due time be accomplished. 

The preparations for it are made; 

the legal barrier to it was removed by the 

death of Christ for our redemption; the 

resurrection of Christ and his endowment 

with all power in heaven and in earth for 

its accomplishment is also an established 

fact; and, thank God! the appointed time 

is not far distant when the long-promised 

blessings shall be poured forth. 

For this great work of justification, salvation 
or restitution, how necessary the resurrection 
of Christ; for man's receiving 
of the thing purchased awaits his glorious 
appearing as the great Prophet, Priest and 
King whom Jehovah promised to raise 
up. ( Deut. 18:15 .) This is the theme of 
the whole gospel— of its types and prophecies 
and all its glowing inspirations. It 
was the hope of the early church, and it is 
our hope. This is the blessing implied in 
the promise to Abraham— "In thy seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed," 
"Which seed," says Paul, "is Christ." 
( Gal. 3:16 .) It is the blessing, too, prefigured 
in that eloquent type of the Day 
of Atonement, when the high priest, after 
making the typical atonement for the sins 
of Israel, came out to the door of the Tabernacle, 
arrayed in robes typical of glory 
and beauty, prefiguring the dignity and 
glory of the office and work of the risen 
Christ, the world's High Priest, and lifting 
up his hands blessed the people who 
lay prostrate in the dust, in symbol of the 
world's prostration in death. It is the 
blessing referred to by the Psalmist when 
he calls upon the heavens and the earth to 
rejoice greatly, saying, "Let the heavens 
rejoice and let the earth be glad; let the 
sea roar and the fulness thereof. Let the 
field be joyful, and all that is therein: then 
shall all the trees of the wood rejoice before 
the Lord; for he cometh, for he cometh 
to judge the earth: he shall judge the 
world with righteousness and the people 
with his truth."- Psa. 96:11-13 . 

It is the blessing referred to by Isaiah (14:7 ), 
when he says, "The whole earth 
is at rest, and is quiet; they break forth into 



singing." It is that for which the 
church has long prayed, saying, "Thy 
kingdom come, thy will be done on earth 
as it is done in heaven." Yes, those years 
of blessing under Christ's reign are the 

"times of refreshing from the presence of 
the Lord," "the times of restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all his holy prophets since the 
world began."— Acts 3:19-21 . 

But we seem to hear some inquire, How 
can these things be? Does not death end 
all? and is not the doom of each one 
sealed at death? Do not the righteous 
then go to heaven and the unrighteous to 
everlasting woe and merciless torture? It 
is not our purpose now to dwell at length 
on that question, but you will readily see 
that those ideas are out of harmony with 
the teachings of the scriptures to which 
attention has just been called. Why would 
God appoint a thousand years to judge the 
race if their trial is already past and their 
doom eternally sealed? There is a class 
whose trial ends with this life, whose judgment 
day is now, and who, therefore, will 
"not come into judgment with the world" 
during the Millennium, but now we are 
considering God's provision for the world 
in general. Whatever may be thought of 
the condition of man in death, all Christian's 
agree that the full reward or penalty 
of each is reserved to the second coming 
of the Lord and the resurrection then due 
to take place. (Those who desire to inquire 
further are respectfully referred to 
Old Theology Tract, No. 1.) 

We see, then, the importance both of the 
death and of the resurrection of the Lord 
Jesus, to the accomplishment of the divine 
plan of salvation. And Christ's resurrection, 
Paul shows us, is the pledge of our resurrection, 
saying, "Now is Christ risen 
from the dead and become the firstfruits of 
them that slept." (See 1 Cor. 15:12-20 .) 
If Christ died and rose again for the purpose 
of giving life to the world; if he removed 
the great legal barrier by his costly 
sacrifice; if his sacrifice was acceptable, 
in that God raised him from the dead, and 
gave him all power in heaven and in earth, 
and appointed a day for the great work, 
then as surely as that day shall dawn upon 
the world, so surely shall the prison-house 
of death yield up its captives ( Isa. 61:1) 
and the justification of the world 



shall be accomplished. Praise the Lord! 
"Blessing and honor and glory and power 
be unto him that sitteth upon the throne 
[of universal dominion] and unto the Lamb 
forever and ever." 



R1249 : page 4 

VENIAL AND MORTAL SINS. 



"There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he 
shall pray for it [to ask its forgiveness]. All unrighteousness 
is sin: and there is a sin not unto 
death."-- 1 John 5:16,17 . 

The Apostle here clearly teaches that 
there are two sorts of sins: one that may 
be repented of and reformed from, and for 
which forgiveness and reconciliation may 
be prayed for and expected, the other a 
sin that "hath never forgiveness" ( Mark 3:29 ), 
while those who commit it, "it is 
impossible to renew again unto repentance." 
(Heb. 6:4,6 ; 10:26 .) It is a sin 
unto death, and none need pray for or expect 
its forgiveness. The latter is sometimes 
called a death-sin, or "mortal sin," while 
the former is termed a "venial sin," or 
one which may be forgiven. 

These distinct sins are recognized by 
these names by Roman Catholics. But this 
should be no reason why we or others 
should reject a thought which we see to be 
Scriptural. The ideas lying at the foundation 
of the distinctions we shall find not 
only reasonable, but older than Roman 
Catholicism, which had no existence as a 
system prior to the third century. The 
distinctions themselves, though not the 
names of those distinctions, Romanists received 
from the early, undenominational 
church. We must beware, however, of 
Papacy's definitions of what would constitute 
a venial and what a mortal sin. She 
classes as mortal sins such as require [they 
say] confession to a priest and his preparation 
and offering of a special sacrifice of 
mass as a cancellation of such sins; while 
under the term venial she classes all those 
unintentional sins which Christ's sacrifice 
covers, which need no confession to the 
priest, nor his sacrifice of the mass for 
their cancellation. It is not difficult to 
see that love of money as payment for 



masses had much to do with this classification 
of mortal and venial sins. When we, 
then, Scripturally divide sins into two 
classes, death-sins or mortal sins, and forgivable 
or venial sins, let us leave Papacy's 
classification of these and seek the 
Scriptural classification. 

First, then, let us see that there could be 
no such division of sins into two kinds 
aside from the New Covenant. Under 
God's law (aside from the New Covenant) 
any transgression of his law is sin, whether 
intended or not intended. God's law 
calls for right and nothing less, in deed as 
well as in thought; and every human being 
is sentenced to death, as unworthy of 
life, by that perfect law, because all (by 
reason of inherited weaknesses through the 
fall) are sinners, i.e., not perfect in deed 
and in thought. Under that absolutely 
just, perfect and good law of God, all 
sins, no matter how slight, would be sins 
unto death— mortal sins. 

The fact that God's law is thus strict, 
exacting perfection and depriving all imperfect 
beings of life, might seem cruelly 
severe to us fallen ones who find weaknesses 
within and temptations without, until 
we see that this very strictness and severity 
of God's law is designed for the benefit of 
his creatures who desire harmony with 
him. God's perfect law is suited exactly 
to perfect beings, and he never made and 
placed under it any others than perfect 
creatures— creatures in his own likeness— 
except Israel, typically. Thus we see that 
God did not create us imperfect and sinful 
and weak in mind and body and morals. 
The man whom God created was our 
father Adam. It was our fallen progenitors 
that brought us into being in their 
likenesses after they had long lost the god-likeness 
of perfection. 

But God had benevolent designs with 
reference to the race of Adam. He saw 
beforehand that some of us would gladly 
be his children, and servants of righteousness, 
if permitted. But his just, perfect 
law, so proper for his perfect creatures, 
stood firm. To change that law to suit 
the fallen creatures would be to recognize 
a lower standard than perfection, would 
make God a party to sin and imperfection, 
and would unsettle the principles and precedents 
of a government designed to be 
lasting and unchangeable and a universal 



blessing. So God provided for his fallen 
creatures in another way. 

In his plan Christ Jesus became the redeemer 
or purchaser of Adam and all his 
family and effects, by paying the full penalty 
that stood against him, which was— 
death. Then, still working through this 
Redeemer, on whom he bestowed the gift 
of a higher nature, even the divine, God, 
without dealing directly with the sinners, 
and without allowing them to come under 
the judgment of his perfect law made for 
perfect beings, but dealing only with 
Christ who bought them, in him establishes 
a court of justice and a new trial for the 
fallen race. 

In this special trial of those whom he 
bought, by the Redeemer, he will be the 
judge, and the perfect law of God will be 
the standard of judgment or trial. But this 
trial will be more merciful and lenient 
than if conducted otherwise, (not because 
Christ Jesus is more loving than Jehovah, 
for he is merely the co-operating 
agent in the development of Jehovah's 
plan, but) because during the trial of each 
the Judge can make allowance for all the 
weaknesses and errors of men which result 
from the degradations traceable by 
him directly or indirectly to the fall of 
Adam. And he will have the legal right 
to make such allowances because he himself 
paid the penalty for that whole transgression 
and its direct and indirect results 
in satisfaction of this very perfect law of 
God. 

So, then, the right by which the Lord 
Jesus, during his Millennial reign and judgment 
of the world, will pass over and forgive, 
and not impute as sins, such violations 
of God's perfect law as are the results 
of ignorance, inherited weaknesses and 
temptation, lies in the fact that he has already 
paid the penalty for the sin which 
led to all those weaknesses. And as that 
age advances and the work of enlightening 
all men progresses, and as they are 
gradually restored, step by step, nearer to 
perfection, the allowances for actual transgressions 
on the score of the redemptive 
work will grow less and less; until, at the 
close of the Millennial age, those who have 
progressed to actual perfection, physical, 
mental and moral, with full knowledge of 
right and wrong, will be subject to the 
same exact requirements at the hands of 



Christ as at the hands of Jehovah under 

the same perfect law of God, because then 

there would be no longer room for the imputation, 

to such, of the merits of the ransom 

to cover future sins, since any sins 

they would then commit would be wilful, 

and entirely independent of the fall and 

its consequent imperfections, all of which 

(Adamic death) would by that time be 

R1249 : page 5 

swallowed up— destroyed, removed. The 

work of the Mediatorial Kingdom thus 

ending by the completion of God's intentions, 

those who shall have been under 

discipline and restitution will be tested 

( Rev. 20:7-15 ); the unworthy will be destroyed, 

and such as prove fully obedient 

will be turned over to the full administration 

of the Father, that he may be seen to be 

the great All in all— the head of Christ 

and of all things; and then the work 

of mediation will be at an end, having 

accomplished God's purposes to the 

full— the testing and perfecting of all of the 

fallen race who are friends of God. Now 

look again, this time more critically, at the 

sins which will be forgiven by our Redeemer 

when he sits as Judge of the world, 

associating his church in that work with 

him. There will be then as now three sorts 

of sins, but only two of them recognized 

as sins. 

First, there will be the actual imperfections 
or errors of thought, word and 
deed, entirely unintentional. This class of 
sins would be worthy of death under the 
one and only law of God which condemns 
everything that is imperfect; but such ARE 
NOT COUNTED SINS AT ALL under the New 
Covenant, because the Judge's sacrifice for 
the culprit family covers these unavoidable 
weaknesses and transgressions fully 
and completely. 

Second, there will be sins in which the 
elements of weakness and ignorance will 
be but a partial excuse, because a measure 

R1250 : page 5 

of wilfulness blends with the weakness. 
Such sins will be excusable only to the extent 
that they are of ignorance, weakness and 
temptation. To whatever degree they were 
wilful, to that extent they are not forgivable, 



but must be punished —with many or 
few "stripes," as the Judge sees the degree 
of wilfulness to be. Our Lord Jesus 
applies in such cases the merit of his own 
sacrifice to cover the criminal, to the extent 
that the crime is the result of inherited 
weakness from the Adamic fall and 
the consequent depravity of the race since. 

Third, "there is a sin unto death," and 
those who go so far as to commit it need 
not be hoped for, nor prayed for, because 
it will be impossible to renew again by 
bringing to repentance those who thus 
sin.- Heb. 6:4-6 ; 1 John 5:16 . 

This sin is one, though it may be committed 
in a variety of ways. Whenever a 
wrong course is adopted intentionally, with 
a full desire to have it so, against a clear 
knowledge of the right and wrong in the 
matter, and not from weakness— physical 
or moral— such, to our understanding, is 
the one sin that is unto death; it is wilful, 
intentional sin against clear knowledge. 
It is unto death and not subject to 
forgiveness because not covered by Christ's 
ransom-price. It is not covered by the 
ransom because it is not in any sense traceable 
to Adam's transgression and its consequences. 
Christ as Mediator stands between 
men and God's perfect and exact 
requirements, to shield them from the exactness 
of that law to the extent of their 
weaknesses, ignorances and evil besetments, 
and to instruct them until they 
shall come to a clear knowledge of the 
truth. But Christ's object and God's object, 
in this mediation, is not to spare and 
shield wilful sinners from God's just law 
and its penalty, but to recover the unwilling 
captives of sin and to release and restore 
them out of their weaknesses. The mediation 
is extended to all, but permanently 
benefits only those who accept and conform 
to it. Wilful sinners are condemned 
to death— second death— by the Mediator's 
law as well as by Jehovah's law, for 
they are identical except that the Mediator 
applies the merit of his own sacrifice to 
compensate for the Adamic weaknesses of 
those seeking to obey him, while they are 
coming up to perfection, under his instruction 
and aid. 

The Apostle teaches that this sin unto 
death can be committed now by the church, 
if, after clearly recognizing Christ as their 
Redeemer and Mediator, and enjoying the 



blessings of his ransom-sacrifice, they 

knowingly turn from this, God's plan, to 

commend themselves to him aside from 

that sin-offering which Christ presented 

once for all who would come unto the Father. 

Those who have been once enlightened 

and who have tasted of the heavenly 

gift [forgiveness of sins through Christ], and 

have been made partakers of the spirit of holiness, 

who have tasted of the good word of 

God and the powers of the coming age, 

and who then sin wilfully, are sinning on 

their own account, and intelligently, after 

having enjoyed their full share of the redemption 

and release from Adamic or 

"original sin" secured by God for all 

through Christ's atoning work. By such 

a wilful course of opposition they clearly 

say to God, Thy great plan of redemption 

and reconciliation of the world through 

Christ is a failure so far as we are concerned; 

we do not appreciate Christ's 

work as Redeemer, nor recognize his blood 

(death) as the seal of the New Covenant, 

though we recognize him as a very good 

man whose example is worthy of imitation; 

we see no purchasing power in his blood 

for us; he died for himself and we die for 

ourselves; he commended himself to God 

as worthy of life, and we shall commend ourselves 

to God as worthy of life by doing 

the same as he did— following his example. 

They say, Our case is in God's hands; he 

will bring us through; we needed no purchase 

or ransom-price for our sins, and we 

recognize none. 

Thus, they do despite to the one and only 
plan of salvation provided by God— the 
salvation which is in Christ Jesus through 
faith in his blood (death)— and fall into 
the hands of the living God; and by their 
rejection of the mediation for sin secured 
in Christ's death they expose themselves 
to the full blaze of the perfect law which 
surely condemns any of the fallen race of 
Adam not under cover of the one and only 
ransom. And as Paul declares, their 
position then, without a Mediator, is a 
fearful one. ( Heb. 10:31 .) For as in the 
type all who despised Moses, the typical 
Mediator, and attempted to offer to God 
incense for themselves and not through 
Moses, the Mediator of their typical covenant, 
and his appointed channel, which 
recognized the sin-offering as the basis of 
forgiveness, were dealt with without mercy, 



so those who despise the blood and the Mediator 
of the New Covenant and place their 
case thus in the hands of God direct, and 
not through his recognized channel, the 
Mediator, will be dealt with upon lines of 
strictest justice, without mercy ( Heb. 10:26-31 ); 
God's mercy for sinners all being 
provided in Christ, so that there is none 
other name than his in heaven or in earth 
whereby we must be saved. And under that 
strict justice the verdict would be, Imperfect, 
unworthy of life; sentence, Death. 

Yet we should carefully discriminate between 
the second and the third form of 
sins, as explained; even in judging of ourselves, 
our judgment might be too severe. 
The extent to which ignorance and wilfulness 
may blend is very great. By far the 
greater number who will accurately judge 
of themselves will find themselves sinners 
under the second class described, though 
all should strive to avoid even the first. 
Such are not counted sinners under the 
favor of God in Christ, under the New 
Covenant, though actually imperfect. 

By far the smallest number, we believe, 
come under the third class as having committed 
wilful sin, unmitigated by ignorance 
or weakness— the sin unto death. 
Though the Apostle intimates that the 
"holy brethren" should be able to discern 
those cases in which wilful sin has been 
committed, so that they will not pray for 
such, yet there is evidently great room for 
patient forbearance and generous judgment 
in such cases. Many are blinded by sophistries 
and misled by the Adversary through 
false teachers to the rejection of the ransom 
covering, who are merely confused and 
bewildered by false teachings. Some who 
loudly deny that the Lord bought them, 
and that the Lord as the man Christ substituted 
his life for Adam's forfeited life 
(that thus he might justly set free from 
death by a resurrection all of Adam's race 
who will accept of the gift of life upon the 
conditions of the New Covenant), do nevertheless 
trust (though unintelligently) 
that somehow Christ did do something 
which they do not comprehend, which under 
God's arrangement secures a release 
from condemnation to everlasting death. 
Such are really trusting in Christ as a Redeemer, 
though the eyes of their understanding 
are sadly blinded by errors which 
may hinder them from winning the prize 



of the high calling, but which will be fully 
corrected and removed when the Millennial 
age is fully ushered in— when "the 
blind shall see out of obscurity." 

Of these three grades of sins, then, we 
thus comment: Those who commit the first, 
if they should say, We are without sin, 
would be deceiving themselves and making 
God a liar; for he has declared that all 
are sinners, that there is none righteous- 
no, not one. Yet these who are subject 
to this first class of sins, when they accept of 
Christ's work as Redeemer or Ransomer, 
so that he is made unto them wisdom and 
righteousness and sanctification and redemption 
( 1 Cor. 1:30), are so fully 
cleared by the imputation to them of the 
merit of Christ's sin-offering on their behalf, 
that of such it can then be truly 
said, "Whosoever is begotten of God sinneth 
not." [Such do not sin wilfully, intentionally, 
and other imperfections are 
not reckoned sins to such]. "Whosoever 
abideth in him [Christ, the Mediator] sinneth 
not [maintains his justified standing 
before God]; whosoever sinneth [wilfully] 
hath not seen him, neither known him. 
He that committeth [wilful] sin is of the 
devil." So long as the begetting seed of 
the new nature abides, so long as the spirit 
of the truth rules in the heart, there can 
be no love of sin and no wilful sinning 
there. Where wilful opposition to God or 
to righteousness exists, it is an evidence 
either that the person never had been begotten 
of the spirit of the truth to newness 
of life, or else that he has become 
alienated. If the alienation and sin were 
but partly wilful it is "venial sin," and 
there is hope through repentance and chastisement 
of the recovery of such; but if 
the alienation and sin are wholly wilful, 
against full light and ability, it is "mortal 

sin;" and there is no hope of repentance 
or recovery; it is unto death, the second 
death— destruction without hope of 
recovery. 



R1251 : page 5 

OUR HIGH CALLING. 



"Paul, to the faithful in Christ Jesus:"— "After 
I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus and love 



unto all the saints, [I] cease not to give thanks for 
you, making mention of you in my prayers; that 
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Father, 
may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and 
revelation in the knowledge of him: the eyes of your 
understanding being enlightened, that ye may know 
what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches 
of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and 
what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward 
who believe, according to the working of his 
mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when he 
raised him from the dead and set him at his own 
right hand in the heavenly places— far above all 
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, 
and every name that is named, not only in this 
world, but also in that which is to come; and hath 
put all things under his feet, and given him to be 
the head over all things to the church, which is his 
body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all."— 
Eph. 1:1,15-23 . 

The high calling of the Gospel church 
is always referred to by the apostles as a 
mystery, as something hard to understand, 
and as a secret thing. Not so is it with the 
hope and calling of the world in general. 
It is to the glory of human perfection, and to 
all the blessings of divine favor designed 
for the perfect man. Such a restitution is 
clearly predicted and described by all of 
the apostles and prophets, as well as by the 
Lord Jesus. They show that all of the 
past condemnation against the race is canceled 
by the death of "the man Christ 
Jesus;" that every soul that accepts of his 
provision may go on to perfection and everlasting 
life; and that the earth itself will 
be brought to glorious perfection and made 
the fit abode for the redeemed and perfect 
race, so that even the deserts shall rejoice 
and blossom as the rose, and throughout 
its length and breadth there shall be nothing 
to hurt nor to offend. Of all this 
glory the human mind can form a tolerably 
clear idea. We can conceive of the perfection 
of the human body and of the human 
mind. Such a body would have complete 
exemption from sickness, pain and 
death; it would be in perfect health, with 
all the bloom and beauty and the freshness 
and elasticity of youth coupled with 
the vigor and dignity and glory of maturity. 
Such a mind would have all its powers of 
memory, reason, judgment, etc., perfect; 
and with the education and discipline of 
centuries it would be a living and accurate 



R1252 : page 5 

encyclopaedia, an authentic and voluminous 
history, and a master in the realms of 
science, philosophy, mathematics, art and 
every avenue of mental activity. 

Such is the grand calling of the human 
race in general, yet in comparison with 
this, grand as it is, the call of the Gospel 
church is termed a high calling. 
What, then, is the hope of our calling? 
O! says the Apostle, feeling his inability 
to describe it, I pray "that the God of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Father, 
may give unto you the spirit of wisdom 
and revelation in the knowledge of him: 
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, 
that ye may know what is the 
hope of his calling and what the riches of 
the glory of his inheritance in the saints." 

To understand the hope of this calling, 
he here intimates, requires something more 
than ordinary human ability. It is a call 
to a station higher than human; it is a 
call to joint-heirship with Christ, who has 
been made the "heir of all things," who 
is even at the right hand of the glorious 
Father— far above all principality, and 
power, and might, and dominion, and 
every name that is named, not only in this 
world, but also in that which is to come. 
What human mind can grasp the full 
meaning of such "exceeding great and 
precious promises?" To the natural man 
it is simply incomprehensible, and therefore 
foolishness; but to those who have 
received the spirit of wisdom and revelation 
—who have received the spirit of 
Christ— this mystery is made known. To 
all others it is, and will remain, a mystery. 

You, therefore, who have received the 
spirit of Christ, give ear; to you God 
would make known the fellowship of this 
mystery. We have heard of your faith in 
the Lord Jesus and of your love unto all 

R1252 : page 6 

the saints, and by this we recognize you 
as fellow-heirs with all the saints of this 
age and joint-heirs with the Lord Jesus 
Christ; for every one that loveth him that 
begat loveth him also that is begotten of 
him.— 1 John 5:1 . 
By faith behold now the Lord Jesus, 



who, though he was made flesh (human) 
for the suffering of death, is now no 
longer "the man Christ Jesus," but who is 
now the divine Christ, unto whom is given 
"all power in heaven and in earth." Aye! 
hast thou read those words again and again 
without observing their weight? Consider 
now their breadth and scope. He is 
now so "highly exalted" above even his 
pre-human condition— which was the chief 
of all created beings, both angelic and 
human— that he is now seated with Jehovah 
in his throne, the throne of universal 
dominion and glory and power ( Rev. 3:21 ), 
a partaker of Jehovah's own divine 
nature and "the express image of his 
[glorious] person," whom all creatures 
are now commanded to honor "even as 
they honor the Father." 

What a height of glory is this to which 
this Heir of all divine things has been exalted, 
and in which the Gospel church 
is called to joint-heirship! How marvelous 
the favor of God in calling even one 
of his creatures to such fellowship and intimacy 
with himself, and endowing him 
with such power and glory and honor 
throughout all the realm of his own dominion. 
What if such a one should some 
time become puffed up with pride and 
turn traitor? with such unlimited power 
and influence what a rival he might 
become. 

Ah! no; there is no danger of that. 
Before the Lord Jesus was thus exalted he 
was put to the severest possible test; and 
that test proved that there was no pride 
or self-emulation in him; that, on the contrary, 
he was so loyal and obedient to God 
and so confident of his superior wisdom 
and his love that he humbly submitted his 
own will and followed God's command 
even where he could not trace his wisdom 
—even unto death— even unto full surrender 
of his being. To thus prove him, as well 
as to give to the human race an actual experience 
with evil, and to angels and men 
an illustration of its effects and its penalty, 
God placed upon the human race the 
extreme penalty of his law, which penalty 
could only be set aside by a sacrifice of 
equivalent value. And the privilege of 
thus redeeming men by the sacrifice of himself 
—first by lowering him to the human 
nature and then by the sacrifice even unto 
death— was offered to the Son of God 



together with a promise of recovery out of 
death, which hope he could receive by 
faith only. This he did, and thereby 
proved his loyalty and his faithfulness— 

"Wherefore God also hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name which is above 
every name [his own of course excepted— 

1 Cor. 15:27 ], that at the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow, of things in heaven 
and things in earth." ( Phil. 2:10 .) 
Divine wisdom foresaw that such a character, 
so like his own, would stand 
eternally. 

This is the high calling of God; this 
the glorious inheritance into which Christ 
Jesus has already entered; this transformation 
to the divine nature is "the mighty 
power which God wrought in Christ when 
he raised him from the dead." And now, 
beloved, hearken! "He gave him to be 
the head over all things to the church, 
which is his body." And this constitutes 
"the full development of him who is filling 
all things with all." That is, the divine 
Father, his divine Son, our Lord 
Jesus, and his bride and joint-heir, the 
Gospel church, will constitute the full development 
of the divine family whose 
grand, united, future work will be to fill 
all things (the universe) with all the blessings 
that the Father's eternal wisdom has 
planned. And when this divine family 
has thus reached its "full development" 
there can not be another member added 
to it. 

This, O ye faithful saints, is the glory 
and wealth of your high calling. Do you 
long for power— not for self-emulation, or 
pride, or vain glory, but for the blessed 
privilege of filling the universe with blessing, 
and peace, and praise, and love, and 
happiness, and never failing joy?— here 
then is your marvelous opportunity. But 
before the crown must come the cross. 
We must prove our loyalty and faithfulness 
as the Master proved his; we must 
take his yoke upon us and learn of him, 
cheerfully, lovingly and faithfully submitting 
to the humiliations and afflictions of 
the present time— even unto death— confidently 
remembering that faithful is he 
who hath called us, who also will exalt us 
in due time, after that we have endured 
sufficiently to establish our character and 
prove our worthiness. 

If it is marvelous that the Son of God 



should be thus exalted, how much more 
so that we, who were once sinners and 
under condemnation of death, should be 
called to be partakers of the same divine 
nature. Yet it is God who hath called us, 
and who is he who shall judge us unworthy 
if God counts us among "the called, 
and chosen, and faithful?" And what 
wonder if others fail to comprehend these 
exceeding great and precious promises, 
and think those very presumptuous who 
claim them. Yet they are ours to be received 
with meekness and fear; and no 
man can receive them save through the 
divine revelation, the Word of God, and 
in the spirit of that revelation— the spirit 
of Christ— in meekness, and holiness, and 
faith. May the called ones give great diligence 
to make their calling and election 
sure. MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1252 : page 6 

"GOOD NEWS FOR ALL. 



This is the title of a four-page tract 
being circulated by some who we feel confident 
would not circulate it if they had 
critically examined it. Its first paragraph 
contains sufficient error for the purpose of 
our criticism. We quote: 

"READER, whoever you may be, and 
whatever your condition, God loves you, 
and Christ is your Savior. Those who 
have taught you that "God will love you 
if you will be good," and that "Christ 
died for you if you will believe it," have 
meant well, but they were mistaken. Believing 
anything never makes it true, nor 
can disbelieving make it false. Those who 
have so taught have not only dishonored 
God by misrepresenting him, but have 
also thus put a stumbling-block in the way 
of sinners being drawn to the Savior. Love 
that depends on an if has no drawing power 
in it. It really does not exist, and so 
cannot be gospel. The truth is, that 'God 
is Love;' that is his nature; and therefore 
his love for all mankind, which includes 
you and me, had no beginning and can 
have no end." 

Here we have a strange mixture of truth 
and error, a refutation of one set of errors 
common to "orthodoxy" and a 



running into error on the opposite side of 
the question. It is a lamentable fact that, 
while teaching the Bible truth, that God is 
love, many have erroneously presented 
certain doctrines in such a light as to give 
ground for the inference that God had no 
love for his creatures and that the Lord Jesus 
alone sympathized with men. We have 
nothing to say in favor of such an unreasonable 
and unscriptural view of the 
matter. 

But the people so unbalanced in judgment 
as to get so false an idea of God are 
of the very class most likely to take the 
other extreme if helped out of this. And 
we cannot say that such are greatly to be 
censured, for as ability for sound reasoning 
is partly inherited, so a predisposition 
to extremes and unsound reasoning is 
more or less the result also of heredity. 

The fact, then, that the writer of the 
foregoing had once so extremely false a conception 

R1253 : page 6 

of God's character and plan as he 
portrays, and that a very few other men 
have gone to the same extreme, should 
lead all who never were so unbalanced in 
judgment to be on their guard, and to expect 
such a one to err correspondingly in 
the opposite direction when he comes to 
see that error. We are glad that the 
writer of the above got rid of that false, 
God-dishonoring view, but we regret that 
he has taken the other extreme. 

While the quotation above contains an 
element of truth— and what error is so 
false as to be totally devoid of elements of 
truth?— yet, taken as a whole, it is misleading 
and consequently untrue. It is 
brim full of glaring inconsistencies and 
errors, put in that defiant, positive and sophistical 
manner which is calculated to 
mislead those who rely upon their own 
and other men's reasonings, and who neglect 
the Word of the Lord. 

Take the first sentence: it does not at 
all limit the class, except that they must be 
able to read and must see that tract. If the 
reader be the most blatant atheist, whom 
God calls a "fool" ( Psa. 14:1 ), or one of 
those wilfully wicked whom God declares 
are an abomination unto him, and that on 
such his wrath still abides ( John 3:36 ), 
or if the reader be Satan himself, whom 



God repeatedly declares shall be destroyed 
as the enemy of God and righteousness 
( Heb. 2:14 ), all such are told that God 
loves them and that Christ is their Savior. 
Surely God has given no authority to any 
man to contradict him thus. We will show 
more at length hereafter the true character 
of God's love, but now we want briefly 
to expose other errors of this statement. 

If Christ is the Savior of such as we have 
mentioned— the wilfully wicked, atheists, 
Satan— then as a matter of course they are 

saved. What are they saved from? From 
sin? from unbelief? from opposition to 
God and righteousness? Surely not. Every 
one knows that all, "whoever they may 
be and whatever their condition," are not 
thus saved. Well, then, are all saved from the 
penalty of sin and yet left to revel in it? 
God's Word declares, "The wages of sin 
is death." "The soul that sinneth it shall 
die." Have all been saved from this sentence 
which passed upon all men? ( Rom. 5:12 .) 
Surely atheists die, and all are 
dying; none are yet saved actually from 
that penalty. The resurrection will be 
the only actual salvation from death. 

But can we not be saved by faith, before 
that actual salvation of the 
resurrection? 

Ah, yes! we, all who have faith, can 
thus reckon ourselves saved from death by 
faith, "saved by hope," looking forward 
to the reality, future. We can likewise 
also by faith reckon ourselves saved from 
sin; realizing that Christ's righteousness, 
the merit of his ransom-sacrifice, covers 
the unintentional sins and weaknesses of 
all in Christ— of all who "believe into 
him." Such can by faith think of themselves 
as saved, not only from the sins of 
the past and their penalty, but also from 
sins future; grace to help in every time of 
need being promised to such— grace to 
make gradually stronger to resist sin and 
weaknesses; and the grace of his own 
meritorious sacrifice for sins, to cover all 
their unintentional errors and weaknesses. 

There is indeed, then, a class of whom 
we may speak, and who may properly speak 
of themselves, as saved (by faith and hope) 
now; and Christ is therefore their Savior. 
But does this include all, whatever their 
condition, as this tract asserts? Are not 
these at present but a small class, and therefore 
a peculiar people? Is it not then a 



serious error and a totally false statement 
to say as above quoted, "Whoever you 
may be and whatever your condition, 
Christ is your Savior? It is totally false 
in every particular. It is inconsistent with 
reason as well as with Scripture. 

The passage of Scripture which might 
readily be misconstrued to support the 
fallacious assertion in question is 1 Tim. 4:10 , 
and it does not refer to Christ 
as the Savior at all. It reads, "We 
trust in the living God, who is the 
Savior of all men, specially of them that 
believe." This passage declares that God 
is the Savior. He was back of all and the 
cause or mainspring of all that our Lord 
Jesus has done and will do as his agent 
and representative in saving men. The 
passage as a whole teaches that in an especial 
sense God is the Savior of believers, 
and consequently only believers are specially 
or lastingly saved; while in a general 
way God is the Savior of all unbelievers 
also. In what sense the unbelievers 
are saved is not shown in this passage; 
but this is clearly told in the preceding 
chapter. ( 1 Tim. 2:4 .) "He desires [wills] 
that all men shall be saved and come 
into an exact knowledge of the truth." 
(Diaglott.) The saving here referred to 
is one that will enable all to come to a 
full appreciation of good and evil and a 
full opportunity of making their salvation a 
special and everlasting one, by becoming 
an obedient believer in the Mediator. As 
far as God is concerned, he provided 
for all, while all were yet sinners, that 
sacrifice for sins which saves all from the 
original sentence of death— extinction— 
and has, so to speak, turned it into a sleep— 
a sleep of death, from which Christ will 
awaken all who are in their graves and 
bring all to the full knowledge and opportunity 
of salvation. 

It is because the death of Christ will 
save none but believers, specially and everlastingly, 
that God wills that all shall 
come to a knowledge of the facts, and that a 
Millennial age has been arranged for by 
God, during which ("due time") the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole 
earth, when it shall be testified to all, 
that "the man Christ Jesus gave himself 
a ransom for all," and that all may be 
specially or everlastingly saved by believing 
in and obeying him. 



It was because belief and obedience are 
necessary to a share in the merit of Christ's 
death, that the apostle wrote, "With the 
heart man believeth unto justification and 
with the mouth confession is made unto 
salvation.. ..Whosoever shall petition 
the name of the Lord shall be saved." But 
he asks (showing that he had not taken 
his lessons from the little tract we criticize), 
"How shall they petition him in 
whom they have not believed?" for faith 
must precede trust and prayers, and faith 
comes by hearing the good tidings. 

Thus, the tract is wrong again when it 
says, "Believing anything never makes it 
true," for, as we have just seen, believing 
in Christ, and that so fully as to accept of the 
proffered salvation or recovery out of sin 
and its penalty, is NECESSARY before the 
individual has any share in the salvation 
or the Savior. Again, "If we suffer with 
him we shall also reign with him;" how 
often has the believing of that statement 
made it a fact to the saints? 

R1253 : page 7 

Such misleading tracts and sermons not 
infrequently becloud the minds of God's 
saints and incapacitate them for presenting 
the truth, and at the same time become 
stumbling blocks to sinners, who 
might conclude that if they are as much 
saved and as much loved as the saints, 
while yet in their sins and rebellion against 
God, they may as well continue thus in his 
love and salvation. "Woe unto them that 
call evil good and good evil; that put 
darkness for light, and light for darkness; 
that put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter, 
saith the Lord."— Isa. 5:20 . 

Consider another of this tract's statements: 
"Love that depends on an if has 
no drawing power in it." Is this teaching 
of heaven, or merely earthly talk, unauthorized 
by Scripture and unfounded so 
far as reason and experience are concerned? 
We assert that it is the latter and will 
prove it: first, by Scripture, then by facts 
and reason. Love with an if in it means 
love that is conditional or because of something. 
Now note the conditions of God's 
love and Christ's love as asserted in the 
Scriptures, and remember that this conditional 
love of Christ constraineth (or 
draweth) us who are now his followers.— 



See John 10:17 ; 14:15,21,23 ; 15:10,14 . 

Now, for a word of reason on the subject: 
What is it that calls forth real, noble 
love? Is it not real merit which begets 
appreciation, esteem, pleasure and delight? 
Sometimes love is awakened by a 
hope or desire that such noble, beautiful, 
admirable qualities can be awakened or 
produced in a person who may have but 
few of these at the time— but the basis of 
the real love is always centered somehow 
upon real merit. That unreasonable, selfish, 
animal passion called love, which is 
blind to character and quality, and which 
has no if or because or reason, is not the real 
love, and is not at all similar to the love of 
God. That blind love with no if is what 
we see in the lower animals. It is displayed 
by the tigress, the lioness, the cat, 
the cow, the horse, the hen, as well as by 
the lowest grades of savage human beings 
toward their offspring. They love blindly 
and without an if, because they love 
selfishly— not from quality and character, 
but because "it is mine!" And thus we 
see that even in that sort of love, the lowest, 
there is a because and an if, but a selfish 
one. If it were some one else's offspring 
there would be no love, perhaps envy; but 
because it is theirs they hold for it this 
lowest form of love. 

How different God's love is from this 
cannot be appreciated by all. Those who 
have only the selfish form of love are apt 
to think of God's love as like their own. 
Their reasoning is after this style: God is 
the creator of all mankind; he must 
therefore feel a selfish love for them, similar 
to that which fallen earthly beings feel 
for their offspring. As the mother would 
love and defend her child at the risk of 
her own life, no matter how undutiful, bad 
natured or otherwise ungainly, and as a 
tigress would defend her cubs, no matter 
how ugly and vicious, so they think God 
feels a selfish love for his creatures, which, 
because he created them, will and must save 
every last one of them. These ask, Could 
God be happy if even one of his creatures 

R1254 : page 7 

should die the second death? 

Others, again, attributing to God the 
unreasoning pride, ambition and combativeness, 
which are still unconquered in 



their own hearts, ask, Do you think that 
the Almighty God would let himself be 
beaten? Can he not and will he not coerce 
all into obedience and everlasting life? 

It is not difficult for some to see the 
mistake which lies back of these questions 
—the mistaken view of the divine 
character. It is difficult for others to get 
any other view than that which these 
questions represent. They have merely 
the selfish or depraved-human view of 
love and other motives, and cannot comprehend 
what is above their level of 
thought. Only such as have the mind 
(spirit, disposition) of Christ can truly 
appreciate the motives and principles upon 
which the divine plan is being worked out; 
and they are greatly in the minority. Nor 
should we blame or despise the majority 
who take the depraved, earthly, selfish 
view, though it is our duty to point out 
their errors for the sake of those who have 
sufficiently received the mind of Christ to 
be able to appreciate matters from God's 
standpoint. A few of the humbler ones 
may yet learn in the present life, but for 
the vast majority it will require the longer 
and more explicit instructions of the Millennial 
age. 

If God were moved by selfish love and 
ambition, as some suppose, it would extend 
also to the lower animals, as the same 
selfish spirit in depraved men embraces 
not only their children but all things 
that are theirs. They love their horses and 
cows and dogs and cats, and many a human 
life has been lost in defence of a favorite 
dog or horse— the selfish love for 
these leading sometimes to quarrels, feuds, 
brawls, fights and murders. If God were 
influenced by this selfish love it would 
have plenty of room for exercise, for we 
must remember that he is the creator of 
the lower animals as truly as of man. Let 
us inquire then, 

First. Is it true that God loves everybody, 

"whatever his condition," whether 
of wilful obedience or wilful disobedience, 
of sin or of righteousness, of pride or of 
meekness? Is this true? or is it merely 
the extreme view of an extreme mind, and 
radically untrue— a misrepresentation of 
the truth? 

Since God is best able to speak for himself 
on this as on other subjects, we would 
best inquire of him through his Word. 



And first let us notice that there is a general 
love as well as a special love. Love 
of the general sort we sometimes speak of 
as kindness or generosity, and it is properly 
exercised toward even the wretched and 
unlovely, if they are in such a state through 
misfortune or ignorance, and unwillingly. 
General love, then, is large-hearted generosity. 
And since, so far as we are 
now competent to judge, all men are 
in sin and trouble unwillingly, it becomes 
us to have and to use and to cultivate this 
quality of general love of all mankind; 
this universal good will, and readiness to 
do good to all men, which is signified by 
the word Philanthropy. We need not 
add that a special love of the lovely and 
good and true, as of God and Christ and 
brethren, is also proper. What we would 
have all notice is, that there are two kinds 
of love: the intense, particular love, and 
the general love, or kindness. And these 
two sorts of love (affectionate love and 
loving kindness) can be traced throughout 
the Scriptures in reference to the love of 
our Lord Jesus and also of the Heavenly 
Father. Let us note first a few of the 
many statements which show the special 
love or affection:— Mark in the following 
passage God's special love (affection) for 
Christ Jesus and for those who come unto 
him through Jesus, and Christ's special 
love (affection) for all who have his spirit 
and who are truly his followers:— 

"The Father loveth the Son and hath given 
all things into his hand."— John 3:35 . 

"Therefore doth my Father love me, because 
I lay down my life."— John 10:17 . 

"When Jesus knew that his hour was 
come that he should depart out of the 
world unto the Father, having loved his 
own which were in the world, he loved 
them unto the end" ( John 13:1 ), and 
sent out Judas, who had a different spirit, 
which he did not love. Then he said to 
the loved ones remaining: 

"A new commandment I give unto you, 
that ye love one another; as I have loved 
you, that ye also love one another." ( John 13:31-34 .) 
Then promising these loved ones 
the Comforter, even the spirit of truth 
whom the world cannot receive, he adds: 

"He that hath my commandments and 
keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and 
he that loveth me shall be loved of my 
Father, and I will love him, and will 



manifest myself to him.... If a man 
love me he will keep my words: and my 
Father will love him, and we will come 
unto him and make our abode with him." 
-John 14:15,21,23 . 

[From these words of our Lord it would 
appear that he is the one whose words are 
contradicted by the words of the tract in 
question— "Those who have taught you 
that God will love you if you will be good 
have meant well, but they are mistaken." 
What teacher is this who undertakes to 
criticize the great Teacher who spake as 
never man spake?] 

"As the Father hath loved me, so have 
I loved you; continue ye in my love. If 
ye keep my commandments ye shall continue 
in my love; even as I have kept my 
Father's commandments and abide in his 
love."- John 15:9,10 . 

"This is my commandment, That ye 
love one another as I have loved you. 
Greater love hath no man than this, that 
a man lay down his life for his friends. 
Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I 
command you. Henceforth I call you not 

servants. ..but friends I have chosen 

you out of the world."— John 15:12-19 . 

Before leaving them our Lord prayed 
for those who had received God's word 
( John 17:14 ), and whom he called his 
friends, specially and affectionately loved, 
saying:— 

"I pray for them: I pray not for the 
world, but for them which thou hast given 
me; for they are thine. And all mine are 
thine, and thine are mine. ...Neither 
pray I for these [present disciples] alone, 
but for them also which shall believe on 
me through their word,. ..that the 
world may believe that thou hast sent me; 
and hast loved them as thou hast loved 
me." -John 17:9-11,20-23 . 

Perhaps the above citations are sufficient 
to show, to the critical, the special or 
affectionate love of God for those in harmony 
with him; likewise the special love 
of Christ for the same class of "friends," 
and the special love that should prevail 
among God's children for each other in 
proportion as they see in each other the 
likeness of their Lord. For further evidence 
on this line see the following texts, 
which we will not occupy space to quote. 
That disciple whom Jesus [specially] loved. 
-John 19:26; 21:7,20. 



Christ's special love for his church, 
clearly distinguished from the world.— 
Rom. 8:35,37 ; Gal. 2:20 ; Eph. 2:4 ; 5:2,25,28 ; 
Rev. 1:5 ; 3:9 . 

God's special love and provision for his 
saints as distinguished from the world.— 

1 Cor. 2:9 ; 8:3 ; Rom. 8:28,39 ; 2 Thes. 2:16 ; 

1 John 3:1 ; 4:10,11,16 ; James 1:12 ; 2:5 ; 
Heb. 12:6 ; Jude 21 . 

Special brotherly love among the saints, 
as distinguished from our benevolent sympathy 
for the world, enjoined.— 1 John 3:11,14,23 ; 
4:7,11,12,20,21 ; 5:1,2. 

GENERAL SYMPATHY-LOVE. 

Aside from the special love or affection 
for those who have characters and 
principles of life worthy of love, there is 
the general love of sympathy and pity 
which God and Christ exercise toward all 
the fallen race of men as well as toward 
the lower creation; and this, too, God's 
people are to have and to exercise. While 
we are to love righteousness and hate iniquity 
and oppose it, even to the extent 
of refusing to fellowship with those who 
continue not in the doctrine of Christ. 
( 2 John 9-11), yet we should be full of 
sympathy toward the ignorant as well as 
of pity toward the wanderers. To such 
an extent should we exercise this sympathy 
and pity, that if one who is an enemy 
to us, or who has done or would do us 
harm should come under our power, we 
not only should do him no harm, but if 
in want, we should feed him. And if he 
be even an enemy of the cross of Christ, 
whose life is spent in tearing down the 
faith of the Gospel, we must beware that 
we attempt to punish such, though we 
should be very zealous for the truth in showing 
up their errors— "contending earnestly 
for the faith once delivered unto 
the saints." While, as the Apostle directs, 
such should not be treated as brethren, 
nor granted the affectionate love and demonstration 
of hospitality due to brethren, 
yet it is not for us to bring railing accusations, 
against even such, nor to attempt 
to say what shall be their just punishment; 
but if these hungered we should feed them 
also, and if naked we should assist in 
clothing them. 

We are ever to remember, in dealing 
with others and in considering their failings 



and errors, that we are not now competent 
to judge to what extent theirs may be 

wilful transgressions against knowledge 
and ability, and to what extent they may be 
due to the imperfections and unbalance of 
mind and body inherited through the fall. 

Therefore, says the Apostle, judge (decide) 
nothing before the time, because it is written: 
"Vengeance is mine, I will repay, 
saith the Lord;" and therefore, if thine 
enemy hunger, feed him, because thou art 
not competent to decide now what measure 
of sentence he really deserves. We are, 
however, competent to decide whether or 

R1255 : page 7 

not his conduct is moral or immoral and 
we should not fellowship the immoral, even 
though they profess to be brethren. ( 1 Cor. 5:11 .) 
And we are also competent to 
decide whether a teacher is leaving the 
doctrine of Christ and preaching another 
gospel, or whether he is abiding in and 
teaching the gospel of the cross of Christ. 
And such as do not abide in the doctrines 
of Christ and the Apostles, though they 
be angels from heaven, we are not to 
recognize longer as brothers in Christ, 
lest our fellowshiping of them as such 
cause our influence to oppose the truth 
and favor the error and thus make us sharers 
in the evil being done. But we are 
not to harm a hair of their heads, nor even 
to attempt to decide what punishment 
will be their due. That is God's part, not 
ours. While we are standing staunch for the 
truth, we can pity the erring, hope that their 
error is not wilful, and leave the matter of 
their future reward or punishment in the 
hands of him who reads the motives. Our 
treatment of such cases is prescribed by 
our Lord— "Let him be unto thee as an 
heathen man and as a publican." ( Matt. 18:15-17 .) 
As we would treat a heathen 
man with justice and kindness and the 
love of pity, but not with the love of affection 
due to a brother in Christ, so we 
are to treat such a one as has departed 
from the good tidings once delivered to 
the saints by our Lord and the Apostles, 
after doing our best to correct his error. 

All who accept of Christ's atoning work 
are reckoned justified and at-one with God 
—freed from condemnation, freed from the 



R1255 : page 8 

curse. Such God owns as his children, 
and such we are to own and affectionately 
love as brethren. But when such reject 
the gospel of Christ and the Apostles— the 
gospel of forgiveness of sins by virtue of 
Christ's sacrifice —those who thus pervert 
the true Gospel, and attempt to put forth 
in its stead another gospel, are no longer 
to be affectionately loved as God's children 
but are to be pitied, as all others are to be 
pitied who have not escaped the condemnation 
that is on the world. This is Paul's 
doctrine clearly stated in Gal. 1:4,7,9 . 

R1250 : page 8 

GOD'S LOVE AND OURS FOR THE WORLD. 

That God's love and our love copied 
after his, as they relate to the world, are a 
different sort of love from what he and we 
bear toward the saints and all the household 
of faith, is very evident. Not that 
the love is of a different kind exactly, but 
that they are different degrees of intensity 
of the same quality. This is not only 
evident from the foregoing citations in 
which the special love of God for his 
children, those adopted into his family, 
is clearly specified, but it is manifest to 

R1251 : page 8 

all by their own experiences also. You 
love the whole world in the sense of pitying 
them all and wishing them all a better 
state of mind and body; but your pitying 
love for murderers and thieves, for the 
morally and physically unclean, is, or 
ought to be, very different from your higher 
and deeper love of affection for those who 
are well intentioned— the pure in heart. 

It would as truly be an indication of 
your own moral uncleanness for you to 
love affectionately the morally polluted 
as for you not to love affectionately all 
those brethren who love righteousness.— 

1 John 2:15 . 

God not only tells us that he loved the 
world, but how much he loved it, and in 
what way his love took shape. He did 
not love the sin of the world; nor were 
the sinful qualities of the world lovely in 
his sight. On the contrary, he tells us that 



he is angry with the wicked and that he 
hates evil doers. ( Psa. 7:10-17 ; 139:21,22 ; 
Amos 5:14,15 ; Heb. 1:9 .) He 
tells us to be like him in our loves and 
hates— to hate sin and love righteousness. 
He says, "Love not the world, neither 
the things that are in the world. If any 
man love the world, the love of the Father 
is not in him." And again, "Have 
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of 
darkness, but rather reprove them."— 

1 John 2:15 ; Eph. 5:11 . 

This testimony is perfectly harmonious 
—we must, as lovers of God and righteousness, 
have no affectionate love for evil doers, 
though we should charitably hope that 
much of the evil is the result of misinformation 
and inherited weaknesses, and accordingly 
should feel and act kindly, with 
pitying love toward such as are out of the 
way, endeavoring to bring them to righteousness. 
Such is God's love for the world. 
He saw man's distress in sin and under its 
penalty, death; and his pitying love provided 
the ransom and opened up the way 
for all to return unto God and be abundantly 
pardoned and received back into his 
family and helped out of sin and death to 
righteousness and life. So then 

THE REAL GOOD NEWS FOR ALL 

is that God, moved by benevolence, saw 
that some of his human creatures, if granted 
a trial for life, after having had an experience 
with sin and its results, would 
choose righteousness and its reward of life. 
Seeing such possibilities of lovable character 
in men, God loved the race because of 
the possibilities before it. This prompted 
the plan and action of God in all his dealings 
with his creatures. God determined to 
give Adam and each of his posterity a 
chance for everlasting life, after they had 
an experience with sin and its wages. He 
proposed salvation from the consequences 
of the sin of Adam— salvation out of sin 
and death. This would be second trial or 
second chance for life to Adam and in the 
sense that all his children were represented 
in Adam in his trial it would be the second 
trial or chance for all the race— though to 
all but Adam it would be the first individual 
trial. 

But in order to be just and to keep his 
word— that the wages of sin is death, something 



was needed to be done to meet the 
penalty that was against Adam of which all 
men shared the affects in that all are sinners, 
none being perfect or worthy of life. Would 
God permit his Word to be broken? Would 
he restore to life and favor Adam, whom 
he had justly sentenced to death? No. 
But God had taken all this into account 
beforehand; knowing the end from the beginning, 
his plans were all perfected before 
man's creation. He would do two 
things at once— he had a dearly beloved 
Son on the spiritual plane of existence, who 
was "the beginning of his creation," and the 
chief of all his creatures. He wanted to advance 
him to still higher honors and the 
divine nature. He would make an open 
display to all his intelligent creatures of 
how he shows favor to the obedient and 
humble, by testing Christ's obedience to 
the extremist point and then rewarding him 
highly— just as he had already manifested 
his disfavor to one (Satan) who in pride 
had attempted to usurp divine honors. 

The redemption of man from the sentence 
of death would furnish an opportunity 
wonderfully favorable to several things: 
1st, For the manifestation of the obedience 
of Christ and its great reward; 2nd, For 
the giving of another trial of life to 
Adam and an individual opportunity to 
each of his posterity; 3d, It would vindicate 
the law of God; and while showing 
his great love for men, would still maintain 
untarnished his absolute justice and 
truthfulness. 

In God's due time Christ humbled himself 
from his higher nature and became a 
man, simply to carry out God's plan— to 
prove his full obedience and to pay man's 
penalty— to be a ransom or corresponding 
price for Adam, and by dying as his substitute 
to make it possible for Adam to come 
out of death, relieving him from the sentence 
of death. 

Remember that the death of Christ did 
not change God's law. It merely removed 
the sentence of that law from Adam and 
his race, and put them under the control of 
Christ, the purchaser, who will discipline 
them and select the worthy. Thus Christ 
became a hope of salvation to all men, but 
the author of eternal salvation to those 
only who obey him. ( Heb. 5:9 .) And 
when his Bride, the Gospel church, has 
been selected, and he has taken his great 



power, he will begin the great work of 
giving knowledge and discipline to all the 
race, and selecting those who, by hearty 
obedience, shall be commended as lovers 
of righteousness, worthy of life everlasting. 

Therefore, we see that the real good 
news for any and for all dates from the 
cross— everything before that was typical, 
and based on the coming reality. The 
good news is that, in God's goodness or 
grace, Christ Jesus tasted death for us, 
that we might be released from our death 
sentence and might have a chance to obtain 
life everlasting, by accepting of Christ 
as our Redeemer, and by obeying him and 
forsaking sin. It is for all, in the sense that 
no limitations are placed upon it— none 
are debarred from the privilege. So far as 
God's part is concerned, all will be done 
(during the Millennial reign of Christ) that 
justice and love can do. The knowledge 
of this salvation and of its conditions will 
be clearly and fully made known to all, 
and whoever fails of it will have himself 
to blame. There would be no means of 
knowing whether few or many, or none, 
would pass the trial of the Millennial age 
successfully, except for God's foreknowledge. 
He shows that there will be some 
found worthy of life and some unworthy, 
but does not tell us the proportions of 
each class; nor is it necessary for us to 
know this. Each for himself should, as 
soon as he hears it, embrace the good news 
of salvation from sin and death, and by 
faith and obedience make the blessing his. 



R1255 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., NOVEMBER, 1890. NO. 12. 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

THE RANSOM STILL THE TEST.--MORE ARE 
FALLING AND YET MANY MORE TO FALL 
LN THIS "EVIL DAY."-DR. LYMAN ABBOTT'S 
REJECTION OF THE TRUE GOSPEL. 
-DR. EDWARD ABBOTT'S DEFENSE 
OF THE TRUTH.-THE PRESBYTERIAN 
BANNER'S FAITHFULNESS.-THE LESSONS 
OF THE HOUR.-THE QUESTION 
CANNOT BE AVOIDED.-WHO IS ON THE 
LORD'S SIDE? 

For the past eleven years, faithfulness to 
the Lord and his Word and the welfare of 
his sheep has necessitated an almost constant 
contention for the ransom, as the 
very center and foundation principle of 
true Christian doctrine. 

During this time we have seen and faithfully 
proclaimed that it is upon this point 
of doctrine that the great test of the close 
of this age is to come. It is written, "He 
shall be for a stone of stumbling and for 
a rock of offence to both the [nominal] 
houses of Israel." ( Isa. 8:14 .) To the 
Jews, Christ crucified for our redemption 
was, as Paul testifies, a cause of offence— 
"They stumbled at that stumbling-stone." 
( Rom. 9:32,33 .) And so also the nominal 
spiritual Israel is likewise stumbling. 
Every year, we might almost say every day, 
gives increasing evidence of this stumbling. 
Any one whose attention has been 
drawn to this subject of the present falling 
away of Christian people from the true 
foundation of Christianity must observe 
that, one after another, ministers and religious 
journals of all denominations and 
shades of belief are abandoning this foundation. 
They claim that the death of Christ 
was either for himself, or as an exemplification 
of fidelity to principle which would 
benefit his disciples and the world, not as 
a sacrifice for their sins, but as an example 
of how each must save himself —salvation 
by works, observe, and not by 
faith in the precious blood of Christ shed 
for our redemption. 

Thank God for the privilege of being 



traduced and misrepresented by the world 
and by "false brethren" for the sake of this 
cause. All have our witness on the subject. 
We are not surprised at the sweeping 
strides the error is making. The Scriptures 
indicate, too, that the great stumbling 
and falling away from this all-important 
doctrine is only beginning. Before 
the sifting ends a thousand will fall to one 
who will stand. ( Psa. 91:7 ; Eph. 6:11-13 .) 
Christian people generally hold 
the doctrine of the ransom, but only in a 
blind way. They have no clear, definite 
views as to how or what it was. They are 
all, therefore, very susceptible to this latter-day 
snare of the Adversary. 

As an evidence of the spread of this false 
doctrine, which, as another gospel, seeks 
to displace the true, we cite the case of 
Dr. Lyman Abbott, from whose gifted pen 
we have heretofore made quotations. It 
seems that he, too, has denied the faith. 
The new views are known as the "New 
Theology," while ours is the Apostolic, or 
Old Theology. 

We clip the following from the Presbyterian 
Banner, and must compliment its 
editor upon his courage as a champion of 
the now waning cause of the cross of 
Christ, which is yet to the "orthodox" a 
stumbling-block, and to the worldly-wise 
foolishness. The Banner article runs as 
follows:— 

SETTING ASIDE THE SACRIFICE 
OF CHRIST. 

"Dr. Lyman Abbott, successor of the 
late Rev. Henry Ward Beecher in the pastorate 
of Plymouth church, Brooklyn, and 
editor of the Christian Union, has for a 
time been somewhat noted, as a commentator, 
preacher and editor, for announcing 
sentiments and doctrines contrary to what 
are generally held by orthodox evangelical 
Christians. His most noted departure appeared 
in an article in the Andover Review, 
last November, which has been the 
occasion of a fraternal correspondence between 
him and his brother, Dr. Edward 
Abbott, published in the Christian Union, 
July 3d. The article in the Andover Review 
was an effort to set forth that the historic 
interpretation by the Church that 
the sacrifice of Christ was an atonement for 
the sins of his people has been an entire 



mistake; that we are to be saved, not by 
what Christ did or suffered eighteen hundred 
years ago, but by the nature of God 
transmitted to us and entering into us 
through Christ; and that the main object 
of Christ's sacrifice is to keep us from 
committing sin now, not to save us from 
the guilt and punishment of sin. 

"In his correspondence with his brother, 
in defense of his position, he says: 'The 
New Testament does not seem to me to 
afford ground for the opinion that Christ 
died either to induce God to pardon, or 
to enable him to pardon.' 'The question 
is, How can the suffering of the innocent 
one avail, not to purchase a pardon for 
the guilty, but to purify and perfect him?' 
This is simply to set aside the expiatory 
character of the sufferings and death of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, and to deny the 
plain teachings of the Word of God with 
respect to it. He appears to go even so 
far as to admit that parts of the Scriptures 
must be blotted out in order to meet the 
view he has presented. And he does not 
shrink from advising this. For he says 
that his interpretation of the sacrifice of 
Christ makes it necessary 'to erase a great 
deal from the New Testament,' and to 
'blot out a great deal from the consciousness 
of the Christian Church,' and he is 
confident that this should be done. Surely 
the wildest latitudinarianism could ask 
nothing more. This robs the Gospel at 
once of that which the prophets, the apostles 
and the saints of all ages have most undoubtedly 
believed, upon which they have 
most firmly rested, and which Christ himself 
most certainly taught. 

"The reply of Dr. Edward Abbott is conclusive. 
He calls attention to the fact that 
Christ said that he laid down his life for 
his sheep; that Paul and Peter and John 
had clearly taught the doctrine of the expiation 
of sin by the death of Christ; and 
that it has been the belief of the Church 
from the beginning, 'that in some way an 
atonement, an expiatory atonement, a vicarious 
atonement, was operative,' whatever 
may have been the difference as to its 
philosophy. He asks these and other 
equally pertinent questions: 

'"Is, or is not, this plainly the doctrine 
of Scripture, whatever may be our 
own opinion about it?' 'Has not the 
substance of this truth been the very fiber 



of the Church universal?' 'Can it be 
possible, if there be a holy Spirit, that the 
Church should have been so deceived and 
deceiving?' 'Is it safe to erase as much 
from the New Testament as it is necessary 
to erase, and to blot out as much from 
the consciousness of the Christian Church 
as it is necessary to blot out, before your 
theory of the blood of Christ can be 
accepted?' 

"The teachings of the Old and New 
Testaments, in many forms, that Christ 
gave himself a sacrifice to save us from the 
guilt and penalty of sin, are the most precious 
words God has spoken to us. If 
Christ did not die for us, then are we indeed 
without God and without hope in 
the world. No present obedience and righteousness, 
even if they were possible, as 
taught by Dr. Lyman Abbott, could by 
any means remove the sin that previously 
had separated us from God and brought 
us under condemnation. Christ 'hath 
borne our griefs and carried our sorrows;' 
'was wounded for our transgressions, 
bruised for our iniquities;' 'was delivered 
for our offences, and was raised again for 
our justification;' and 'being justified by 
his blood, we shall be saved from wrath 

R1256 : page 1 

through him.' 'There is therefore now no 
condemnation to them which are in Christ 
Jesus.' Dr. Lyman Abbott's gospel is 'another 
gospel, which is not another,' but is 
a perversion of the Gospel." 

Let no one suppose that we take pleasure 
in the announcement of the falling 
from the faith of Dr. Abbott, or any other 
man. On the contrary, it is a source of 
painful disappointment to us, that such a 
one should be lost to the cause of the cross, 
and become an opponent of the Lamb of 
God which taketh away the sin of the world. 
Nor would the exercise of that loving sympathy 
which would hide his fall from public 
notice be proper; for he is more than 
a brother fallen from grace— he is a teacher 
exercising an influence which will affect 
others and cause them to stumble, also. 
Our love must be exercised first toward 
God, in fidelity to his Word, and second, 
toward those still in harmony with God 
and his truth, to guard them against the 
erroneous view. Let God be true, though 



it show every man to be in error. Let 
God's character and plan be upheld, no 
matter who must be shown up as proclaimers 
of another gospel. This is what 
is signified by the injunction to "contend 
earnestly for the faith once delivered to 
the saints." 

We are the more disappointed in Dr. 
Abbott because his influence heretofore has 
been growingly in harmony with the Truth. 
And yet, while we can no longer recognize 
him as a brother in Christ, because 
he has abandoned the only foundation upon 
which Christian brotherhood can stand, 
we can and do recognize his honest, manly 
statement of his position, and honor 
him for it. He is too candid to attempt to 
quibble and to deny the true and only 
meaning of the words (ransom, etc.) of 
our Lord and the apostles, and to continue 
the use of the word ransom as a 
blind, merely to deceive people and seek 
to be in favor with all classes. He comes 
out honestly and plainly and admits that 
his theory requires him "to erase a great 
deal from the New Testament." 

Because few are so candid as Mr. Abbott, 
the Truth has the severer battle, and 
the deception is the greater. During the 
past ten years, in discussing this subject 
and combating the error as the snare of 
the enemy, we have had the underhanded 
ones to oppose, who use the words ransom 
and redeem, and yet deny their true and 
only meaning, in order to deceive some 
of the sheep. In Mark 10:45 and Matt. 20:28 
the Greek term rendered ransom 
is lutron anti (a price to offset or to correspond), 
and in 1 Tim. 2:6 it is the same 
expression reversed, anti-lutron (a corresponding 
price). 

Those who deny that our Lord Jesus 
gave himself a ransom (a corresponding 
price, a substitute) for all deny the gospel 
of Christ and the apostles, whatever else 
they may believe. And the clearer it is 
presented, and the sooner they realize it, 
the better for such as are being blindly led 
into the error. The sooner the line of 
division is clearly drawn, the better it will 
be for the Lord's sheep. It is a good sign, 
however, of the real loyalty of the deceived 
ones, that the false shepherds are 
obliged to use words (ransom, redeem, 
etc.) which do not represent their views, 
in order to deceive and to hold the sheep. 



We need not expect that such will confess 
that they are deniers of the ransom 
any more than we need expect a staunch 
Romanist to admit that the Papal system 
is Antichrist. By their doctrines, and not 
by their professions, both show their real 
position. 

It is time, dearly beloved, that each for 
himself shall definitely settle this one question 
which lies at the foundation of Christian 
faith: Do you accept the Bible 
teaching that the death of "the man 
Christ Jesus" was our ransom, or corresponding 
price, by which a "propitiation" 
(satisfaction) of the divine law was effected 
( 1 John 2:2; 4:10; 1 Tim. 2:5,6 ), 
or do you not believe it? Be honest 

R1256 : page 2 

with yourself and with others. Be not 
ashamed of your honest convictions. If 
honestly in doubt as to God's teaching on 
the subject and meekly desirous of being 
shown the path of life, you are of the sort 
he is ready and willing to lead into the 
truth. Such may truly and confidently 
look to God and say, "Thou wilt show 
me the path of life," remembering the 
promises, "The meek will he guide in 
judgment, and the meek will he teach his 
way." ( Psa. 16:11 ; 25:9 .) "All the 
paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto 
such as keep his covenant and his testimonies." 
-Psa. 25:10 . 

It will not answer to say, Yes, of course 
I believe in Christ as the ransom— and yet 
indifferently neglect to give consideration 
and weight to the meaning of the word 
ransom. You do not believe, in the true 
sense, anything of which you are wholly 
ignorant. We exhort all, therefore, to 
awake to the importance of the subject, 
so as to study this foundation doctrine of 
true Christianity. 

To acknowledge the Scripture teaching, 
that the death of the man Christ Jesus was 
the corresponding price which sufficed to 
meet and to cancel the first Adam's sin 
and penalty, is to acknowledge the following 
clear line of reasoning from the 
Scriptures:— 

(1) When the beloved Son of God left 
the glory which he had with the Father before 
the world was, to become our Savior, 
he was "made flesh," became "a man," 



"a little lower than the angels," for the 
very purpose of tasting death for every 
man, as the ransom or corresponding price 
for the first man through whom the loss 
and condemnation had come. ( Heb. 2:9 .) 
Since he was the corresponding 
price, it proves that the man Christ Jesus 
corresponded exactly with the first man. 

(2) It proves then, that the first man 
was all that God declares that he made 
him— a man, an earthly being in the image 
and likeness of his Creator.— Gen. 1:27 . 

(3) It proves that a fall occurred, from 
that perfect manhood, into sin and death, 
as witnessed by the degradation and dying 
under which the world in general is 
groaning and travailing to-day, longing 
for deliverance. This is also witnessed by 
the grand superiority of "the man Christ 

Jesus who gave himself a ransom" or corresponding 

price; for as he (aside from the 

special divine power imparted to him at 

his baptism) corresponded to Adam, it 

shows how greatly Adam's race has fallen 

from that real human perfection. 

(4) It shows distinctly what is implied 

in the promise of a restitution or restoration 
to that which was lost in Adam and 
redeemed for all in the ransom-sacrifice 
given by "the man Christ Jesus."— 
Acts 3:21 ; Matt. 18:11 ; 1 Tim. 2:5,6 . 

(5) It distinguishes clearly between restitution 
to the world of the lost earthly possessions 

and those human perfections which 
the first Adam possessed but lost by sin, 
and which the Lord took for a time for the 

purpose of giving himself as man's ransom 
( Heb. 10:4-10 ), and the high calling of 

the Gospel Church to the divine nature, 
to which our Lord was exalted at his resurrection, 
because of his obedience to the 
Father's plan for our redemption. 

(6) It shows, too, how the Gospel 
Church, the Bride of Christ, though belonging 
to the condemned race and requiring 

and receiving a share in the ransom, 
has been invited to share with the 
Redeemer in sacrifices which shall fully 
test her love and devotion and fitness, 
under God's conditions, to share her 
Lord's nature and glory; and how she can 
do no needful work, such as her Lord's, 
in the way of ransoming others, since his 
work was the full, complete ransom for 
the one man in whom all had been sentenced, 
and hence was, as stated, a "ransom 



for all." 

(7) It shows at once the error of the 
opposing claim of "another gospel," 
which affirms that our Lord Jesus never 
gave himself as a corresponding price (a 
ransom) for all; that death is not a penalty 
to be ransomed from, but a step of 
progress in a plan of evolution, by which 
the divine nature is to be attained 
by all; that the fall of man is 
myth-that "if he fell at all he fell 
upward;" that man never was perfected 
as man, but that he began to exist in a 
very crude and imperfect state; that he 
never had God's image, and could not, 
therefore, have lost that or any other good 
quality, nor in any sense have lost himself, 
and hence needed no corresponding 
price, no saving from a lost estate, no redemption 
from a fall, no restitution to an 
original perfection and image of God. 

The ransom may thus be seen to be the 
very center of the Word and plan of God, 
and the most thorough test that can be 
applied to any theory, to prove at once 
whether it is of God or of men. Whatever 
is found out of harmony with this 
foundation principle of the Gospel, 
preached by Jesus and the Apostles, should 
be let severely alone. To tamper with that 
which you perceive to be off the only 
foundation for faith, laid in God's Word, 
is dangerous. To allow either yourself 
or others for you to devise and arrange 
another plan of salvation than that which 
God reveals, is to trust to your own or 
their blind reasonings and to abandon 
the lines and points which God has 
marked for our guidance in his revelation. 
You cannot trust your own reasoning faculties 
or those of others outside those lines 
and points which God has furnished. To 
go outside them is to get lost in a mental 
maze in which all is speculation and uncertainty, 
because outside of the fixed lines 
provided for our restraint by our loving 
Creator. 

The Lord's invitation, "Come, let us 
reason together," implies that we are to 
reason with Him, inside these lines which 
he has erected for our preservation from 
error, and not that we should abandon his 
Word to reason for ourselves. And the 
subject upon which we reason and the lines 
which must limit our reasonings are indicated 
in the words which follow the invitation 



to reason— "Though your sins be 
as scarlet they shall be white as wool." 
Here is an acknowledgement of sin, and of 
a fall, and of a just condemnation. It is also 
an admission that the sins are scarlet— 

R1257 : page 2 

of a deep dyed and fast color— that we 
cannot wash them away ourselves, and that 
God proposes to cleanse them away for us 
through the blood of the Lamb slain for 
our redemption. 

The difficulty with Eve was just this 
which is now to test the Church, the second 
Eve. ( 2 Cor. 1 1:3 .) Eve knew the 
lines which God had placed, she knew 
the liberty which the gracious Creator had 
bestowed, and she knew the limit of that 
liberty— that she must not partake of the 
forbidden tree; but she chafed under any 
restriction. The restrictions would probably 
have been removed in time, but Eve 
was not submissive to the Lord's plan, and 
lent an ear to the suggestion of the 
tempter that she should assert and use 
her liberty, and not recognize God's superior 
wisdom and yield willing obedience. 
As she forsook all the other trees of the 
garden, so beautiful and so good, to partake 
of the forbidden one, so now the 
Church is tempted to forsake all the exceeding 
great and precious and harmonious 
truths of God's Word, our garden of 
delights, and to seek other wisdom which 
will as surely carry them away from 
the true gospel as Eve's disobedience led 
out of Eden. 

If our first parents, with perfect reasoning 
faculties, needed the Lord's direction, 
because of their inexperience, how much 
more necessary it is for us, who not only 
lack experience, but also lack perfection 
of mental capacity and balance, to stay 
close to the Word of the Lord and carefully 
avoid even an attempt to reason outside of 
its defined lines, or in opposition to its 
clearly expressed doctrine on this subject 
of the ransom, which, like a finger-board, 
distinguishes the way the Lord planned 
and directs from all other ways. 

WHO IS ON THE LORD'S SIDE? 

A passive interest in this question is 
not sufficient: an active interest is what 



the importance of the question, fidelity 

to God's Word and interest in the 

saints in the trial now in progress demands. 

This is no time to shirk the question 

or half-heartedly to watch the battle 

between truth and error, content to know 

that you yourself see the truth clearly and 

favor it in your heart. This is no time to 

fear to own the cross, lest its growing unpopularity 

should rupture some earthly 

ties and bring you the disapprobation of 

those you have loved and esteemed. It is 

a time, on the contrary, to be esteemed 

and used as a precious occasion for showing 

our dear Redeemer our loyalty to him 

and his Word, and our willingness, if 

need be, to break every tender tie, except 

that which binds us to him. The present 

is such an emergency as develops strength 

and courage in the true soldier of the 

cross, who appreciates the opportunity of 

enduring scoffs and misrepresentations for 

Christ's sake. 

In the history of the nation of Israel, 
which typified the Church of Christ, we 
find that when a battle raged between 
Israel and those who typified errorists now, 
those who "went not up to the help of 
the Lord against the mighty" were cursed 
or condemned instead of praised and blessed 
after the victory had been won ( Judges 5:23 ), 
even though they took no active 
part in opposition to God's cause. So in 
the present conflict: those who fail to lift 
up heart and pen and voice and every 
talent possessed, on the Lord's side of the 
question, will not be reckoned among the 
overcomers who get the victory under the 
Lord's direction. 

Awake! Put on the whole armor of 
God and follow the Lamb whithersoever 
he goeth.- Rev. 14:4 . 

R1257 : page 2 

TRUTH IS STRANGER THAN FICTION. 

This old proverb seems to find illustration 
in the subject before us. To 
those who disregard the Bible account of 
man's origin and destiny, the Bible doctrine 
of a fall from an original perfection 
seems less in harmony with existing conditions 
in comparison with the past than 
does the theory of evolution, or gradual 
progression from a very low beginning. 



One cause of this seeming discount of 
truth, to some minds, lies in the fact that 
though man has been gradually deteriorating 
from the original perfection, his surrounding 
conditions have been gradually 
improving, the gain of experience compensating 
to some extent for the loss of 
native ability. Besides, we should remember 
that we are considering and comparing 
the achievements of a comparatively 
few men in earlier times with those of today, 
which are the results of the combined 
experiences of millions of men 
based upon the record of the experiences 
and experiments of many more millions 
now dead, all working together in the 
same general cause— to overcome surrounding 
obstacles and disadvantages. 
Thus considered, we see that it is only reasonable 
to expect what we do find, that 
circumstances are so much more favorable 
to-day, that men of small capacity and 
greatly fallen from the original image of 
God can, under present advantageous 
circumstances, accomplish much more than 
Adam, who had that image, or than any of 
his more immediate posterity. To contrast 
properly the individual ability of to-day 
with that of the remote past, imagine 
yourself and wife wrecked upon a desert 
island, out of reach and out of hope of 
reaching or communicating with others; 
imagine every article of commerce lost, 
and your memory of the past, of your own 
experiences and reading, etc., all blotted 
out; and then think how long it would 
probably take you and your wife and 
children to formulate language, to establish 
the arts and sciences and to invent 
telegraphs, railroads and all the machinery 
of the present day. The strong probabilities 
are that, instead of thus rising, 
you would gradually become more and 
more degraded, and instead of handing 
down such a race as Adam's your children 
within two hundred years would be 
savages. Had God started our race in 
such a pair, the earth never would have 
had the civilization of to-day— aside from 
some direct interposition of providence. 
And this brings us to— 

A SECOND REASON 

why the truth— the Bible declaration of a 
fall— seems to the worldly mind stranger, 



or less credible, than the fiction of evolution, 
or gradual progression. It is because 
the fall of Adam's posterity was so rapid 
that the world speedily became degraded 
to semi-barbarism, except that family 
(Seth, Enoch, Methuselah, Noah and Shem) 
which alone continued to have any particular 
degree of divine likeness, and which 
sought to retain God and his will in their 
hearts. After the flood the same degeneracy 
continued among Noah's posterity 
—except in the one line of Abraham's 
family (Israel, God's covenant people); 
and even in this family the tendency to 
forget God and to follow witchcraft, idolatry, 
etc., like the nations around them, 
was continual, and was only prevented in 
a measure by the Lord's bringing upon 
them famines, pestilences, etc., according 
to the provisions of their covenant, to 
turn them back from the tendencies of 
their fallen natures. 

The effect of the Lord's restraints upon 
that nation, Israel, are manifest from 
the fact that in the zenith of their national 
existence, in the days of David and 
Solomon, they excelled all other nations. 
That people shed a light, and by example 
arrested to a large degree the downward 
tendency in the surrounding nations. 
They set them an example in literature, 
in the Psalms of David and the Proverbs 
of Solomon, which the poets and wise men 
of other nations afterward copied but 
very imperfectly. From the promises 
made by the Lord to Israel through the 
prophets, of future blessings, in which 
peace and plenty and beauty for ashes 
should fill the earth, sprang the songs and 
legends among other nations of a coming 
golden age, which helped to lift their 
minds from sensuality. And from a promise 
that this blessing should come through 
a great deliverer, Messiah, we can trace 
the ambition of a Cyrus, an Alexander, 
the Caesars and others to acquire universal 
dominion, fulfil the prophecy and organize 
the strong government promised. 



CONTINUED ON SEVENTH PAGE. 
R1257 : page 7 
TRUTH STRANGER THAN FICTION. 



(CONTINUED FROM SECOND PAGE.) 

Thus to the light of God's people, and 
of God's promises to them, is attributable 
the fact that all the adjacent nations 
were superior to those farther away from 
that influence, who were at that time in 
barbarism and savagery. 

And so, too, since the Gospel began, 
the light of God's promises and the teachings 
and example of our Lord and his 
apostles have exerted an influence in favor 
of purity, enlightenment and freedom, 
notwithstanding the gross counterfeit (Papacy) 
which sprang up and usurped the 
name and influence of the true Church, 
endeavoring to throttle freedom, and substituting 
for it superstition, almost choking 
the light of truth under forms and 
ceremonies. 

Meanwhile God permitted Antichrist 
to hinder the influence of the doctrines 
and example of the true Christ and his true 
followers, and to becloud the true light for 
a time, ushering in "the dark ages" 
from which the reformation movements of 
the past three centuries have only in part 
released men. This view of the matter, and 
no other, is in harmony with the Apostle 
Paul's explanation of how the Gentile 
nations came to be so degraded as we find 
them in various quarters of the heathen 
world. He says it is "Because that, when 
they knew God, they glorified him not as 
God, neither were thankful, but became 
vain in their imaginations, and their foolish 
heart was darkened. Professing themselves 
to be wise they became fools.... 
Wherefore God gave them up. ...And 

R1258 : page 7 

even as they did not care to retain 
God in their knowledge, God gave them 
over to a reprobate mind to do those 
things which are improper; being filled 
with all unrighteousness, wickedness, covetousness, 
maliciousness; full of envy, 
murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers, 
backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, 
proud, boasters, inventors of evil 

things, disobedient to parents, etc." (Rom. 1:21,22,25,28-31 .) 
Thus the Apostle 

sums up the degradation from the image of 
God, which more or less we see all about 
us in civilized as well as in heathen lands. 



And this brings us to— 

R1258 : page 8 

THE THIRD REASON WHY 

the error seems better supported than the 
truth by existing facts. It is because recent 
discoveries and inventions cast so 
brilliant a light upon our day that all the 
centuries past seem grossly dark in comparison. 
Yet many forget that there are 
lost arts, such as the making of elastic 
glass, the tempering of copper, the making 
of Damascus steel, etc., which have not yet 
been re-discovered, with present light. 
And let us not forget that with all the 
scientific instruments and mechanical skill 
known to-day, it would be a monster 
undertaking to construct such a building 
as the Great Pyramid of Egypt. The 
bringing of its immense stones long distances 
would tax the ingenuity of the 
skilled engineers of our day, and the 
placing of such immense stones in such a 
building would be considered a marvelous 
feat with all of our present day's powerful 
machinery. The exactness of the fitting 
of such immense stones probably 
could not be equaled by our best stone-cutters 
of to-day with every help of modern 
instruments; and the exactness of the 
orientation of the building could with 
difficulty be equaled to-day by our learned 
astronomers with their exact and delicate 
instruments. And remember that this is 
only with present skill and machinery, and 
that fifty years ago, with all the skill 
known, that Pyramid could not have been 
duplicated; and it is doubtful if it could be 
to-day. So, too, with the immense stones 
of Solomon's aqueduct at Jerusalem, recently 
unearthed: though they represent 
the masonry and genius of twenty-five 
centuries ago, their trueness and size and 
durability excite the wonder of modern 
architects and masons, who doubt if we 
have to-day machinery capable of handling 
stones so immense. Then tell us not 
of the inferiority of the ancients who could 
do and did do, without the machinery, 
etc., of our late day, what we can only 
now do with it all. 

The solution of the riddle that is puzzling 
men to-day— why our day has produced 
so much more of invention and 



discovery than the past— is found only in 
the Bible. It announced the present period 
of invention over two thousand years 
ago. ( Dan. 12:4 .) It pointed out, that far 
in advance, that with the year A.D. 1799 
"The Time of the End" would begin, 
and that the present "Time of the End" 
would be the "Day of God's Preparation" 
( Nahum 2:3 ) for the incoming Millennium 
of blessing. It is, therefore, to 
the fact that God is now lifting the veil of 
ignorance and letting in the light, which 
is of him, and not by human evolution, 
that present progress is attributable. Those 
who hold to God's version of the fall and 
the ransom and the restitution may be 
laughed to scorn now by the worldly-wise 
and heady, but they will be kept by the 
power of God— by the power of his truth— 
from many injurious errors which will 
stumble thousands on every hand. Abide 
in him, and let his Word abide in you. 



R1258 : page 3 
LOOKING FOR HOME. 



I am looking beyond this abode of strife, 

With its burden of tears and sighs, 
To the radiant realms of eternal life 

Where the summits of glory rise; 
Where the fields of Paradise open to view 

As humanity's lasting home, 
And the higher bliss of a faithful few 

Assuredly shall have come. 

I am looking away to mansions fair, 

Prepared for the bride of the Lamb; 
For those who the cross now faithfully bear 

Shall soon share the crown and the palm. 
O! the rapturous bliss of Bridegroom and bride, 

When the long waiting season is o'er, 
When hearts so faithful and loyal and tried 

Are united to sever no more. 

I am looking away, for the day-star brings 

Its promise of glory rare— 
Till the rose-tipped finger of morning flings 

Her banner upon the air. 
I heed not the scourge of the tempests breath, 

I reck not the surges foam, 
For beyond the sad vistas of sin and death 

I am looking for home— sweet home! 
Selected. 



R1258 : page 3 
ANASTASIS-RESURRECTION. 

No subject occupies a more important 
place in God's Word than the resurrection, 
except those two other doctrines so 
closely identified with it— the ransom, 
which is the basis of all hope in a resurrection, 
and the second coming of the Lord 
to establish his kingdom, under which the 
fruit of the ransom (resurrection) shall be 
extended to Adam and his race in general. 
Yet, while these doctrines are given such 
prominence in the divine plan, how 
strange it seems that Christian people generally 
almost ignore these topics which 
the spirit of God indicates to be of greatest 
importance. The cause of this neglect 
lies in the fact that in the period from the 
third to the sixth centuries the idea of a 
coming kingdom for the blessing of the 
world, with Christ and his glorified spiritual 
church at its head, was dropped and 
exchanged for the idea that it would be a 
kingdom composed of the notables of the 
earthly church in earthly glory and honor, 
and with one of their number as chief or 
pope to represent Christ on earth. This 
thought tended to undermine and make 
void the apostles' doctrine of glory and 
blessing and a crown of life to the church 
at Christ's appearing and kingdom. 
( 1 Pet. 1:5 ; 2 Tim. 4:8 .) And gradually 
the idea was introduced, which is 
totally foreign to the Scriptures, that the 
resurrection is really a matter of no necessity 
—that the dying saints pass immediately 
into the fullest of life and glory 
and blessing, irrespective of Christ's second 
advent and a resurrection. And surely 
if this were the case, if fulness of life 

and blessing can be obtained without a 
resurrection, the term would represent 
nothing of value to be hoped for or expected; 
and the doctrine of the resurrection, 
like the doctrine of the Lord's coming, 
would be gradually lost sight of and at 
last cease to be specially cherished and 
hoped for. And so we find it. 

As we have already seen that the study 
of the subject of the ransom and of the second 
coming of the Lord, and the kingdom 



then to be established and to bless 
all the families of the earth, reveals much 
valuable truth that was previously unseen, 
so the study of the subject of resurrection 
gives clearer views of the divine plan. 

It was not until the year 1881 that our 
attention was drawn critically to the subject 
of resurrection; and shortly after, under 
the same caption as above we presented 
the subject in the TOWER of June 
1882. Further study, aided by increasing 
light shining from other features of the 
divine plan, has served to confirm the 
views there expressed and to amplify them, 
so that the entire subject of the resurrection 
is now very clear, and harmonious 
with itself, as well as with other features 
of the plan. 

We find that while men use the word 
resurrection in a very general way, the 
Bible uses the Greek word anastasis, represented 
by our English word resurrection, 
in a very particular manner. The common 
view of the doctrine of resurrection 
is shown by Webster's definition of the 
term, as follows: "Resurrection. (1)A 
rising again; the resumption of vigor. 
(2) Especially, the rising again from the 
dead; the resumption of life." 

As examples of resurrection, our Lord's 
notable miracles, in the case of Lazarus, 
and of the son of the widow of 
Nain, of Jairus' daughter, etc., are often 
cited; the idea being that the restoration 
of any degree of vigor or life to one who 
has passed into the unconsciousness of 

R1259 : page 3 

death is a resurrection. 

The Scriptural use of the original Greek 
word anastasis is, however, quite different 
from this. The Scriptures never speak 
of the above cases of the awakening of 
the dead as a resurrection. Anastasis 
means much more than merely awakening 
out of death; it signifies to raise again, 
and this means all that the word restitution 
means, and all that the word saved 
means, to the lost and ruined race of 
Adam. As restitution means full restitution 
to all that was lost by Adam, and as 

saved means full salvation from all the 
penalty and loss incurred under God's 
sentence by Adam's disobedience, so resurrection 

(anastasis) signifies a full and 



complete raising up again to all that was 

lost; not a partial raising to a part of 
what was lost, but a full raising again, 
clear up to the position and condition of 
perfect manhood, mentally, morally and 
physically, whence the fall hurled father 
Adam and all in him— his posterity. 
This is the blessed fulness implied in the 
word resurrection as God uses it. Let us 
rejoice in it hereafter, and use the word 

resurrection as God uses it. Hereafter let 
us not speak of such cases as the awakening 
of Lazarus as resurrection; for Lazarus 
neither came perfect from the tomb, 
nor did he from that time begin to progress 
to perfection. He was merely awakened, 
as our Lord said: "I go that I may 

awake him." And when Lazarus died 
again, that could not be considered 
his second death, for he never was fully 
freed from the Adamic death. If one 
were awakened a dozen times from Adamic 
death, he would still be in it, and 
could not die the Second Death (the 
wages of individual, wilful sin) until 

some how released from the first or Adamic 
death-sentence. 

Writing particularly on this subject 
( 1 Cor. 15 ), the Apostle tells us several 
important things: 

(1) That the doctrine of a resurrection 
is an all-important one, because if there 
be no resurrection, those who have already 
fallen asleep in death are perished, 

and we who are hoping and seeking 
for a future life are deceived and will 
be sadly disappointed ( verses 18,19 ); 
but he assures us that there is the best of 
ground for faith in God's power and purpose 
to have a resurrection, and that the 
resurrection of our Lord Jesus is the proof 
of this.— Verse 20 . 

(2) He further declares our Lord to be 

the first one ever resurrected; thus showing 
that Lazarus and others were not resurrected 
in the sense that God uses that 
word— Christ was "the first -fruits of them 
that slept."— Verse 20 and Acts 26:23 . 

(3) Building upon the foundation he 

had already laid down ( chap. 1:18,23,24,30 ) 

—that Christ's death as our ransom 

is the basis of our hope of the resurrection 

to life, which he thus redeemed 

for us and for all, the Apostle proceeds 

to declare ( verses 21,22 ) that as death 

came as a result of something done by 



man (Adam) so the resurrection comes as 
a result of something done by another 
man ("the man Christ Jesus, who gave 
himself a ransom for all"); and that as 
all who were in Adam shared his sentence 
and as a consequence die, even so, all who 
are in Christ will be made alive— made 
to share the blessing which the man Christ 
Jesus merited, but which he laid down in 
death on behalf of all those who will 
obey him when brought to a full knowledge 
of the truth.- Heb. 5:9 . 

(4) But even among those made alive 
in Christ there will be a difference: there 
will be two orders, or classes, or grades; 
and all brought to perfection by resurrection, 
all lifted completely out of death, 

will belong to one or the other of these 
orders. They will either belong to the 

spiritual order of which the "body of 
Christ" under Jesus its head, represented 
in Israel's priesthood, is the first-fruits unto 
God of his creatures ( verse 23 and 

James 1:18 ), and of which the second 
company, represented in the Levites, will 
be the blessed servants or assistants, or 
else they will come up in the human order 
to human perfection as members of the 
great restitution class to be developed 
during the Lord's presence —during the 
Millennial reign. 

(5) But, says the Apostle ( verse 35 ), 
some will unthinkingly ask, How can the 
dead be raised up? Where are their 
bodies? O thoughtless person, to suppose 
that the decay of the body to dust could 
hinder the fulfilment of God's promise! 
Do you not see that in nature God teaches 
this very lesson? that though the seed 
planted does not come up, another seed 
of the same sort comes forth— a new 
grain of the same nature as that planted. 

( Verses 35-37 .) And so it will be in the 
resurrection: it will not be the same 
body, composed of the same solids and 
liquids as the one which was buried, but 
it will be the same being who died that 
will be resurrected. 

(6) Is it asked, What sort of a body 

will the resurrection body be? We answer, 
There will be different kinds of resurrection 
bodies— just as with the different 
sorts of grain when planted, the new 
grain which springs up is of the same 
kind, or nature, as that which is sown; 
so it will be in the resurrection. What 



kind of a perfect body one will have in 
the resurrection depends upon what nature 
he belongs to. But are not all who died 
in Adam of the same nature as Adam- 
human nature? No; the vast majority 
are, and all were such at one time; but a 
few, a "little flock," have changed their 
nature and are human no longer. (These, 
and the method by which their change of 
nature was effected, are specially pointed 
out in the August TOWER.) From the time 
they consecrated their justified human natures 
as sacrifices, they were reckoned of 
God as "new creatures in Christ," "partakers 
of the divine nature." In the resurrection, 
God, according to his plan, will 
give to each one such a body as it hath 
pleased him to provide— namely, to each 
kind of seed his own appropriate body. 
Concerning mankind in general, we know 
the kind of bodies they will have, for we 
all have imperfect human bodies now, and 
can form fairly good conceptions of what 
will be the grandeur and powers of such 
bodies when perfected, when fully raised 
up to the perfection lost in Adam. But 
of the bodies which God hath prepared 
for the little flock of his chosen saints, the 
"royal priesthood," who are to be changed 
to the divine nature, we can now know 
but little. We can merely know that they 
will have divine bodies when they are perfected. 
And so the Apostle declares, "It 
doth not yet appear what we shall be, but 
we shall be like Him" who is "the express 
image of the Father's person." 

And this fact is in accord with what we 
see of God's general plan. If we look 
beyond the earth we see variety in God's 
creation, and if we look about us on earth 
we see great variety in plant and animal 
life.- Verses 38-41 . 

(7) We will be specially interested in 
the resurrection bodies of the saints, because 

(a) that is the prize for which we 
are running, and (b) because we have a 
tolerably clear idea of what a restitution 
body will be. And while it doth not yet 
appear what we shall be, I can suggest 
some contrasts between what we now are 
and what we shall be then, though it will 
afford but a meager view. "Thus is * 
THE RESURRECTION of THE DEAD [the chief 
resurrection or the resurrection of the 
chief class, the sacrificing overcomers]. 
It is sown in corruption, it is raised in 



incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is 
raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it 
is raised in power; it is sown a natural 
[human] body, it is raised a spiritual 
body." As surely as there are natural, 
human or earthly bodies, so surely also 
there is such a thing as a heavenly or 
spirit body. 

In harmony with this is the statement 
—The first man, Adam, became a living 
soul (i.e., an animal or earthly being), 
the last Adam (became— by resurrection) 
a life-giving spirit. The spiritual, however, 
was not first, but the natural, afterwards 
the spiritual, so that the race in 
general inherited not the divine nature, 
but the earthly or human nature; hence 
it is only the few, only such as now experience 
the change of nature, that in the 
resurrection or revivifying out of death 
will have the divine bodies. 

(8) If we would think of the two orders 
of beings, we should consider the change 
that took place in one of those who became 
divine and how the change was effected. 
For "the first man was from the 
ground, earthly; the second man from 
heaven." Of the kind or nature of the 
earthly one, in his highest attainment, will 
be the kind or nature of all the earthly 
ones who by resurrection attain fulness of 
life and perfection; and of the kind or 
nature attained by the one from heaven 
is to be the kind and nature of the heavenly 
ones. Yes, even as we have borne the 
likeness of the earthly we shall also bear the 
likeness of the heavenly. We shall be like 
him and shall see him as he is. And this I say, 
brethren, because I would have you understand 
that such a change from human to 
divine nature and organism is necessary, 
because flesh and blood [human nature] 
cannot inherit the kingdom of God; nor 
can we so long as corruptible inherit that 
incorruptible glory and kingdom promised 
us. Therefore, such a resurrection, 
such a perfecting, completing us as divine 
beings, is absolutely necessary.— Vs. 47-50 . 

But I will reveal a mystery to you, a 
point not clearly seen heretofore ( verse 51) 
—We shall not all need to sleep; for when 
the time for the establishment of God's 
kingdom has come it will no longer be 
necessary to wait in the unconscious sleep 
of death. Yet, though we will not need 
to wait in sleep, the same change from 



flesh and blood [the earthly, human nature] 



*The Greek here particularizes the resurrection 
and the dead as we have indicated by putting these 
words in small capitals. 

R1259 : page 4 

to the divine nature will be as needful 
to such as to those who are required to 
sleep and to wait for the kingdom. The 
change to such will be of the same sort, 
but instantaneous; the moment of death 
will be to them the moment of change, 

R1260 : page 4 

and hence no sleep will intervene. The 
change will be instantaneous to all these, 
to those who sleep and to those who shall 
not sleep, but it will be at the instant of 
dying to those only who are alive when the 
Lord is present a second time establishing 
his kingdom. It will be a full resurrection 
change, to all of these, a full, complete 
lifting out of death into perfection and 
fulness of life— the perfecting in each of 
the divine nature. 

This resurrection to divine existence is 
the First Resurrection— the chief or most 
important and most wonderful. It is most 
wonderful in that it fulfils the most wonderful 
promises of God— exceeding great 
and precious promises. It is most important, 
as well as first in order of time, in that 
all other promises of restitution or resurrection 
are dependent upon it— because 
this resurrection completes the Christ, the 
"Seed," in and through whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed; because 
they [the restitution class] without 
us [the Church of the First Resurrection] 
shall not be made perfect.— Heb. 11:40 . 

And be it noted that our Lord Jesus 
shared in this first resurrection; or rather, 
this first resurrection is his resurrection, in 
which we, by the grace of God, are privileged 
to share. He alone was sinless, he alone 
gave the legal ransom for man, he trod 
the winepress alone, and of the people 
there was none with him; and as a result 
THE resurrection, to the divine nature, 
came to him alone as the full reward of 
service. Our share with him in this chief 



resurrection (his resurrection) comes indirectly 

through him; for his work first justified 

us, and made it possible for us not 

only to receive this "high-calling," but 

also to attain it by helping our infirmities 

and strengthening and encouraging 

us on the way with grace and help in every 

time of need. 

Thus the Apostle understood the matter 
and wrote: "That I might know him and 
the power of his resurrection, [by] being 
made conformable unto his death," and 
"attain unto the [chief] resurrection of the 
dead" ( Phil. 3:10,11 ); and again, "If we 
be dead with him, we shall also live with 
him," be with him where he is and behold 
his glory and be like him, which can be only 
by the same resurrection change which he 
experienced. ( 2 Tim. 2:11 ; Rom. 6:8 .) 
And again he says, "For if we have been 
planted together in the likeness of his 
death, we shall be also [sharers] in the 
likeness of his resurrection." — Rom. 6:5 . 

This "change" or resurrection from 
flesh to spirit, from human to divine nature, 
which must come to all who will inherit 
the Kingdom, will be in a moment, 
an instantaneous change to each; it will 
not be a protracted or gradual changing 
from a little life to an abundant fulness, 
but in an instant they shall be "like him" 
and see him as he is. This change will 
not be at the same instant to all, however. 
A long period of over eighteen hundred 
years elapsed between the instantaneous 
resurrection change of our Lord and the 
change of those who have slept and waited 
for the Kingdom to come that they might 
be changed and granted a share in it. 
Though possibly the moment of change 
may be the same for all who slept less, it is 
not God's plan that those who will be 
changed without sleep should be changed 
at the same moment; for it is written, 
"The dead in Christ shall rise first, then 
we, the remainder [or ones left over of 
the same class] appointed unto life, shall 
be caught away in clouds [into obscurity] 
to meet the Lord in the air."* 

This change, or resurrection, or perfecting, 
will take place in the end or close of 
the Gospel age, at or during the sounding 
of the last trumpet— the seventh trumpet. 
(Rev. 11:15,18 ; 1 Thes. 4:16,17 .) For 
the trumpet will sound and THE dead shall 
be raised incorruptible, and we [of the 



same order or class who remain] shall be 
changed. Because that [part of the body 
of Christ] which is corrupted shall put on 
incorruption, and that which is now dying 
shall put on immortality. 

And ( verses 54,55 ) when this mortal 
[or dying part of the "body of Christ" 
which is not to be changed until the dead 
members of the same body have first been 
made incorruptible] shall have put on immortality, 
then shall be brought to fulfilment 
that saying [prophecy] which is 
written: 

"Death is swallowed up victoriously. 

"O death, where is thy victory? 

"O death, where is thy sting?"+ 

Our Lord's resurrection was a step toward 
this victory: it was the all-important foundation 
for it. The resurrection change of 
his Church— the corruptible and mortal 
to incorruptible and immortal conditions 
—will be a further step toward the victory 
over death, but still only preparatory, 
because when Christ and the Church are 
glorified, death's dominion will be nearly 
as extensive as ever, the Church being 
in all only a "little flock." 

The thought of the passage is that after 
the change of the Church, then the destruction 
of Adamic death, by the release 
of all mankind from its control, will begin 
—the long promised release ( Gen. 3:15 ; 
Jer. 31:29-34 ), when the children 
shall no longer be held in the bondage of 
Adamic death for their fathers' transgressions, 
but, released from condemnation under 
it, may live forever, unless they come 
individually under sentence again through 
wilful, individual sin. 

The sting which caused death is sin: 
had sin not entered the world human death 
would not have been known. 

And the strength of sin is the law. It 
was God's law behind sin that determined 
what should constitute sin and what 
its sting or penalty should be. But, thank 
God! while he was just in his law, and 
while the terrible penalty of that law, the 
sting of death, was merited by the race, 
he has graciously arranged for our victory 
over death and our escape from his just sentence 
through Christ Jesus, our Lord. 



*Air here seems to signify spiritual authority 



or power, as in Eph. 2:2 . 
+Thus read the oldest Greek MSS. 

R1260 : page 4 

THE GENERAL RESURRECTION. 

In the light of the foregoing statement 
of the true significance of the word resurrection, 
as indicated by the Greek word 
anastasis which it translates, we need not 
stop to show particularly again that by the 
term general resurrection, we do not mean 
merely a general awakening of the sleeping 
billions of earth, but much more; 
namely, a general bringing of all mankind 
to perfection of being— to full freedom 
from the Adamic death penalty and all 
its hindering weaknesses. 

This delivering of men out of Adamic 
death to full perfection and restitution of 
being, and into all the rights and privileges 
lost through Adam, may be done in 
either one of two ways: namely, (1) by 
actual restitution to physical, mental and 
moral perfection of manhood, to full harmony 
and communion with God and to 
the actual dominion of the earth and all 
the lower animals, as Adam possessed all 
these in the beginning, before sin entered, 
and then testing each to see whether worthy 
or not to retain those favors everlastingly; 
or (2) by granting to each individual 
a release by faith from Adamic death 
and condemnation, and a restitution by 
faith to divine favor and communion, and 
an actual restitution to all the earthly advantages 
of Adam, so far and so soon as, 
by obedience under testing, they shall be 
found worthy of those blessings. Let us 
notice carefully and particularly the fact 
that such a release from Adamic death by 
faith (through a full knowledge of the 
ransom that was given and the forgiveness 
and reconciliation and restitution thus 
provided for all who will accept these 
favors) is not only as good and as favorable 
for men, during their trial, but that 
it is better and more favorable than would 
be the actual restitution first and a trial 
afterward. 

Let us suppose it both ways, and note 
the advantages of God's plan of justifying 
by faith. Suppose that the hour had 
come in the divine arrangement for the 
restitution work to begin. Imagine all the 



millions of earth changed instantly to 

perfect human beings— perfect mentally, 

morally and physically. How strange it 

would all be: no man would know his 

neighbor, either by appearance, or by 

speech, or by manner, or by former weaknesses. 

Worse yet, few would know their 

own fathers and mothers, or their own 

children, for the same reason. Still worse, 

but few could recognize themselves, for 

the same reason. And the few who could 

in any degree appreciate such a radical 

change would be those few only who in 

the present life have by faith, to some extent, 

from communion with God, learned 

as justified persons to think and will from 

the perfect standpoint, even though not always 

able because of inherited weaknesses 

to do as perfect men. The few overcomers 

of the past— Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, 

and all the holy prophets— can and will as 

justified ones carry over their identity 

when instantly perfected as men; and the 

little flock of overcomers of this Gospel 

age, for a similar reason (because already 

living the new resurrection life by faith), 

will also carry their identity, notwithstanding 

their great and instantaneous change 

to the perfection of the divine nature. 

But these two classes are exceptions to the 

generality of the race— not only as to their 

instantaneous resurrections or perfectings, 

but also as to their experiences in the 

present life. 

R1261 : page 4 

But let us for a moment imagine the 
resurrection of the billions who have died, 
coming forth actually perfect in mind and 
in body. Imagine Nero coming forth perfect 
—free from his terrible passions, great 
depravity, love of rapine and cruelty, a 
pure, simple-hearted, benevolent man. He 
would neither be known by any, nor would 
he know himself. Imagine wild, ignorant 
cannibals, who had never had any but the 
most debased sentiments and experiences, 
coming forth with every power of mind 
and body perfect. Imagine all the billions 
past and present thus perfected, and then 
think over the following points carefully: 

How would their experiences with sin 
benefit them, since by their sudden change 
they could not even identify themselves 
with the degraded, sin-polluted creatures 



they once were? 

If such were God's plan, how could the 
permission of the trouble and sorrowful 
experiences of the past six thousand years 
be accounted for? Surely it is only because 
present woes of earth have served as 
lessons, as beneficial experiences to prepare 
men for the future trial, that God 
has at all permitted them. 

Consider, too, that if men were thus perfected 
instantly, so that present experiences 
would not be appreciated, they would 
all be as liable to fail as was Adam, and for 
the same reason— namely, from lack of 
experience. The distinction between perfection 
of being and perfection of experience 
should ever be kept in mind: 
Adam had the perfection of being implied 
in the declaration that he was made in the 
image of God; but at the time of his trial 
he had far less experience than his fallen, 
imperfect sons of to-day. But he knew 
enough for his trial upon the simple test 
of obedience applied: he knew that God 
was his Creator and benefactor who had 
done everything for him; and he knew, 
when he wilfully disobeyed, that implicit 
obedience was his duty. 

Remember, too, that as in Adam's case 
so in the case of any perfect man on trial 
before God's law: one violation of one 
point would bring upon such the full wages 
of sin— death, extinction. 

So, then, if it were God's plan to instantly 
raise the world of mankind up out 
of death to full perfection and trial, as 
Adam enjoyed these before the fall, it 
would be a very doubtful blessing— with 
the strong probability that many, if not 
all, would make some mistake and fall 
under the just sentence of God's perfect 
law. Nor would it do to suppose that after 
being made perfect by an instantaneous 
anastasis, they might be kept for a time 
free from trial until they had acquired experience 
and knowledge; for perfection 
of being implies responsibility to God's 
law from the moment it begins. 

Thus, too, Adam was not given an uncounted 
experience with sin, but for his 
first transgression was sentenced so completely 
that nothing short of a ransom 
could release him from his sin and its penalty, 
death. So it will be with the world of 
mankind: when perfected by the Mediator, 
Christ Jesus, his work for them will 



be at an end— they will then be in the 

hands of God and subject to that law of 

his which shows no mercy. For imperfect 

beings to be exposed to the test of 

that perfect law would mean failure, sure; 

and hence, as the Apostle declares, it 

would be a fearful thing for us if we should 

reject Christ from being our Mediator and 

attempt to stand trial before God in the 

filthy rags of our own righteousness ( Isa. 64:6 ; 

Heb. 10:31 ); and for perfect beings 

lacking in experience to be tried by 
that same law would be almost as certain 
of failure. 

God's gracious provision in Christ is, 
however, abundant. His arrangement is 
that the whole race, having been purchased 
by our Lord Jesus, shall be fully 
in his hands: "The Father judgeth no 
man, but hath committed all judgment unto 
the Son" ( John 5:22 ); and he hath 
appointed the Millennial day for that work 
of trial or judgment. ( Acts 17:31 .) He 
who redeemed or purchased back Adam 
and his race from the sentence of death will 

offer to each one full restitution to all that 
Adam possessed and lost, upon conditions 
which even in their fallen condition they 
will be fully able to accept. Obedience 
of will or intent shall be the first requirement; 
and as this is obeyed restitution 
will commence. As gradually, during the 
Millennium, imperfection and weakness 
shall give place to strength and perfection, 
correspondingly less allowance will be 
made for transgressions by the Mediator-Judge; 
his chastisements and corrections 
proportioned to the ability and wilfulness 
of the transgressors being meanwhile most 
valuable experience to those upon trial. 

Starting upon the highway of holiness 
(toward full restitution to the perfection 

R1261 : page 5 

and all the blessings lost in Adam) at a 
point corresponding to their present state 
of imperfection, their own identity and 
the identity of each other will be maintained, 
and all the experiences in sin and 
degradation will be fresh and vivid, and 
will carry with them the full weight and 
value, in contrast with the experiences with 
righteousness in active operation, to which 
they will then be subjected. The difference 
at first will be not in the hearts of 



men, nor in their bodies (except that the 
sleeping ones will be awakened), but in 
the outward conditions of men, under 
the rule of the Kingdom of God. The 
earthly representatives of that kingdom 
will be Abraham and the prophets, whose 
trials are already passed and who will then 
be perfect men and samples of what all 
the race may become by hearty obedience 
to the kingdom and laws then, and for that 
very purpose, in control. The outward 
changes of that age will be very distasteful 
to many. Men will have less liberty than at 
present— they will have liberty to do right 
and to do good, but no license whatever 
to do evil, or to pursue any vocation which 
would in any degree injure or demoralize 
others morally, or financially, or physically. 
Thus (by the binding of Satan) more 
than one-half of the temptations of the 
present will be cut off, and only those 
which belong to the weakness of man's 
fallen flesh will be upon him. And these, 
as we have seen, he is to be permitted to 
outgrow and overcome by the great Mediator's 
assistance and discipline, and in 
consequence of having been redeemed by 
him from the sentence of death, of which 
those weaknesses are a part. This plan 
of restoring men and testing them at 
the same time, and giving them the blessings 
only as they shall learn to appreciate 
them, is for man's benefit, that he may then 
have the fullest knowledge and experience, 
so as to be fully able to make his choice 
between sin and its penalty and righteousness 
and its reward. 

From the time men are brought to a 
clear knowledge of God's plan for their 
salvation from sin and death, under those 
favorable conditions, they will be reckoned 
as having received the gift of God, everlasting 
life; because from that moment 
they will have it within their reach and 
power. If they fail to eat the bread of 
life thus placed in their hands, they will 
fail to receive the strength and the life it 
contains. But none shall refuse it ignorantly 
—all will have proofs on every hand 
that actual restitution to full human perfection 
is possible and in progress; and 
none will be left to doubt that the sacrifice 
for sins once offered by the Lamb of 
God is efficacious for his full restitution, 
under the arrangement and law of the New 
Covenant— "Thou shalt love the Lord 



thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor 
as thy self." 

Those who, under those favorable conditions, 
resist and oppose that law will be 
permitted to enjoy its blessings for a 
hundred years, restrained of power to injure 
others; but if by the end of that period 
(which is four times the period of 
mature experience of the present time) 
they have not conformed to the new arrangement 
so as to make some progress, 
they will be cut off and die for their own 
sin— the second death. 

Even after a hundred years of such favor, 
they will be but "children," partly 
developed; but their wilful rejection of 
the gift of life, the anastasis, or full raising 
out of death, tendered them and fully 
understood by them, is reckoned as the 
very same to them as though they had 
gradually progressed toward perfection 
and had reached it, and then, despising 
God's goodness, had rebelled against his 
laws and arrangements, as we are informed 
some will do.- Rev. 20:10,14,15 ; 21:8 . 

"I will rejoice in Jerusalem and be glad 
in my people: and there shall not be heard 
in her, any more, the voice of weeping 
nor the voice of complaint. There shall 
no more come thence an infant of few 
days nor an old man that shall not have 
the full length of his days; for as a lad 
shall one die a hundred years old— and as 
a sinner shall be accursed who (dieth) at 
a hundred years old." ( Isa. 65:19,20 . 
Leeser's translation.) That this refers 
to the Millennial age and to the restitution 
or earthly class is further attested by 
the succeeding verses of the same chapter. 



R1262 : page 5 
FAVOR UPON FAVOR. 



"Therefore, being justified by faith, we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: 
by whom, also, we have access by faith into this 
grace wherein we stand and rejoice in hope of the 
glory of God."— Rom. 5:1,2 . 

In the October issue of the TOWER 
we took a hasty view of God's great favor, 
which all the world may enjoy, of justification 
through Christ. We saw what a 



blessed, full salvation, full restitution to 

all that was lost in Adam, is implied in 

that term justification. And while we do 

not now experience that justification in 

the actual restoration to perfection— mental, 

moral and physical; while we still 

suffer, from the fall, many weaknesses and 

sad deformities of character and person, 

while we are still subject to death and must 

sooner or later sink under its power; nevertheless, 

having by faith accepted the 

promise of actual justification, through 

Christ, we have peace with God; for we 

hold in our possession, so to speak, a check 

on the bank of heaven for full salvation, 

justification or restitution, payable to the 

bearer in God's due time— the Millennial 

age. And, therefore, we reckon ourselves, 

as God reckons us, justified freely from 

all things, our shortcomings being no 

longer imputed to us, being atoned for by 

the precious blood wherein we trust, and 

the righteousness of Christ counted to us. 

Our sins were laid upon Christ, our Redeemer, 
and his righteousness is transferred 
correspondingly to our account. O 
how we have rejoiced over these checks 
when by faith we received them and began 
to realize their import! How often 
we have opened the blessed book of God 
and read that check over and over again 
—"God so loved the world that he gave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in him [Ah! that includes me, we 
said] should not perish, but have everlasting 
life." ( John 3:16 .) Some of us shouted 
over it, and some of us wept over it tears 
of joy and gratitude. And for this grace 
we will never cease to praise God through 
all eternity. 

But now we want to consider this additional 
favor or grace of which the Apostle 
speaks, into which, also, we have access 
by faith in Christ, and in which those 
who have received it rejoice in hope of 
the glory of God— this, which some Christians 
call "the second blessing," but which 
we regret to say many such but vaguely comprehend. 
What is it? Can there be anything 
grander than what we have seen the grace of 
justification to be? anything more desirable 
than the pardon of our sins and our 
reconciliation and peace with God? Can 
there be anything more desirable than the 
outcome of this reconciliation in the perfection 
of every physical, mental and 



moral power? than a body in the glow of 
health and beauty of form and feature, 
forever decked with the bloom of eternal 
youth? than a mind in full possession of 
all its powers, and trained, educated and 
disciplined beyond the range even of all 
the intellectual prodigies we have ever 
known? and a moral refinement gloriously 
reflecting the divine likeness and perfectly 
acceptable to God? Can there be 
any desirable grace beyond this and the 
perfect condition of the glorious earth 
whose now desert places shall then blossom 
as the rose? 

From a human standpoint it would seem 
not. Surely this is all the human heart 
could wish for or aspire to. And when "God 
shall wipe away all tears, and there shall 
be no more death, neither sorrow, nor 
crying, neither shall there be any more 
pain," surely all who love righteousness 
will be satisfied, and, as Isaiah says, 
"the whole earth shall break forth into 
singing." ( Isa. 14:7 .) Praise the Lord! 
the prospect even now puts a new song 
into our mouths. But notwithstanding 
all this we learn that God has provided 

"some better thing" for the Gospel church. 
Paul speaks of this when, after recounting 
the faith and good works of the ancient 
worthies who lived previous to the Gospel 
age, and hence previous to the special call 
of this age, he says, "These all, having obtained 
a good report through faith, received 
not [yet] the promise, God having 
provided some better thing for us, that 
they without us should not be made perfect." 
-Heb. 11:40. 

And it is concerning this that we read 
the expressions, "favor upon favor" 
( John 1:16 . Diaglott), "exceeding great 
and precious promises," "the prize of 
our high calling," "the heavenly calling," 
etc. This high calling is a call to joint-heirship 
with Christ as his bride, to be 
partakers of his divine nature, to share 
his likeness, and glory, and honor, and 
to be associated as co-workers together 
with him in his high office, when, at the 
appointed time, his Kingdom shall come 
—even to sit with him in his throne as 
kings and priests unto God. See Rom. 8:17 ; 

2 Pet. 1:4 ; 1 John 3:2 ; Rev. 3:21 ; 

1:6. 

The human mind staggers in its endeavor 
to comprehend such a height of 



glory; yet those whose hearts are deeply 
in love with the Lord can appreciate 
the exceeding favor of the invitation 
to be the beloved bride of Christ, 
to be made like him and to be in his 
glorious presence forever. Amazing grace! 
and the wonder grows when we reflect 
upon the high exaltation of Christ, even 
beyond the glory which he had with the 
Father before the world was— a glory of 
person which is "the express image of the 
Father's person" ( Heb. 1:3 ), a glory of 
wealth which places the whole universe 
at his feet as "the Heir of all things" 
( Heb. 1:2 ), a glory of power, of "all 
power in heaven and on earth," a glory 
of office, too, which is second only to 
that of Jehovah, the great Emperor of 
the Universe ( 1 Cor. 15:27,28 ), and a 
glory of character which shines with all 
the luster of unsullied purity. 

To aspire to such a height of glory 
without invitation would indeed be the 
height of presumption and folly. But 
when invited to it, it is our privilege to 
accept the favor with thanksgiving and 
humble endeavor to fulfill the conditions 
of the call. This is the high privilege of 
the saints of the Gospel age; but strait 
is the gate and narrow is the way that 
leadeth unto it, and few there be that 
find it- Matt. 7:14 . 

Paul shows us that through Christ we 
have access by faith into this grace, even 
as through him also we by faith had access 
to the grace of justification. He also 
shows that before we have access to this 
grace we must have received the grace of 
justification. Then, believing that "faithful 
is he that hath called us, who also will 
do it," and fully relying on his grace, we 
earnestly seek to know and fulfill the conditions. 
These conditions, those especially 
who are fully consecrated to God, 
are anxious to learn. And such have already 
taken the first steps, at least, in fulfilment 
of the conditions. We have already 
accepted thankfully the grace of 
justification, by faith in Christ our Redeemer; 
and this gives us a reckoned 
standing in God's sight. That is, we 
are henceforth reckoned as holy, as though 
actually justified, and treated from that 
standpoint. The Apostle says we are 
"holy and acceptable to God." ( Rom. 12:1 .) 
And being thus justified, holy 



(through Christ's imputed righteousness), 

and therefore acceptable to God, he says: 

"I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by 

the mercies of God [manifested in the 

grace which justified you], that ye present 

your bodies a living sacrifice,. ..which 

is your reasonable service." ( Rom. 12:1 .) 

There is the condition of the high calling, 

briefly stated— That we present our bodies, 

our justified humanity, a living sacrifice. 

And you will remember that this is just 

what our Lord Jesus did, saying, "A body 

hast thou prepared me. In burnt offerings 

and sacrifices for sin thou hast had 

no pleasure. Lo, I come (in the volume 

of the book it is written of me) to do thy 

will, O God." ( Heb. 10:5-7 .) As he offered 

his life a sacrifice for sin, so we are 

invited to sacrifice our life faithfully, unto 

death, as he did; and in so doing we 

are counted in with him as part of the sin-offering, 

though our sacrifice would have 

no merit whatever of itself, because apart 

from him we ourselves would be under 

condemnation. But being first justified 

by faith in him, we are acceptable sacrifices 

to God, as the Apostle states. And 

in this privilege of sacrificing ourselves 

now consists the special advantage of justification 

by faith during the present age, 

rather than in the future. 

In fulfilling the condition of the high 
calling, then, we will be doing just what 
Jesus did, remembering that he left us 
an example that we should follow his steps. 
( 1 Pet. 2:21 .) Remember, too, the Apostle's 
words— "If we be dead with him, 
we shall also live with him; if we suffer, 
we shall reign with him." "If we have 
been planted together in the likeness of 
his death, we shall be also in the likeness 
of his resurrection."— 2 Tim. 2:11,12 ; 
Rom. 6:5 . 

Call to mind now what was the likeness 
of his resurrection. It was an exceeding 
high exaltation ( Phil. 2:9 ), far above the 
human nature, "far above all principality 
and power and might and dominion, and 
every name that is named." ( Eph. 1:21 .) 
It was an exaltation even to the divine 
nature, of which, says Peter, we also, who 
follow his steps as he set us an example, 
may become partakers. ( 2 Pet. 1:4 .) To 
follow in the Lord's steps of humiliation 
and sacrifice, even unto death, is no light 
undertaking. It means the giving up of 



our will for the accomplishment of the 
divine will. Our sacrifice is not the giving 
up of our sins: those we fully renounced 
when we received the grace of 
justification, before we were acceptable as 
sacrifices. Our sacrifice must, therefore, 
consist in our self-denial of those things to 
which as natural men we have a right. 
Our first consideration in all that we do 
must be, What will be most to the glory of 
God and the advancement of his cause. 
If we realize that we can glorify God 
somewhat by one course at slight inconvenience 
or expense of our own will, and 
yet more by another course of greater expense 

R1262 : page 6 

or humiliation, then the latter is 

the one to which we are committed by 

our consecration. 

R1263 : page 6 

Amidst the noisy clamorings of our old 
(human) nature, insisting on its own will 
and way, to some extent, at least, it is often 
difficult to even discover the right 
course in view of our consecration. But 
persistently to silence the old nature, and 
studiously to search and determine the will 
of the Lord in all that we do, is the 
finding of the "narrow way" that leads 
to life— to that divine life to which the 
saints of this age are called. "And 
few there be that find it," says the Lord. 
How few even of those who made the 
covenant seem thus to studiously search 
for the way and humbly to walk in it. 

"Oh! 'tis a pathway rough to choose, 

A struggle hard to share, 
For human pride would still refuse 

The nameless trials there. 

"But though we know the gate is low 

That leads to heavenly bliss, 
What higher grace could God bestow 

Than such a hope as this?" 

There is only one way for any to do 
who would keep in this narrow way of 
sacrifice even unto death, and that is 
what Paul directs, "Forgetting those 
things which are behind, and reaching 
forth unto those things which are before, 



to press toward the mark for the prize 
of the high calling of God in Christ 
Jesus"— "lay aside every weight and the 
sin which doth so easily beset us, and run 
with patience the race that is set before us, 
looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher 
of our faith," and considering him, how he 
endured, lest we be wearied and faint in 
our minds. ( Phil. 3:13 ; Heb. 12:1-3 .) 
If we keep looking at the things behind, 
we lose sight of the heavenly things and 
begin to over-estimate the earthly, and 
to correspondingly discount the heavenly. 
In other words, we begin to be conformed 
to this world. The Apostle says, "Be ye 
not conformed to this world, but be ye 
transformed;" let your minds be continually 
turned heavenward. 

However difficult and thorny the path 
may be, forget not the privilege of walking 
in it. We may not repine and wish it 
were otherwise; for he that putteth his 
hand to the plow, and looketh back, is not 
fit for the kingdom. ( Luke 9:62 .) If our 
Lord had to be so severely tested to prove 
his worthiness of high exaltation, we should 
not think it strange concerning the fiery 
trial which is to try us, as though some 
strange thing had happened unto us. 
( 1 Pet. 4:12 .) We must "endure hardness 
as good soldiers," and wait patiently 
for "the glory which shall be revealed in 
us." And for our encouragement let us bear 
in mind the exceeding great and precious 
promises:— "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with me in my throne, 
even as I overcame and am set down with 
my Father in his throne;" "Be thou faithful 
unto death, and I will give thee a crown 
of life;" "Fear not, little flock; it is your 
Father's good pleasure to give you the 
kingdom;" "Faithful is he that calleth 
you, who also will do it." Glorious, indeed, 
will be that second blessing when 
fully realized; and even now, as by faith 
the prospect of its inheritance looms up 
before us, we rejoice with joy unspeakable 
and full of glory, reckoning that the sufferings 
of this present time, for Christ's 
sake, are not worthy to be compared with 
the glory which shall be revealed in us. 



R1274 : page 6 



"THE feeling of gratitude has all the 
ardor of passion in noble hearts." 



"He that justifieth the wicked, and he 
that condemneth the just, even they both 
are an abomination to the Lord." 



R1263 : page 6 
"I AM HE." 
"I am he that liveth and was dead."— Rev. 1:18 

Here the risen Lord identifies himself 
with the crucified One; yet how different 
from the crucified One. Now he 
is a divine being, while previous to his 
crucifixion he was human. Yet the identity 
is clearly established, though it is 
written that as the heavens are higher 
than the earth, so is the one higher 
than the other. ( Isa. 55:9 .) The Son 
of God experienced existence in three 
different natures— first, a very high order 
of spiritual nature, higher than angels; 
secondly, the human nature, a little lower 
than the angels; and thirdly, the divine 
nature, which is superior to all others. 
And in the last two of these states, or natures, 
he clearly affirmed his personal identity 
from first to last. As a man, he freely 
spoke of the glory which he had with the 
Father before the world was. ( John 17:5 ; 

8:42,58 .) And as a divine being, he tells 
how he recognizes himself as the same one 
who was a man, and who as such died, became 
extinct. The identity, therefore, of 
the Son of God is clearly stated by himself. 
And while, therefore, not for a moment 
doubting it, it may be profitable to 
inquire, How can this be? for some fail 
to see how a being could know himself 
under such radical transformations. 

The philosophy of this fact is clearly 
seen, however, when we remember the 
statement that man was created in the 
image of God (which is true also of angels 
as well as of our Lord before he became 
a man— all of God's intelligent and responsible 
creatures are made in God's 
mental and moral likeness): that is, their 
mental and moral faculties are facsimiles 



of the divine nature. The difference, then, 
between them is in the range and scope of 
these corresponding faculties: the one is 
finite, the other is infinite. The range of 
the human nature is confined to the earth, 
while the range and scope of the divine 
is wider than the universe, boundless as 
space and unlimited as eternity. The 
divine nature is immortal, incorruptible, 
and could not become infirm, or die, since 
of itself it is above all those conditions 
upon which other natures must depend. 
All other natures are mortal, corruptible— 
not that they must of necessity corrupt, 
or die, but that they could die and would 
die if God did not continually supply to 
them the necessary sustenance. Thus the 
Divine Being holds the reigns of universal 
government as an Absolute Monarch, having 
the life and property and every interest 
of every creature in his hands— under 
his providence and complete control. 

The wonderful favor of a share in this 
divine nature, originally pertaining only to 
the Emperor and Lord of the Universe- 
Jehovah God— was, as we have heretofore 
seen, granted to our Lord Jesus as a reward 
for his humiliation and sacrifice for 
our redemption; and we are assured that 
it shall also, in due time, be granted to a 
chosen little flock of redeemed men who 
follow in his footsteps of sacrifice, even 
unto death. We also, therefore, if counted 
worthy, shall, in the resurrection, experience 
a change similar to that of the Lord at 
his resurrection. Shall we, therefore, know 
ourselves and each other? Assuredly, yes! 
We will recognize in ourselves the same 
personality— the mental and moral character 
—that now exists; but these same 
reasoning faculties will then be able to 
grapple successfully and promptly with 
the weightiest, deepest and most intricate 
problems; these perceptive faculties, 
now sometimes so dull, but then 
expanded immeasurably, will quickly take 
in at a glance all the varied conditions 
of every creature and all the minutiae 
of the great work of establishing universal 
order and peace. And so it will be 
with all our faculties which constitute us 
now an image (though greatly marred) of 
the divine nature— of what we shall be then. 

And yet the same will, the same character, 
now possessed will then be ours; 
that is, the same aims and ambitions will 



actuate us then as now. The plan of God, 
which is now the theme of our constant 
thought and the motive power of all our 
efforts, will then also be our theme and 
motive power. It will be our pleasure 
and privilege, then, to carry on to completion 
the great work begun now, in 
which all the faithful are heartily and 
zealously engaged. But then we will find 
ourselves perfectly free and unfettered by 
any infirmities or adverse circumstances. 

What a glorious change! Think you, 
brethren, that when changed to that glorious 
likeness of our Lord and Head, with 
all these present interests of the great 
work still the absorbing theme of our 
thought, but with increased ability and 
power to carry it on, with all these same 
hopes, ambitions and aims still keen and 
active, shall we not recognize ourselves 
and each other? Will your glowing zeal, 
your confident faith, your ardent love and 
your present knowledge of truth not be 
recognizable again? Yea, verily! The 
personal identity, the character, of each of 
us will be clearly recognizable both by 
ourselves and by others. 

And the same may be said of every human 
being, as well as of those changed to the 
divine nature. The individual character* 
is that which we call our identity. It is 
the character of an individual, not his 
flesh and bones, which we love or hate, 
and which God loves or hates and counts 
either worthy or unworthy of continued 
existence. Flesh and blood is only associated 
with our ideas of character or personality, 
just as a coat habitually worn is 
associated with our mental pictures of a 
human form. The character of our Heavenly 
Father and of our Lord Jesus is 
what we know and love, though we have 
never seen their glorious bodies under any 
conditions; and the same may be said of 
many of our human friends. 



*Webster defines character as "the sum of 
qualities which distinguish one person or thing 
from another." 

R1264 : page 6 

It is plain, therefore, that though an individual 
may die, become extinct, pass out 



of actual existence, his character still 

exists in the memory, the mind of God, 

even the very minutest features of it. 

And, therefore, when in his own time God 

creates another body, either of the earthly 

or of the spiritual nature, and stamps it 

with all the lines of that character just as 

it exists in his memory, and awakens it to 

life, instantly that character, that identity, 

will recognize itself. And not only so, but it 

will be recognized again by former friends 

and acquaintances from whose memory it 

had not perished. Thus the Lord Jesus 

recognized himself when his character was 

transferred from a spiritual body to a body 

of clay; and again, when he died and his 

identity was completely lost to himself for 

three days, it still existed in the memory 

of God, and as soon as God transferred, 

from the tablet of his mind to an 

actual, glorious, divine body, those mental 

characteristics, our Lord Jesus recognized 

himself again— with the same ardent love 

for God, the same devotion to the accomplishment 

of his great work, the same pitying 

love for the fallen human race, the 

same tender love and solicitude for his 

precious elect ones, every one of whom then 

living he remembered personally and 

distinctly. And with all this knowledge 

of himself and his great work came the 

glorious realization of "all power in heaven 

and in earth" for its accomplishment. 

And so will it be with us, praise the Lord! 

While we are reckoned dead already, and 

must sooner or later pass under the dominion 

of death actually, it matters little; 

for our life is hid with Christ [as associate 

members of his body] in God. ( Col. 3:3 .) 

The character of man receives impressions 

from his thoughts and actions 

like as the wax cylinder of a phonograph 

receives and preserves an impression from 

every sound; and the mind of God, the 

book of his remembrance, is like a great 

cabinet in which are preserved the exact 

record of the thoughts and sentiments or 

characters of all the world (as in the wax 

cylinders), and from which each character 

can at his will be reproduced. He keeps the 

record of every soul that passes out of the 

present existence until it is reproduced in 

the resurrection morning. His mind is 

the great "book of life," in which the 

names of the consecrated ones are all written 

in a special list as worthy of lasting 



life, and from which, if we are faithful, 
they will not be blotted out.— Rev. 3:5 . 

And herein we find a good illustration 
of the difference between Adamic death 
and the Second death. The Adamic death 
is well illustrated by the removal and preservation 
of the wax cylinder, with a view 
to the reproduction of the thoughts thus 
preserved. So the dissolution in Adamic 
death stops the making and expressing of 
character; but through the ransom God 
has made provision for, and has promised 
the preservation of, our characters— and a 
resurrection or reproduction of them in his 
due time, in such instruments or cases 
(bodies) as it pleases him— as the same cylinder 
can be fitted to any sort of phonograph 
instrument, of wood, iron or other 
case. But the Second death is one in which 
there is no preservation of the character, 
and from which there will never more be 
a reproduction— just as when the wax cylinders 
are done with, all the impressions are 
obliterated— as though they had not been. 

It is plain, therefore, that though in 
death the human soul loses its own identity, 
yet never, excepting in the case of 
those who die the second death, is the 
identity of a single soul lost to God- 
blotted out of his book of remembrance. 
There they all live unto him, though they 
are actually dead. When the death sentence 
passed and was executed upon Adam, 
his identity was not lost to God; for in 
God's purpose he was redeemed by Christ 
and must in due time be restored. And 
when our Lord Jesus died, his identity, his 
personality or character, which included 
all his powers, was completely lost to 
himself, though it was never lost to God, 
in whose mind every feature of his 
character was clearly legible; and in due 
time it was reproduced in a glorious body 
of the divine nature and "the express 
image of the Father's person." 

The humanity which he took for the 
suffering of death, and which he accordingly 
laid down in death, remains, therefore, 
a sacrifice forever— it was the price 
laid down for our redemption, and never 
taken back; but that glorious character, 
the ego, the identity of the blessed Son of 
God, "who was before all things," and by 
whom all things were created, who in loving 
obedience to the Father's will gave 
himself as a man for our redemption, still 



existed in the book of God's remembrance 
and in due time was reproduced or 
raised to life again for our justification— not 
to a human existence again, which was laid 
down forever as our ransom price, but to a 
higher nature, through the instrumentality 
of which he will be able to bring to us 

R1264 : page 7 

actually all the blessings purchased by his 
great sacrifice for us. And so he still 
lives, our great high Priest and King, our 
adorable Lord Jesus, Jehovah's Anointed; 
and if we be dead with him, in due time 
we also shall live with him, as his bride 
and joint-heir, and shall reign with him 
who liveth and was dead. Amen; and is 
alive forevermore. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1264 : page 7 
LOST AND SAVED. 



No two words seem to be more confused 
in the general mind than the words 
lost and saved, as used in the Scriptures. 

Some, when they read that the Son of 
Man came to seek and to save that which 
was lost ( Luke 19:10 ), at once get the 
impression that the word lost signifies 
doomed to everlasting torment, and that 
the word save means to secure everlasting 
bliss, whereas no such thing is even 
hinted at. To understand what is to be 

saved or recovered, we must first learn 
what was lost. For information on this 
subject we are wholly dependent upon 
God's revelation. Whatever our father 
Adam possessed before he sinned, that 
he and his race do not now possess, 
has been lost, and that is what the Son of 
Man came to save or restore. 

God's Word informs us that, as originally 
created, father Adam was a mental and 
moral image of his Creator. How quickly 
the race fell from that noble state! 
How far from this are men to-day! Originally, 
because pure and good, our father 
Adam had intimate communion with 
his God; he was God's son, as well as 
his image. ( Luke 3:38 .) So grandly perfect 
was he in physical constitution that 



even under the sentence of death he 

lasted nine hundred and thirty years; and 

his physical strength but illustrates his 

mental and moral perfection, which must 

have corresponded. How great has been 

the loss experienced by all who in his 

loins shared his disobedience and its penalty, 

death! Now, even with the aid of 

six thousand years of experience in seeking 

for remedies and panaceas, the average 

of human life is only about thirty 

years, while the mental and moral powers 

are similarly vitiated, though this deterioration 

is less appreciated because perfection 

is now a thing unknown, because 

education has become more general, and 

especially because the light of the incoming 

age, which God is letting in, to prepare 

the way of the Lord, is now elevating 

men above former conditions. (See MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, Vol. I., pages 157-167.) 

How much we have lost none can appreciate, 

except as we occasionally meet with 

prodigies whose wonderful powers in one 

direction or another so far transcend our 

own as to excite our astonishment. We 

can scarcely imagine a man possessed of 

all the wonderful powers and abilities of 

all these prodigies, nor think how, even 

then, such would probably be far short of 

the original capacities of our father Adam, 

and what might have been our powers 

had they not been lost. 

But, thank God, all that was lost is to 
be saved. Our Lord Jesus came into the 
world on this very mission. Carrying out 
the Father's plan, he became a man for 
this very purpose and gave his life as our 
ransom-price; he redeemed, or bought back 
from the penalty and loss, Adam and all 
who suffered the loss in him. Thus the 
arrangement to save the world of mankind 
is complete; but they are not yet saved. 
It will be the great work of Christ's Millennial 
Kingdom to save them. They will 
be saved by a restitution process, a resurrection 

(anastasis), or lifting up to the 
condition and powers and blessings and 
opportunities lost in Adam. 

SOME SAVED BY FAITH IN ADVANCE. 

God had this plan of salvation in mind 
long before he took the first step toward 
it in sending his Son to redeem us. He 
even made known his plan to some extent 



before he began to execute it. Abraham 
and the holy prophets were made slightly 
acquainted with it by his declarations and 
by the types and illustrations which were 
given them. Such as believed and proved 
their faith by acting accordingly were 
granted a measure of the restoration 
from the loss, in the privilege of 
fellowship and communion with God 
which had been lost; and these were assured 
that in due time they would have 
back full life and vigor, mental and physical, 
and all that was lost, through a great 
Messiah, who would have all power to bless 
and to lift them up. This was before the 
ransom had been actually given. 

R1265 : page 7 

Since the ransom has been given (during 
the Gospel age), God has revealed 
himself and his plans yet more fully to 
those who are seeking communion and 
fellowship with him through obedience. 
He shows them how broad a foundation 
he has laid in the ransom of all by the 
second perfect man, even as all had come 
under sentence through the first perfect 
man. ( Rom. 5:17-19 .) Those who have 
believed God and accepted of the Messiah, 
during this age, have not only been 
granted a restitution of heavenly communion 
and a realization of joy and peace 
through faith in the pardon extended to 
them through the Redeemer, and hopes 
of full restitution to all that was lost, but 
they have been granted something more— 
an additional favor. This additional favor 
is in the offer that if they will now 
consecrate themselves fully to the Lord 
and give up present and future earthly or 
restitution rights, privileges and blessings, 
and sacrifice these in his service now, 
God will give them in exchange for these 
sacrifices something that will be still 
grander and higher. Instead of a perfect 
earthly body with its full measure of perfect 
powers, which, though very grand 
are still a little lower than the powers of 
angels, God proposes to give them a 
divine nature and body— far superior in 
power and glory to those of angels. 
( 2 Pet. 1:4 ; 1 Cor. 6:3 .) In a word, if 
these who have ears (willingness) to hear of 
God's gracious plan now, and who believe 
and receive restitution to human 



perfection by faith, will present themselves 
as sacrifices in the service of the 
Lord as his agents and ambassadors, God 
will reckon these in as Christ's bride, 
and make this "little flock" joint-heirs 
with Christ and partakers of his nature 
and glory and Millennial work and honors. 
This work is about complete; the 
last members of the "bride" will soon 
be fully tested and proved worthy of his 
love and of the promised blessing; and 
then all, glorified with and like their 
Lord, will begin the 

GREAT WORK OF SAVING ALL THE WORLD. 

All are to be saved, as all were 
ransomed. "The man Christ Jesus gave 
himself a ransom for all, to be testified 
in due time." ( 1 Tim. 2:5,6 .) As 
this salvation reaches now those who "have 
an ear to hear," so it will in the Millennial 
age reach all —for the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped and the sin-blinded 
shall see, out of obscurity ( Rev. 2:7 ; Isa. 29:18 ), 
the gracious provision God has 
made for all. And for all to be thus 
reached by the knowledge, ability and opportunity 
of salvation is for all to be 

saved: whether they make a good or 
a bad use of God's gift after it has reached 
them is another matter. 

WHO WILL MAKE THEIR SALVATION 
EVERLASTING? 

This salvation from what was lost is a 
gift from God through Christ Jesus, our 
Lord. We do not merit it, and could 
not demand or secure it for ourselves in 
any way: it is a loving gift in the fullest 
sense. But whether or not men shall 
everlastingly retain and enjoy the things 
saved depends on the men and not on 
God, he having arranged that all who receive 
his gift shall be tested. Those who 
delight to do his will may keep the gift 
forever, but those who then sin wilfully 
shall lose it just as father Adam lost it. 
But such will be more culpable than 
Adam, because of more intimate acquaintance 
with God's justice and love, gained 
during their experience with sin and during 
their recovery from it. Thus a blessing, 
a recovery of what was lost (Adam's 
perfections and opportunities), comes to 



all, but God's gift of everlasting life 
through Jesus Christ, our Lord, is only 
to those who obey him. — John 3:36 ; 
Heb. 5:9 ; Jude 5 . 
In every case where the second death 
is represented as being inflicted, whether 
in symbols, parables or literal statements, 
there is something associated which shows 
that the persons mentioned as condemned 
to the second death have been saved from 
the condemnation of Adamic sin and death 
and have had a full opportunity for life 
everlasting, and that they lose it a second 
time only by their own known and 
wilful disobedience to God. 



R1265 : page 7 

NONE WORTHY OF EVERLASTING LIFE. 

No, none; because none are perfect, 
and under God's law no imperfect being 
is fit to have the boon of lasting life. Our 
only hope of lasting life, then, is to be 
made perfect. When made perfect all will 
depend on our worthiness; that is, when 
perfect we will be on the same footing as 
father Adam— permitted to live so long 
as we remain in harmony with our Creator's 
wise and good laws and regulations. 

But now we are not only imperfect, 
and hence unworthy of life everlasting, 
but still worse, we have no hope of ever 
being able to make ourselves perfect and 
worthy; for our tendency is in the opposite 
direction— toward greater imperfection 
of mind and body. We find ourselves 
under a sentence of death and 
subject to a weakness which started in our 
father Adam. What must men do to be 
saved— from this degradation and weakness 
and death which is upon us? We can do 
nothing except to look to God and trust 
that his mercy and love can find a way to 
help us. 

Looking, we find that our just Creator, 
who sentenced us, is pitiful toward us— 
disposed to help us— that while he could 
not justly ignore and pass over and forgive 
the violation of his law under which 
we were sentenced, he could do and has 
done what amounts to the same so far as we 
are concerned— he has paid our penalty for 
us, through his Son, our Lord Jesus, who 



gladly carried out the gracious plan and 
has himself been highly exalted as a reward 
for that obedience and loving sacrifice, 
which was our ransom -price. 

What remains for us to do is to accept 
the gracious offer of forgiveness through 
our Redeemer, and to put ourselves heartily 
into his hands for repairs— for restitution 
back to the original condition lost 
through Adam. This is necessary; for 
while it was necessary that the original sin 
should be canceled first, its cancellation 
would still leave us weak, imperfect and 
unworthy of life everlasting. Hence God's 
gracious plan not only includes the death 
of Christ as the ransom, or corresponding 
price, or substitute, for Adam and his race, 
to relieve us from the sentence of death 
against Adam and all who were in his 
loins, but it does more: it has made a 
provision for restoring the race through 
the same one who paid the ransom price. 
And as our Lord's death is an assurance 
that our ransom price is paid, so his resurrection 
is God's pledge that the opportunity 
for restitution will be extended to 
all, even as the ransom was for all. 

All this is done for men while wholly 
unworthy— it is a free gift of God. Their 
part is simply to accept the forgiveness 
through Christ by faith, and to show their 
appreciation of the opportunity for restitution 
which it affords by obedient conformity, 
so far as they are able, to the 
laws and arrangements of the Lord through 
the Mediator, designed for their perfecting. 

After this perfecting shall be accomplished 
(or when upon full knowledge it 
is refused) the individual must thereafter 
stand in his own merit— in his own righteousness 
presented to him through Christ's 
work for and in him, or must fall under 
condemnation into the second death because 
of his lack of worthiness of lasting life; 
and his worthiness of lasting life or of 
lasting death will be then decided by his 
obedience or disobedience. 



page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Pennsylvania. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Truly the 



Lord blesses me greatly in my work, not 
indicated so much in the number of DAWNS 
sold and delivered as in the great number 
of comments which even go ahead of my 
arrival while I canvass between those towns 
I visit. I deliver one or two discourses 
of 1-1/4 hours each, every Sunday; never 
failing to have a full house of deeply interested 
hearers. These flock around me 
at the close of each service with scores of 
proper questions suggested by the sermon. 
Brief answers to these are listened to by 
other honest inquirers. At the close of 
the evening discourse the remark is often 
made that it answered many questions suggested 
by that of the morning. 

The deep interest is also manifested by 
the fact that a goodly number walk miles 
from one appointment to the next in the 
adjoining district. Others volunteer to go 
with carriage, taking me to and from appointments, 
and many seem to vie with each 
other in hearty invitations to accompany 
them to their homes to share their hospitality 
—many more than I can accept. It is 
very cheering to notice how quickly and 
effectually the cobwebs of tradition and 
musty creeds disappear when the present 
truth is presented. I sell a goodly number of 
MILLENNIAL DAWNS in connection with 
each appointment. From it appropriate 
selections are made for singing. 

As must be expected, a would-be numerous 
opposition is apparent; yet it is shy 
and lacks all the boldness of righteousness. 
Last Sunday I was politely invited 
by a "Drew theologian," the M.E. minister 
in charge here, to his parsonage studio, 
where were congregated a council of 
"shepherds" of different "flocks" who 
were intent upon devising ways and 
means to crush "this man and his book," 
which were scattering their flocks from 
their folds, doing more to disintegrate and 
lead away than they all had the power to 
resist. They had concluded that something 
must be done and were willing to 
unite to oppose the "common enemy." 
They wanted to advise and warn as to my 
doctrine and my book. 

I inquired, "Have you read the book?" 
"No." "Have you heard the man 
preach?" "No." Then in turn, gentlemen, 
let me advise and admonish you 
first to read the book carefully, then hear 
the man candidly, then bear the truth thus 



obtained to your congregations. They will 
see the light and follow; but failing to do 
this, you will but blow smoke and dust 
into the eyes of those saying to you, "Help 
us to see." Should you tell them the man 
and the book teach Adventism or Universalism 
they will quickly tell you they know 
better. The M.E. minister suggested his 
unwillingness to have the book in his library. 
Both the eyes and ears of each were 
resolutely closed. 

The interview ended in emphasizing the 
truth that "If the blind lead the blind 
both shall fall into the ditch," and that 
darkness still covers the earth and gross 
darkness the people. 

Yet how blessed the sight of scores of 
honest, truth-hungry seekers in every neighborhood 
gladly grasping the "white bread 
of heaven," borne to them from the Master's 
table. How surely, as soon as they 
get the light, they will refuse to be led by 
their blind leaders. 

At the close of my last discourse a tall, 
fine looking young man, chorister and 
leader in the singing, came to me and inquired 
what I called the doctrine I 
preached. I replied that it was the doctrine 
of the restitution of all things which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all his 
holy prophets since the world began— 
that I knew no other and wanted no other 
name. Well, said he, in the hearing of 
many who were listening, "They may 
call it what they please, it is just my belief. 
I have never heard my doctrine so 
clearly and fully expressed before." He 
wanted both volumes of the DAWN. How 
plenteous the harvest! How few the laborers! 
Yours in the blessed service, 
E. J. ROGERS. 

Indiana. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am glad 
you invited your readers to write to you, 
else I should have hesitated to do so. I can 
not begin to tell you what joy and comfort 
I have found in reading the DAWN and 
WATCH TOWER. I have been a member 
of the Methodist church for more than 
twenty years, but long before I read your 
works it seemed to me to be not so much 
a house of prayer as a temple of fashion. 

My precious boy, whom I buried last year, 
saw these things and held aloof from the 
church, and he took sick and died out of 



the church— he whom I had dedicated to 

God in baptism and prayed for all his 

life. He was nineteen years of age. According 

to my own belief as a Methodist, 

I must think him unsaved, though I could 

not believe it; for a better, more God-fearing 

if not God-loving boy I never 

saw. But I could not harmonize Methodist 

faith and God's providence, his promises 

and my awful loss. Of myself I could 

have found no solution of the mystery. 

In speaking to the pastor about it, he said, 

"Sister, you know what the terms of salvation 

are." 

I will not attempt to tell you of the 
consolation I have found in reading your 
works. Before I read them, after my son's 
death, I could not pray; I tried, but words 
froze on my lips. But, thanks to you and 
the dear Lord, I see light through the 
cloud, and my soul is filled with joy while 
I sing: 
"What if the clouds do, for a moment, 
Hide the blue sky where morn appears? 
Soon the glad sun of promise given 
Rises to shine a thousand years." 
But I have written upon the very subject 
I thought I would not attempt, lest 
my letter be too long. You need not take 
the trouble to reply, as I shall find it in 
the DAWN and in the TOWER. I am anxious 
for the next volume and wait impatiently 
for every number of the TOWER. 

I close, subscribing myself your sister 
in Christ, in hope of a glorious resurrection 
and a reunion with loved and buried 
ones, through Him who hath loved us and 
given Himself a ransom for us. 
MRS. F. W. SPOTTS. 

Canada. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose 
express money order of $50, for my DAWN 
account. 

As I anticipated, I find plenty of opportunity 
for serving the truth in Canada. 
The harvest is plentiful, and so is the 
ground for sowing. In the short time we have 
been here we have sold nearly 500 DAWNS, 
and there seem to be many that are ripe 
and ready for the sickle of truth. 

We expect to be here about one week 
more. Then my brother will go to meet 
and work with Bro. Zink, and I will work 
one or two towns near here next. 

The last TOWER has been read and 



much appreciated, as usual, though I have 
not had opportunity to read it as carefully 
as I desire to do yet. With love in Christ, 
your brother, S. D. ROGERS. 

Florida. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Yours of 

20th inst. to hand, and contents read, as 
usual, with great pleasure, and I trust with 
profit. I thank you very much for the 
tracts and papers. Although I never know, 
in many cases, what effect the distribution 
of such literature has upon the minds 
and hearts of the recipients, and in fact 
whether they are all even read, yet I 
have seen enough to convince me that 
there can be no more efficient way to 
preach the truth. 

These messengers of truth appeal to the 
individual when all alone, and he has time 
to think, and when, perhaps, he is less 
combative. Many, I am satisfied, believe, 
and, like Nicodemus, "are afraid of the 
Jews." I encounter some who, while they 
are unable to overcome these Bible facts, 
are yet proud and conceited, and will not 
believe though they be convinced. 

I am perfectly delighted with the Hymn 
Book. I want to try and sell some among 
my friends and congregation. 

May God bless you and yours. Yours in 
Christian bonds, W. D. WILLIAMS. 

California. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Enclosed please find 
$5.00, which I believe will cover expenses 
for the DAWNS and envelopes of the enclosed 
order, and also for sending the 

WATCH TOWER to my brother in 

China, for the ensuing year. Anything 
over and above these expenses, retain for 
God's work in your hands. 

I have been much blessed in reading the 
article on the history of the development 
of the present truth in the May number, 
and I do praise God for your faithful word 
of warning at the close, that a pure heart 
and single eye to the glory of God is the 
only safeguard against false doctrine. I 
see around me here the danger of being 
carried away in seeking more knowledge 
of these blessed truths before being truly 
sanctified to God by a complete surrender 
at the foot of the cross. Truly, "knowledge 
puffeth up," if it is not based on the 
love of God as an actual heart experience. 



We started a little meeting last Lord's 
Day in a laundry here, for those who love 
these blessed truths. It was a humble 
gathering, but the Lord blessed us. I pray 
that his spirit may be present in power 
with us as we meet from time to time. 
Pray for us. 

I am very much pleased with Leeser's 
translation, and have got some blessed 
thoughts and helps from it. Specially do I 
appreciate the rendering of Isaiah 53 , bringing 
out so clearly as it does how our Lord 
has borne our sicknesses, and how, through 
his substitutionary sufferings in this line, 
healing is granted to us. 

Yours in the Lord, G. B. STUDD. 

Tennessee. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have 
not written you sooner because I really 
had nothing to write. My life has been 
so uneventful of late, and so full of physical 
suffering, that I am nearly lost to life 
and its busy scenes. In another sense, however, 
my dear brother, I have been feasting 
upon the fat things of a better life, and 
my soul rejoices in the promises of God. 
For whereas I was once blind, now I see, 
and whereas I was once a bond-slave, now 
I rejoice in the liberty of the gospel of 
our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. O what 
a glorious liberty it is! What a blessed 
privilege to be the servant of Christ. 

When I get able I too expect to do some 
work for Christ, but so far I have had a 
hard battle to fight, and am not settled 
yet. How I would like to see you all and 
join you in anthems of praise to "him 
who hath redeemed us." I often think of you 
and the delightful meetings at your house. 

I go to church here occasionally, but how 
painful it is to hear those expounding the 
Word who do not themselves understand 
it, nor believe it. 

I want two of your Hymn Books, and 
for the balance of the within money send 
me all the No. 2 Tracts you can. I am 
entirely out of them. Wishing you and 
Sister Russell, and all our dear brethren 
and sisters in Allegheny, all God's good 
and perfect gifts, I am most sincerely 
yours, J. F. CALDWELL. 

England. 
VERY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Yours 
of the 18th inst. duly received. In reply 



I would say that I feel very humble, yet 
blessed, at the inspiring thought of being 
privileged to thrust the sickle into the 
great harvest-field of England. May I 
receive the merciful assistance of the Master, 
and the prayers of all the brethren. 

Enclosed you will find LI 5, or 75 dollars, 
for which please send five hundred 
DAWNS, Vol. I., and a complete outfit. 
Shall be glad to receive the Arp slips and 
memoranda and some Tracts, especially 
the one treating on the wages of sin. 
Please forward the books at once. 

I have a great field before me, and a 
great work to do; but am overwhelmed 
with gratitude at thought of being permitted 
to engage in the great work. I feel my 
weakness; but the consolation of being 
convinced that I am called to the work is a 
guaranty that I shall be divinely sustained; 
and of this I had some experience at 
Henderson, N. C, in opposition to both 
lay and clerical influence of that town, 
which I take it was but a small drilling 
school to prepare me for my future work. 
Am blessed with the precious consolation 
that the foundation of the Master's work 
is laid there, and an impression made that 
will never be effaced. To God be all the 
glory. Amen! Yours in love, and in the 
Master's cause, RICHARD MARSTON. 

Pennsylvania. 

TOWER TRACT SOCIETY:-I have to 
acknowledge receipt of a capital little 
tract of the teaching of the Old Theology, 
entitled "Protestants, Awake!" 

It is the doctrines of the church that 
have driven so many entirely from the 
teachings of the Great Discoverer of the 
road to happiness, through love. 

Send me other tracts, and as I have 
opportunity for distribution I will send 
money for others. 

Respectfully, G. K. FLOWER. 



page 8 

TAKE NOTICE. 

READERS WILL PLEASE NOTICE that this 
issue constitutes Number 12 of Vol. XL 
The next issue will be an Extra, so that 
Vol. XII. can begin with the new year. 



As we intend using printed address slips 
hereafter, we are revising our lists now, 
and desire to hear at once from all whose 
subscriptions expire with this volume or 
year— whether they desire to renew or to 
have their paper stopped. The same notice 
applies to all who, because of infirmities, 
etc., are in the habit of receiving the 
TOWER free as the Lord's poor. ALL 
such are expected to notify us now if they 
desire our visits for the coming year. 
See terms on first page, and remember that 
the interested ones, too poor to pay, are 
supplied as willingly as any. Attend to 
this at once, please. 



R1261 : page 8 

PLEASE DO NOT ask us for credit on 
Bibles and other books. We have not 
the means to grant such requests, much as 
we love and would like to accommodate 
you all. The small credit allowed to 
MILLENNIAL DAWN colporteurs is an 
exception to this rule. 



R1265 :page 1 

VOL. XL ALLEGHENY, PA., DECEMBER, 1890. NO. 12. EXTRA. 



R1274 : page 1 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This issue is made an Extra, so that 
Vol. XII. can begin with the new year. 
As we intend using printed address slips 
hereafter, and now are revising our lists, 
we desire to hear at once from all whose 
subscriptions expire with this volume or 
year— whether they desire to renew or to 
have their paper stopped. The same notice 
applies to all who, because of infirmities, 
etc., are in the habit of receiving the 
TOWER free as the Lord's poor. ALL 
such are expected to notify us now if they 
desire our visits for the coming year. 
See terms above and remember that 
the interested ones, too poor to pay, are 
supplied as willingly as any. Attend to 
this at once, please. 



page 1 

PLEASE DO NOT ask us for credit on 
Bibles and other books. We have not 
the means to grant such requests, much as 
we love and would like to accommodate 
you all. The small credit allowed to 
MILLENNIAL DAWN colporteurs is an 
exception to this rule. 



R1265 : page 1 

WHAT IS MAN? 

"What is man, that thou art mindful of him? 
or the son of man, that thou visitest him?"— 
Psa. 8:4 . 

What is man? is an important question 
in view of his possible destiny; and the 
question in its widest scope refers to his 
past, his present and his possible future 
state. What, then, we may inquire, was 
he? what is he? and what is he to be in 



the future? 

As to what he was originally we have 
no knowledge whatever, and can gain no 
information, save from the sacred writings 
of God's inspired prophets and witnesses. 
Some would-be philosophers, who have 
more faith in their own surmises than in 
the inspired records, tell us that originally 
man was much inferior to his present state, 
and that from a very low beginning he has 
been gradually progressing toward a state 
of perfection. Progression, or evolution, 
is the term which describes the theory, 
though none of its advocates will attempt 
to define either the beginning or the ultimate 
terminus of such progression. 

But, discarding the vain philosophies of 
mere human reasoning, let us inquire of 
the divine oracles, the only reliable testimony. 

R1266 : page 1 

The Bible tells us that man is of 
the earth, earthy; that out of the ground he 
was taken; that God formed him of the 
dust of the ground and then breathed or 
infused into him the breath of life— i.e., 
instituted the breathing process— and that 
thus man became a living soul or being. 
And not only so, but unlike all the other 
living souls of the earth which God had 
created, this soul was in the image of his 
Maker. Now an image of any thing is a 
representation or copy of it, though of inferior 
substance. So man was an earthy 
or clay copy of his heavenly, spiritual 
Maker— a copy of God! yes, a manifestation 
of God in flesh. Truly, then, he must 
have been a noble creature. And what shall 
we say of the implied reflection against the 
Creator in the claim of some, that man was 
originally far inferior even to his present 
state of degradation? for however high 
or low was his condition, the fact clearly 
stated is that he was an "image," a copy, 
of God. "O," say they, "but the statement 
reads, 'Let us make man in our 
image, after our likeness' ( Gen. 1:26 ), 
and the process of making him was 
only begun in Eden and it still continues, 
and must, until he has reached the 
image of God. Thus far he is "a cake 
only half baked." 
But let such observe the reading of the 
following verse , also verse 3 1 , which show 
that God not only purposed the work and 



proposed it to his Son, his agent in the 
creation of all things ( John 1:3 ; Col. 1:16 ), 
and that he not only began the work, 
but that he also completed it:— "So God 
created man [past tense] in his own image; 
in the image of God created he him; 
male and female created he them." "And 
God saw every thing that he had made, 
and, behold, it was very good." (Compare 
Gen. 1:27,31 ; 5:1 ; 9:6 ; Eccl. 7:29 ; 

1 Cor. 11:7 ; Jas. 3:9 .) And this 
creature which God "had made," completed, 
and declared to be a copy, an image of 
himself, a manifestation of himself in flesh, 
he was also pleased to own as his son 
( Luke 3:38 ), and as Paul says— "If a 
son, then an heir;" for God brings no 
son into existence for whom he has not 
made ample provision. And as a son he 
had the rich token of his Father's loving 
providence in the vast domain of earth 
which he was to subdue and take possession 
of as his posterity would increase and 
require it; and all its products— animal, 
vegetable and mineral— were subject to 
his control and use:— "And God blessed 
them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, 
and multiply, and fill the earth, and 
subdue it; and have dominion over the 
fish of the sea, and over the fowl 
of the air, and over every living thing 
that moveth upon the earth. And God 
said, Behold, I have given you every herb 
bearing seed which is upon the face of all 
the earth, and every tree in the which is 
the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you 
it shall be for meat."— Gen. 1:28,29 . 

And not only did God thus give to 
Adam the whole earth as an inheritance 
for himself and his posterity, telling them 
to appropriate it and cultivate it as their 
increasing necessities should require, but 
he had already prepared a choice portion 
of it as a fit home for the perfect pair, 
and a sample of what the whole domain 
of earth would become under the process 
of industrious cultivation with his added 
blessing.— "And the Lord God planted 
a garden eastward in Eden; and there he 
put the man whom he had formed.... 
And the Lord God took the man and put 
him into the garden of Eden to dress it 
and to keep it."— Gen. 2:8,15 . 

How like a wise and loving father! 
How bountiful the provision, yet how wisely 
bestowed!— not in a way to cultivate 



indolence and undue dependence upon 
paternal care, but in a way to stimulate 
industry and thrift and to cultivate a spirit 
of appreciation and thankfulness for the 
blessings and advantages received. When 
we thus view the newly created man in 
the light in which the Bible presents him, 
as a son and an heir of God, beloved 
and owned of God and so richly blessed 
with such lavish tokens of the divine favor, 
we must conclude that he was indeed 
a creditable "image" of God, and one 
that God was not ashamed to own— a 
perfect creature, therefore, filled with grace 
and crowned with glory, as the Scriptures 
declare.- Psa. 8:5-8 . 

Would a man take pleasure in sending 
out a blurred and defaced painting, and 
widely announce it as an image of himself? 
or would he take delight in owning 
and blessing a simple or an idiotic son? 
No; such a painting would be a disgrace 
to the original, and such a son a reproach 
to a parent. 

But let us consider further this copy of 
God; for even defaced as it now is, and 
therefore no longer owned of God, 
some traces of the original likeness still 
remain, and to view the original, we have 
only to supply in imagination the shortcomings 
of our various powers from the 
standard of an ideal perfection suggested 
in the Scriptures. The physical nature of 
man may, or may not, constitute a part 
of the likeness of God. Of this we cannot 
judge, since "it does not yet appear" what 
a spirit body is, excepting negatively, 
that it is not flesh and blood, though it is 
a reality, a glorious body— "There is a 
natural body and there is a spiritual body." 
( 1 Cor. 15:44 .) But the intellectual and 
moral qualities in man are the exact 
counterparts of God's own intellectual and 
moral qualities. Man has perception, imagination, 
the power of original suggestion, 
memory, reason, judgment and will, 
corresponding to these various intellectual 
qualities in God. He has also the Godlike 
moral quality of conscience, which 
enables him to discern the right and the 
wrong, to distinguish one from the other 
and to estimate them properly. As originally 
created, all of these powers worked 
together perfectly and harmoniously, all 
being subject to that supreme mental faculty, 
the will, which, being free to act independently, 



though aided by the suggestions 

of all the other mental and moral 

faculties, determines the course and constitutes 

the character of the man. 

This Godlike endowment of a free will 
constituted the crowning glory of God's 
human creature. Had he been left without 
this one, though possessed of all the 
other noble faculties, he would have been 
a mere machine, without character, either 
meritorious or blameworthy. So, then, 
the perfect man was this free moral and 
intellectual creature, with a perfect physical 
organism, giving full and free exercise 
to, and in no way interfering with, his noble 
powers; with surroundings which continually 
stimulated and rewarded their cultivation 
and use; and with the promise of 
lasting continuance of these favors on condition 
of the right course of his will— his 
choice of righteousness as manifested in 
the expressed will of God. To prove his 
worthiness of lasting life, a test of character 
must of necessity be applied. The 
first test was a very simple one, merely 
the prohibition of the fruit of a single tree 
in the midst of the garden of Eden. 
But under this first simple test, though 
knowing the Creator's will and perfectly 
able to obey it, he willed to do wrong, to 
disobey God, and hence brought upon 
himself the just penalty, death. 

But, says the objector, does not the 
fact that Adam fell under the very first 
test prove that he was not perfect, and, 
therefore, could not stand? By no means; 
it simply proves that his will was not fixed, 
was not settled in its determination to do 
right, to do the will of God, as it might 
and should have been. Being perfect, in 
the image of God, and free to act out his 
own will, he had power to obey or disobey, 
and in his choice of the course of 
disobedience he was therefore culpable. He 
alone was responsible, and God was in no 
sense responsible. God had richly endowed 
him with every blessing, both personal 
and in his surroundings, had forewarned 
him of the sure rewards of righteousness 
and sin, and in his command of 
obedience to him as to a wise and loving 
Father, he had provided his wisdom and 
care as their protection and safeguard in 
lieu of their inexperience. And the testing 
of their obedience was his righteous 
act to prove their worthiness or unworthiness 



of eternal life. Consequently, the 
responsibility was all on man's part, and 
when he sinned God was just in condemning 
him to death. 

It is plain, therefore, that the salvation 
which God has provided is purely an act 
of his free grace— an act to which he was 
in no sense obligated, and to which he was 
impelled only by his abounding love: 
"For God so loved the world [even while 

R1266 : page 2 

we were yet sinners] that he gave his only 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life."- John 3:16 ; Rom. 5:8 . 

Thus we see from the Bible testimony 
that man was originally perfect, an image 
or copy of God in flesh. Of the fall from 
that original perfection and the results to 
the entire race of Adam, we also have the 
clear testimony of the Scriptures, showing 
just how it came about— that it was a 
wilful transgression of known righteous law, 
in the face of a distinct warning of the 
penalty of such a course. It was a sin on 
man's part only, and from which God is 
fully exonerated in that man was left under 
no necessity of want and with full instruction 
as to the right course and as to the 
results of a wrong course of action. The 
only cause of man's fall, then, which is 
traceable to the Creator, lies in the fact 
that he created him in his own image— 
with a free will of his own. But this endowment, 
we see, was the crowning act of 
God's favor to man, and man's choicest 
blessing. And so it was the lack of appreciation, 
and an abuse of God's abounding 
favor and goodness, and not any lack 
on God's part, which led to the fall. 

As a consequence of that fall from 
original perfection and favor on the part 

R1267 : page 2 

of the head and representative of the race, 
another law of our being, designed for 
our highest good— the law of heredity- 
has brought upon all Adam's posterity its 
entailment of imperfection and proneness 
to evil. And thus all the race is in the 
same wretched plight. An evil tree cannot 
bring forth good fruit, nor a bitter 
fountain send forth sweet waters. The 



present state, therefore, of the entire race 
is a degenerating and dying one. 

But what of the future condition of 
man? The future condition, as implied 
in the penalty, would have been everlasting 
extinction of being, had not the 
mercy, wisdom and love of God provided 
another opportunity for the race, in which 
the bitter experience gained during the 
six thousand years of the reign of sin and 
death will furnish a valuable lesson, which 
experience will prove that obedience to 
God is the only right and safe course for 
any of his creatures. This second trial of 
the race, under conditions which were impossible 
in the first trial, we thus see is 
another favor of God, and a favor, too, 
which could never be claimed on the score 
of justice. Though man was justly condemned 
as unworthy of life, God saw in 
his inexperience and youth an extenuating 
circumstance, though not a release from 
moral obligation; and, therefore, coupled 
with the enunciation of the penalty, came 
the merciful promise of final deliverance 
from it. The sacrifice of our Lord, 
the man Christ Jesus, as the ransom for all, 
to satisfy the claims of justice against all, 
makes manifest both to angels and to men 
that this salvation, this recovery out of sin 
and its penalty, death, could not be hoped 
for on the score of justice, but only on the 
score of pity and love. The atoning sacrifice 
for sins was demanded by justice 
and was furnished by Jehovah, that he 
might be just, and yet the justifier of men 
already justly condemned to death.— 
Rom. 3:26 . 

This favor of a new trial for the condemned 
race was provided by God in the 
gift of his Son, our Lord Jesus, who left 
his former glory and took our human nature, 
and then, as a man, freely gave 
himself as our ransom or corresponding 
price. Wherefore, says the Apostle, God 
has now highly exalted him, even to the 
divine nature, that he might have power 
to justify or restore the redeemed race to 
the perfection and glory and dominion of 
earth lost in Eden; for the Son of man 
came to seek and to recover that which 
was lost.— Luke 19:10 . 

In looking back, therefore, to the original 
condition of man and the dominion 
given him in Eden, we see to what the 
human race is to be restored in the 



times of restitution promised by the mouth 
of all the holy prophets since the world 
began. ( Acts 3:19-21 . See also Gen. 1:26-28 ; 

Psa. 8:4-8 .) He is to be 
restored to his original perfection and to 
the lordship of the whole earth. (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chap. XIV.) 

Ah, says one, "I do not see much glory 
or honor in being made lords over sheep 
and oxen and fishes and creeping things." 
Well, my friend, that is only because your 
ideas of honor and dominion are borrowed 
from the selfish emulations that prevail 
among the ruling classes of the present 
time. See how the kings and lords of 
the past have loved to flaunt their authority 
and presumed superiority before 
the world; how they loved to live in palaces, 
to array themselves in the finest 
fabrics and to glut their appetites with 
the choicest viands of earth's good things, 
selfishly disregarding the woes of the masses, 
whose want of the common necessities 
of life supplied that abundant fulness and 
whose ignorance crouched in humility before 
their assumed greatness. If such gratification 
of the lusts of the flesh and the 
pride of life and the meanness of selfish 
love of display be your ideas of glory and 
honor (and such are the ideas of the sinful 
world), then no wonder if you see no 
special honor and glory in man's future 
dominion over the cattle and beasts and 
fish and fowl. 

But take the standpoint of truth and 
soberness and of a sound mind, and the 
glory and dignity of the future lord of 
earth will be very apparent. He will not 
need to tax his fellow men to gain for 
himself the luxuries of ease and elegance, 
and then seek selfishly to enjoy them in 
the midst of the poverty and distress of his 
impoverished fellow men; for all men 
will be lords and kings, enjoying the same 
wealth and ease and elegance. His glory 
of person will not, as now, be dependent 
on gold and gems and costly array, but 
will have for its foundation the dignity 
and true beauty of character. Gems of 
intellectual beauty will sparkle in the eyes; 
the chisel of thought and the mallet of 
experience will fashion the features to 
forms of beauty such as art has never yet 
dreamed of; and the mantle of an established 
character of purity and righteousness 
and true holiness will clothe it more 



gloriously and royally than purple and 
scarlet and fine linen. One will have nothing 
to boast of over his fellow-men, for 
all will be alike glorious when all have 
been restored. 

Nor will he need to set up a puppet 
show of his greatness before the lower 
creatures, to awe his subjects into submission 
to his authority; for naturally and 
without compulsion the beasts and cattle 
and fish and fowl will be his willing servants, 
and all the stores and forces of nature— 
the winds and waves, the light and heat, 
the electric currents, the minerals and 
gases and liquids, and vegetation in all its 
varied forms— will freely minister to his 
comfort and blessing. With what easy 
grace may the commands of such a lord 
be expressed, and with what delight will 
his blessings be enjoyed; and how far 
superior will they be to the plumed and 
titled mimic lords of to-day, who tremble 
on their thrones and whose very existence 
is continually haunted by visions of angry 
mobs, court intrigues and assassination 
plots. 

Thus we see the grandeur of man as 
originally created in God's image and can 
appreciate the significance of God's statement, 
that he was crowned with dignity 
and honor as the lord and master of earth, 
with dominion over the beasts of the 
field, the fowl of the heavens and the 
fishes of the sea, in likeness of his Creator, 
the Lord and Ruler over all things. 
We have seen, too, how all this arrangement 
was interrupted by sin. But while 
God permitted this interruption, he has 
not permitted, nor does he purpose to permit, 
a failure of his plans. All his purposes 
shall be accomplished ( Isa. 55:11 ), 
because they were all devised in full view 
of all the circumstances which would attend 
them— in view of man's free agency, 
in view of his temptation and fall into sin 
and of its death penalty, and in view, 
also, of the possibility of his recovery 
from that condition through the sacrifice 
and mediation of the Lamb slain from the 
foundation of the world. "Known unto 
God are all his works from the beginning 
of the world;" and therefore he says, 
"I change not." ( Acts 15:18 ; Mai. 3:6 .) 

God's original purpose, therefore, has 
not been changed by reason of Adam's 
failure, and even its interruption by his 



non-appreciation and abuse of his free 
agency, in full view of which the plan was 
formed, shall in the end be overruled for 
good, the painful experience under the 
reign of sin and death acquainting him 
more thoroughly with the wisdom and 
righteousness of God, and at the same 
time exhibiting the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin to the other intelligent creatures. 
But after the long interruption of seven 
thousand years the regeneration of the race 
and their dominion of the whole earth will 
be an accomplished fact. 

But six thousand years have passed already; 
and is there any indication that 
the dominion is soon to be restored? O 
yes: the same inquiry was raised eighteen 
hundred years ago, and Paul showed that 
even then there was a sure indication of it. 
He said, quoting the Psalmist ( Psa. 8:4-8 ), 
"Thou madest man a little lower 
than the angels, thou crownedst him with 
glory and honor and didst set him over 
the works of thy hands. Thou has put 
all things in subjection under his feet. 
But now [since the fall and forfeiture of 
the estate, though God purposes to restore 
mankind to the lost estate] we do not yet 
see all things [restored again] subjected to 
him. But"— what do we see? Is there 
yet any evidence of the long promised 
restitution? O yes, says Paul— "we see 
Jesus, who was made a little lower than 
the angels [a man] for the suffering of 
death, crowned with glory and honor [the 
glory and honor of perfect humanity, in 
whom inhered all the rights and privileges 
of a perfect man, and therefore a fit sacrifice 
—a corresponding price for the man 
Adam], that he, by the grace of God, 
should taste death for every man. For it 
became him [Jehovah] for whom are all 
things and by whom are all things, in 
bringing many sons [the human race] unto 
glory [the glory of the restored perfection 
and dominion], to make the Captain 
of their salvation [the glorified divine 
Christ] perfect [as a divine being— the 
divine Prophet, Priest and King] through 
suffering" [through his suffering in the 
flesh, even unto death].— Heb. 2:6-10 . 

This indication of the promised and 
coming restitution, Paul pointed out to the 
Church in his day, but now in the close 
of the Gospel age we see still further indications. 
We not only recognize, as the 



early Church did, that the Redeemer has 
come and has paid our ransom price, and 
that he has been exalted to power for the 
accomplishment of the great restitution 
work, but we see further that the time is 
close at hand for the establishment of his 
Kingdom and the beginning of his glorious 
reign; that the body of Christ, which 
is to share that reign and work with him, 
is now almost complete; and that we are 
now living in the day of Jehovah's preparation 
for the Millennial reign of Christ, 

R1268 : page 2 

by means of which the restoration of all 
the willing and obedient sons of Adam 
shall be accomplished. 

Praise the Lord! we see the beginning 
of the consummation of the great divine 
plan of the ages. Lord, what is man that 
thou art mindful of him, or what are 
the sons of the fallen man that thou 
visitest them with thy salvation? Creatures 
of the dust, indeed, whose breath is 
in their nostrils! Aye! but more! they are 
creatures stamped with thine own glorious 
image, though sadly marred, and they ere 
long may reflect again thy perfect likeness. 
"O Lord, our Lord, how excellent 
is thy name in all the earth ! " 



R1275 : page 2 

EXTRACT FROM SEW ALL'S ANCIENT HISTORY, 
WRITTEN BY ARCHBISHOP 
USHER, PRIMATE OF IRELAND. 

"All you have yet seen hath been but 
the beginning of sorrows to what is yet to 
come upon the churches of Christ, who 
will ere long fall under a sharper persecution 
than ever yet has been upon them. 
And, therefore, look that you be not found 
in the outward court, but a worshiper in 
the temple before the altar; for Christ will 
measure all those that profess his name 
and call themselves his people; and the 
outward worshipers he will leave out, to 
be trodden down by the Gentiles. The 
outward court is the formal Christians, 
whose religion lies in performing the outward 
duties of Christianity, without having 
an inward life and power of faith and 



love, uniting them to Christ. And these 

God will leave to be trodden down and 

swept away by the Gentiles. But the 

worshipers in the temple and before the 

altar are those who indeed worship God 

in spirit and in truth, whose souls are 

made his temples, and he is honored and 

adored in the inmost thoughts of their 

hearts, and they sacrifice their own wills, 

also, to him; and these God will hide in 

the hollow of his hand, and under the 

shadow of his wings. And this shall be 

the great difference between this last and 

all the preceding persecutions; for, in the 

former, the most eminent and spiritual 

ministers and Christians did generally 

suffer the most, and were most violently 

fallen upon; but in this last persecution, 

these shall be preserved by God as a seed, 

to partake of that glory which shall come 

upon the Church, as soon as ever this 

storm shall be over. For as it shall be the 

sharpest, so it shall be the shortest persecution 

of them all, and shall only take 

away the gross hypocrites and formal professors, 

but the true spiritual believers 

shall be preserved till the calamity be 

'overpast.' See Isa. 26:20,21 : 'Come, 

my people, enter thou into thy chambers, 

and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself 

as it were for a little moment, until 

the indignation be overpast. For, behold, 

the Lord cometh out of his place to punish 

the inhabitants of the earth for their 

iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her 

blood, and shall no more cover her slain." 

[Thus one long ago saw dimly the trouble 
now at hand, and the class of true ministers 
(servants) of God who would escape 
all these things and stand.] 



page 2 



ARP TRACTS— free— in any quantity you 
think you can use judiciously. We have 
these in both English and German. 



R1275 : page 3 

THE CHRISTIAN'S PATH. 

Brighter and brighter, every day! 



Better and better, each step of the way! 
Fairer and clearer, the sky above! 
Nearer and sweeter, the songs of love! 

Peace like a river flowing along, 

Hiding for ever ages of wrong, 

Burying deeply, beneath its calm breast, 

The warfare and strife that robbed us of rest. 

Oh! what a joy to be living to-day! 

Flowers of hope bestrewing our way! 

Roses, and lilies of promise, in bloom! 

Rainbows encircling the ages to come! 
Oh! blessed Lord, what a portion divine 
Art thou to the soul who can say Thou art mine; 
In utter surrender, and joyful repose, 
Thou o'ercomest in him the last of his foes. 

Only those who have known thee can guess at the bliss. 
Alas! that so many the happiness miss- 
Turn away from life's river, and City of Gold, 
For poor, broken cisterns, that nothing will hold. 
Yet nothing, dear Lord, can rob us of joy- 
It is far above anything earth can destroy; 
Our treasures all hidden and laid up above, 
Secure in our Lord, in his kingdom of love. 
— Selected. 



R1268 : page 3 

ALL THINGS ARE OF GOD. 



The adversary seems continually on the 
alert to invent some new error or else to 
revive and revamp some old one, to deceive 
God's children. And God permits 
all this, as he has told us, that those being 
gathered as wheat into his barn may 
thereby be thoroughly threshed and winnowed 
or separated from the chaff. God 
sends, or permits the ambitious ones to 
bring upon themselves, strong delusions 
that all who take pleasure in the error may 
have plenty of it to enjoy and to deceive 
themselves with, that all such may be condemned, 
separated from the simple, trusting, 
humble, non-ambitious, faithful ones 
whom he is about to glorify in his Millennial 
Kingdom. 

One of the latest phases of error is that 
which ascribes all sin and crime and 
wickedness to God; which declares that 
God inspires every wicked thought, word 
and deed, and that men in his hands are only 
tools; that absolutely all things are of God. 



But while God permits wilful men to fall 
into such erroneous views and to prosper 
in spreading them, he does, on the other 
hand, guide the meek in judgment and teach 
them his way, and he raises up a standard 
for them by which they are enabled to see 
the truth and to distinguish it from error. 
And though, in this "evil day," a thousand 
shall fall under those errors, they 
shall not overthrow the meek ones whom 
the Lord is pledged to guide and to keep 
from falling. He will give his messengers 
a charge concerning them, and in their 
hands shall they bear up the feet of the body 
of Christ, lest they should stumble over 
that stumbling-stone which stumbled all 
but a small remnant of the fleshly house 
of Israel, and which is now to stumble all 
but a small remnant of the nominal spiritual 
house. (Psa. 91:10-12 ; Isa. 8:14 .) 
He has given to us a charge or message for 
the feet upon this subject, a message of 
truth which will bear them up— the complete 
and glorious harmony of the divine 
plan of the ages. "They," the feet class, 
"shall never fall;" though they stumble, 
they shall not be utterly cast down.— 
Psa. 37:24 . 

Below we quote the pith of this error 
and will examine those scriptures which it 
claims as proof-texts. It reads as follows:— 

"'All things are of God.' ( 2 Cor. 5:18 .) 
When you think of it seriously it 
seems that Paul was rather unguarded and 
careless in his language; it would seem 
as though he ought to have modified and 
limited his statement somewhat; say, for 
instance, all good things are of God. But 
no, the apostle makes the sweeping, unqualified 
statement— 'All things are of 
(literally, out of) God;' and so important 
did he consider this truth that he 
repeats it no less than seven distinct times. 
See Rom. 11:36 ; 1 Cor. 8:6 ; 11:12; 

2 Cor. 5:18 ;Eph. 1:11 ; 4:6 ; Heb. 2:10 . 

Now was the apostle careless and a little 
too bold in these utterances, or did 
he mean just what he said, and are they 
true absolutely? I say unhesitatingly, Yes, 
to the latter questions. The more we 
learn of God's works and ways the more 
we shall understand that, in a sense, absolutely 
all things are of God, or, as some 
put it, God is in everything. This is the 
doctrine of God's universal, all-pervading, 
ever constant Providence. 'His tender 



mercies are over all his works.' 'He 
worketh all things after the counsel of his 
own will.' 

"This doctrine of God's Providence is 
a most positive and important one; there 
is no doctrine of Scripture that is more 
plainly supported, by the most emphatic 
statements, repeated over and over again, 
as referred to above; and no Christian 
would think of doubting it, were it not 
for the fact that its full acceptance leads 
to some very startling and, to some, even 
shocking conclusions. 'What!' they say, 
'all things are of God? absolutely all 
things? the bad things as well as the 
good? all the crime, and sin, and wickedness? 
surely it is blasphemous to say that 
such things are "of God." Paul never 
could have meant that we should take him 
absolutely; we must use our own judgment 
and reason in such matters, and correct 
these sweeping statements, for it cannot 
mean that absolutely all things are of 
God.' And yet that is the way the apostle 
puts it, over and over again. Was he 
ignorant and careless? NO, HE WAS NEITHER; 
he was right, and the Scriptures 
and experience and observation fully bear 
him out in his statements, as strange and 
startling as they may seem." 
"Startling!" "Shocking!" We should 
say it would be strange, shocking and startling 
to find out that God has been the 
real devil for the past six thousand years. 
What sane man would not be startled, 
could it be proved that God has been 
exerting his power in some men to inspire 
them to "sin, wickedness and crime"— to 
robbery, murder, arson, licentiousness, 
intemperance, profanity, devilishness— 
and at the same time inspiring other 
men to write and say that he hates 
such things, that he is holy and separate 
from sin and cannot look upon 
it with any degree of allowance. 
Meanwhile God has been blaming all 
the sin upon men and upon Satan, and 
not only threatening men with punishment, 
but actually inflicting pain, sickness 
and death upon them and telling 
them that they are blame-worthy sinners, 
when, if this theory be true, God is not 
merely the only sinner in the case, the cause 
of "all sin and wickedness and crime," 
but also a most consummate liar and hypocrite, 
and unjust to the last degree, in 



blaming his own work upon his helpless 
tools. 

"Blasphemous?" We should say so indeed! 
If those who said of our Lord 
Jesus that his works were done by the 
power of Beelzebub were blasphemers, as 
he declares, these who unblushingly ascribe 
to Jehovah himself all the "sin and crime 
and wickedness" of earth, it seems to us, 
are blasphemers a hundred-fold more. No 
wonder the writer of this bold blasphemy 
thought that some would be startled by 
such a charge. In our judgment, the 
man or woman who is not startled— 
nay, more, whose heart does not burn with 
righteous indignation at such a blasphemous 
suggestion— is seriously lacking in 
either mental or spiritual balance, or both. 
If, then, any saint feels startled by the 
bare suggestion of such a doctrine, let him 
glorify God on this behalf and rejoice that 
he has some spiritual instinct on the subject. 

BUT WHAT CAN BE THE OBJECT? 

What inspires such thoughts of God's 
character? What false theory is it that 
hesitates not, even to malign the character 
of the Almighty, and which assumes to 
prove its blasphemies by a distortion of 
the divine Word? What theory can require 
such support to make it appear 
reasonable? 

The object is manifestly two-fold: (1) 
To uphold the theory that man never was 
perfect, that he never fell from perfection 
and righteousness into sin, and hence 
did not need a ransom-price for his release 
from what he did not fall into; and 
also (2) to prove that all men will be everlastingly 
saved (not saved from a fall or 
from anything else that they had anything 
to do with, but saved in the sense of being 
evolved up to perfection) —a salvation, 
not from the wages of their sin, but a salvation 
in the sense of release from the 
wickedness, crime and sin of which God 
is the author and instigator, and under 
which he is now keeping and has for six 
thousand years kept them. This theory in 
substance implies that all men will be saved 
on the score of justice, when God shall 
cease from causing them to sin and shall 
favor righteousness. 

To sustain this false theory, which the 
Bible everywhere both directly and inferentially 



contradicts, is the object of the 
writer whose words we have quoted above: 
and because of lack of Scripture to support 
that which he and others have determined 
must be so, he is willing thus to 
malign and blaspheme the character of 
our God to accomplish it. He reasons it out 
about as follows: If I can prove that God 
admits to being the real instigator of all 
sin and wickedness and crime— that absolutely 
all things are of God, evil as well 
as good, wickedness as well as righteousness 
—then I have proved that man is not 
really the sinner; and if man is not really 
the sinner but merely the agent or tool of 
God, both in good and in evil, why should 
he need a ransom, or be charged with, or 
punished for, anything?— if all things are of 
God? The same line of reasoning, carried 
further, leads to the inference that 
when God tires of prompting to sin and 
wickedness and crime, he will stop it and 
begin to prompt only to righteousness; 
and when he does that all men will be 
righteous, as now, under his control, all are 
more or less disposed to sin and wickedness 

R1269 : page 3 

and crime. If thus all the crime and 

sin and wickedness be of God the problem 

of doing without a ransom is solved. 

GOD'S WORD REPUDIATES THE THEORY. 

But the Scriptures say, "Let no man 
say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of 
God; for God cannot be tempted with 
evil, neither tempteth he any man" ( James 1:13 ). 
"Woe unto them that call evil 
good [who say that the evil of man is 
obedience to God's working in him], and 
[call] good evil [imputing evil to God 
who is only good]; that put darkness for 
light and light for darkness; that put bitter 
for sweet and sweet for bitter! Woe 
unto them that are wise in their own eyes 
and prudent in their own sight."— 
Isa. 5:20,21 . 

Let us now examine the scriptures which 
are claimed to support the above theory. 
Does the expression all things mean absolutely 
all things, as the above writer 
assumes and insists, or was the Apostle 
doing what is common to all writers and 
speakers, leaving something to the general 



intelligence of his readers in relation 

to God's character, and also leaving something 

to be understood from the context 

as to what is meant by the expression, all 

things? Paul wrote only to those "that 
do know their God," who know that "every 

good and perfect gift cometh down from 
our Father, with whom there is no variableness 
[from this rule of sending only 
good and what will work for good— never 
sending or causing wickedness, etc.], neither 
shadow of turning" from that course. 
And besides, we shall see that every one 
of these texts quoted had particular things 
in view, when they stated that all things 
are of God; and that those particular 
things were good things, and not sinful 
things. 

First let us show, by quoting from the 
same Apostle, that, not using words carelessly 
or unguardedly, but in the usual 
manner, common to himself and to all 
writers, he used the same words all things 
in a way that the most stupid and the 
most obstinate must acknowledge was not 
an absolute sense. The following instances 
are only a few of the many which we 
might quote, but they will be sufficient to 
keep the "feet" from stumbling into the 
idea that Paul's expression, "All things are 
of God," must be understood as giving 
sanction to this blasphemy, which charges 
God with all the wickedness, crime and 
sin in the world. 

"All things are lawful unto me." ( 1 Cor. 6:12 .) 
Shall we here say absolutely all 
things were lawful to Paul? Does he mean 
that it would have been lawful for him 
to murder, to commit perjury, to lie, 
to steal and to blaspheme? Does he 
mean that absolutely all things were 
lawful to him? Assuredly not: this would 
be the doctrine of the Jesuits, which led 
them, in the dark ages, into every conceivable 
form of evil, under the plea 
that the end in view would justify the 
means used— any means that would bring 
it to pass. Some so misconstrued the 
Apostle's words at the time, declaring 
that evil might be done if good would 
follow. The Apostle resented such a false 
application of his words, and charges those 
who said so with slandering or blaspheming 
him. Very vehemently he protests 
that their condemnation was just who 
slanderously reported that he taught, 



"Let us do evil that good may result."— 
Rom. 3:8 . 

Who shall suppose that this Apostle, who 
so strenuously resented the thought that 
he would do evil that good might result, 
would himself blaspheme the Creator by 
teaching that he was the direct and inspiring 
cause of all evil— of all sin, crime 
and wickedness? If their condemnation 
would be just for thus blasphemously assailing 
Paul's character, how just would 
be the condemnation of those who so 
charge Jehovah our God, we leave for God 
to determine. We are not incapable of 
deciding that this is a heinous crime and 
blasphemy, but we are incapable of judging 
what weakness of reasoning powers 
lies behind such blasphemies, and hence 
what degree of punishment our all-wise 
and just Creator will pay in due time. 

Take another illustration of the Apostle's 
use of the expression "all things:" 
"He [Jehovah] hath put all things under 
his [Christ's] feet." ( 1 Cor. 15:27 .) It 
does not mean that our Lord Jesus stands 
with his feet upon all things —earth, sea, 
angels and men. It does mean that all 
things are made subject to him, or put under 
his control, under his power or authority. 
Yet even in this sense absolutely 
all things are not understood, for, as 
the Apostle suggests, an exception to the 
all things is left for inference to the intelligent 
mind, and not stated. He says, 
"It is manifest that He [Jehovah] is excepted, 
who did put all things under him" 
[Christ]. And to the same class of minds 
that could appreciate such an exception to 
the expression "all things," it is also 
manifest that in the statement "All things 
are of God," an exception of sin, crime 
and wickedness is to be understood, as being 

R1269 : page 4 

the very opposite of God's character. 
If it is impossible for God to lie, shall we 
say that if he compels men to lie for him, 
he is yet clear from the guilt? 
Take two other illustrations together: 
"All things are for your sakes," and "All 
things are by Jesus Christ." ( 2 Cor. 4:15 ; 
1 Cor. 8:6 .) Shall we say that the Apostle 
meant that all murders and robberies 
and storms, all perjury and lying and every 
form and act of sin, are for our sakes? and 



that they all come by or through the Lord 
Jesus? What nonsense! 

Take another illustration: Charity hopeth 
all things, believeth all things, etc. 
( 1 Cor. 13:7 .) Shall we say absolutely all 
things? Does Love hope and believe that 
your neighbor or yourself will be drowned 
or burned or mangled or murdered, or does 
it believe all the nonsense that somebody 
says? Surely again the connections show 
what the expression signifies. We are to 
believe charitably all that we can believe 
relative to the honesty of our fellow-creatures, 
and charitably to hope all that 
we can in their favor so far as we are ignorant 
of the matter in question. 

Take another illustration: "One believeth 
that he may eat all things." ( Rom. 14:2 .) 
Shall we suppose that some in the 
Apostle's day believed in eating absolutely 
all things?— all the cattle and horses 
and men and houses and trees and mountains? 
— absolutely all things? Or shall 
we use a grain of sense and read the connection 
and find out that the Apostle was 
speaking by way of contrast of some whom 
he calls weak brethren, who would eat nothing 
but vegetables ["herbs"], while others 
had no such conscientious scruples and, as 
we would say, "ate any thing and every 
thing." 

With these illustrations of Paul's general 
use of the expression, "all things" 
(occurring over eighty times in his 
epistles), which show that it is not used 
in the absolute sense, let us proceed to 
examine the texts to which we are cited 
as proofs that God is the author and inspirer 
of all wickedness, sin, crime, etc., 
remembering this fact and expecting to 
find in the context that which will indicate 
which things are all of God, and 
never forgetting that it is manifest that 
sin, wickedness and crime are never to be 
understood as included among the all 
things that are of God. 

THE PROOF-TEXTS EXAMINED. 

Let us now examine the texts which 
are offered as proofs of this theory. 

"All things are of God, who hath reconciled 
us to himself by Jesus Christ."— 

2 Cor. 5:18 . 

Surely nothing in the context affords 
ground for the supposition that the Apostle 



would charge God with all the wickedness 
and sin of the world. On the contrary, 
he is showing our new standing in 
Christ, who "died for all" ( verse 14 ), 
but would have us note that while the 
work of redemption was done by our 
Lord Jesus, it was all planned by the 
Father himself. All the features of our 
redemption are of God who himself reconciled 
us to himself by Christ Jesus. 

"To us there is but one God, the Father, 
OF WHOM are all things, and we in 
him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, BY 
WHOM are all things, and we by him." 
( 1 Cor. 8:6 .) This is a repetition of the 
same thought as that foregoing. 

"For as the woman is [ek, out] of the 
man, even so is the man also by [through] 
the woman; but all things [ek, out] of 
God."- ICor. 11:12. 

This is a further showing (see verse 3 ) 
of the relationship existing between the 
church and Christ Jesus, her Lord, and the 
Heavenly Father, from whom proceedeth 
every good and perfect gift. — James 1:17 . 

"In regard to an administration of the 
fulness of the appointed times, to re-unite 
all things under one head, even under the 
Anointed One;— the things in the heavens 
and the things in the earth— under him." 
— Eph. 1:10 .— Diaglott translation. 

This verse points out that though sin 
has been a rebellion against God, the great 
Emperor, in which some of his creatures 
voluntarily and others involuntarily came 
under the dominion and bondage of sin 
and death, it is not God's purpose to 
allow his empire to remain thus shattered 
forever. On the contrary, he is providing 
for the recovery to full harmony of whosoever 
will, and for the destruction of whosoever 
will not obey his representative— the 
Anointed— unto whom already, since his 
resurrection and high exaltation to the 
divine nature, all power in heaven and on 
earth is given ( Matt. 28: 18 ; Phil. 2:9 ), 
and under whom eventually all things 
shall be subdued, that a state of peace, harmony 
and bliss may everlastingly prevail. 

"By whom also we obtained an inheritance, 
having been previously marked out 
according to a design of him who is operating 
all things agreeably to the counsel 
of his own will."— Eph. 1:11 .— Diaglott 
translation. 



R1270 : page 4 

This verse shows that the Church is not 
included among the all things of the preceding 
verse; for it declares that "also 
we" are already re-united to God, in 
Christ, in advance of the general re-uniting 
and subduing of the Millennium. 
And this plan of first selecting us, the 
Church, is only a part of the one great 
plan which he is working out, which he 
assures us will finally bring order and harmony. 
All these good things are of God 
and work out his will. The wrath of man 
he will not permit to interfere with his 
plan.- Psa. 76:10 . 

"For it was becoming in him for the 
sake of whom [are] the all things, and 
through means of whom [are] the all 
things, when many sons to glory he would 
lead, that the Princely Leader of their 
salvation he should through suffering make 
complete."— Heb. 2:10 .— Rotherham's 
translation. 

Nothing could be farther from the sense 
of this passage than to suppose that the 
Apostle meant "all the sin and crime and 
wickedness" of the world are for the sake 
of God and through the means of God. 
The thought, on the contrary, is that all 
things as they shall ultimately be re-united 
under Christ in God are to be so for God's 
sake, because such has been his purpose, his 
pleasure; and that all will be thus brought 
to perfection and harmony by his means— 
his plan and his power carrying that plan 
to completeness through Christ Jesus, our 
Lord. Having such a plan, a part of which 
was the high exaltation of the Church to 
the divine nature, it was proper that he 
should thoroughly test the obedience of 
all so exalted. Even our Lord Jesus, always 
loyal and faithful, should be no less an 
overcomer and no less proved than the sons 
of glory of whom he is the Princely Leader. 
Wherefore God's arrangement included 
him also (as well as the many 
being brought to glory under his leadership), 
that all who would attain to the 
grand perfection of the divine nature 
must be proved worthy through their endurance 
of suffering and resistance of sin. 

"For of him, and through him, and 
unto him, are all things." — Rom. 11:36 . 

A glance at the preceding verses will 
show that the Apostle is not teaching that 



all sin, wickedness and crime are of and 
through and unto the Lord; but, on the 
contrary, he refers to certain blessings and 
favors which are yet to come upon Israel. 
( Verses 25-27 .) Though they sinned 
and with wicked hands slew the Lord of 
life and glory, and brought upon themselves 
God's "wrath" and "indignation," 
which were manifest in their national 
rejection, trouble and overthrow, yet, 
after all, God has a way for bringing a 
blessing upon them as well as upon all 
others of mankind through Christ and his 
glorified Church ( verses 30,31 ), who, during 
the Millennium, will extend mercy 
and full salvation to all, opening the blind 
eyes and unstopping the deaf ears. Such 
a view of God's wisdom and goodness 
leads the Apostle to the exclamation of 
verses 33 to 36 , which concludes with the 
assertion that this plan is not of human 
device, nor even by human assistance; 
for no man would have dreamed of such 
a wonderful blending of justice and mercy. 
But all was planned of God and is by 
him being carried out through Christ, and 
shall, when completed, be to his praise, to 
whom belongs the glory. 

If, then, we see that the above passages 
do not teach what the writings we criticize 
would misrepresent them as teaching, 
we are bound to conclude that such teaching 
is by no means the spirit of God's 
Word; but on the contrary that it is of 
some other spirit. Whatever the motive 
and aim of the human instrument, it is 
evident that only the spirit of gross error 
could instigate so blasphemous a misrepresentation 
of God's character and of 
his Word. 

GOD'S SUPERVISION OF ALL THINGS. 

That the eyes of the Lord are in every 
place beholding the evil and the good, is 
unquestionable. "The word of God is a discerner 
of [even] the thoughts and intents of 
the heart: neither is there any creature that 
is not manifest in his sight, but all things 
are naked and opened unto the eyes of 
him with whom we have to do." ( Prov. 15:3 ; 
Heb. 4:12,13 .) That God could interfere 
with and stop all forms of evil is a 
manifest truth. That he has not yet 
interfered to stop evil is a clearly recognized 
fact. That the time will come 



when all evil shall be fully restrained is 

his distinct promise. Hence it is as 

proper to say that God permits sin, wickedness 

and crime as it would be false and 

slanderous to say that he causes or instigates 

such things. 

"Let no man say, when he is tempted, 
I am tempted of the Lord; for God 
tempteth no man. ...Every man is 
tempted when he is led astray of his own 
desires [for wealth, power, revenge, etc.] 
and enticed.... Do not err, my beloved 
brethren. Every good and every perfect 
gift is from above, and cometh down from 
the Father of lights, with whom there is 
no change or the least variation. ...For 
the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness 
[right will or mind] of God."— 
James 1:13-20 . 

Nevertheless, God has repeatedly shown 
us how even the wrath of man has been 
made use of by him to accomplish his 
good purposes. The declaration of the 
prophet ( Psa. 76:9,10 ), which assures us 
that in the great time of trouble, when 
the Lord shall arise to judgment and to 
save all the meek of the earth, he will 
cause the wrath of man to praise him and 
the remainder which would not praise him 
shall be restrained, is only the expression, 
we may believe, of what has been the 
principle of God's dealing throughout all 
the past, since sin, wickedness and crime 
began. The truth is, that so far from 
creating sin or inciting to wickedness and 
crimes, God's actions, where he has interfered 
at all, have been toward the restraint 
of sin. The deluge was for the 
restraint of sin; the destruction of Sodom 
was for the same purpose; the destruction 
of Korah and his band was to the same 
end; the destruction of the Canaanites 
was for the same purpose; the captivities, 
famines, etc., permitted to come upon 
Israel were designed to have the same effect. 

And in almost every instance the cause 
is stated. At the time of the deluge the 
whole world, except Noah and his family, 
had become corrupt, and their thoughts 
were evil continually. Of Sodom it is 
declared that the sin thereof was great, 
and God "took them away as he saw 
good." ( Ezek. 16:50 .) His way was good 
for two reasons: first, in that it made an 
example of them for the restraint of those 
who should afterward live ungodly (contrary 



to God's will— in sin— Jude 7 ; 2 Pet. 2:6 ); 
and secondly, because God's "due 
time" for bringing them to a knowledge 
of his gracious provision for them and for 
all under the New Covenant (sealed, or 
made of force, by the precious blood of 
Christ) had not yet come. Besides, in 
his due time, during the Millennium, they 
shall be awakened, when they and all 
shall be under the restraints of Christ's 
Kingdom, and have a full opportunity for 
attaining life everlasting. See 
Ezek. 16:48-50,53-55,60-63 . 

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE CANAANITES. 

In connection with the destruction of 
the Canaanitish nations (the Amorites, 
Hittites, Jebusites, etc.), we are told that 
the Lord would not bring Israel into their 
land, but left his people in Egypt (where 
they got valuable lessons in humility), because 
the iniquity of the Canaanites was 
not yet come to the full. ( Gen. 15:16 .) 
Each nation, seemingly, was permitted to 
go only so far in sin and there was stopped. 
And the stopping of sin furnished repeated 
illustrations, types, suggestions, 
outline hints, of God's general plan for 
the final destruction of evil and the permanent 
establishment of righteousness in 
the world. Thus the due time for Israel's 
release from the bondage of Egypt (which 
fitly typified the bondage of Sin) was also 
the due time for a chastisement of Egypt, 
and the Lord made use of the opportunity 
to show his power both for the deliverance 
of his covenant people and for the overcoming 
of all opposition. Hence he 

"raised up" to the throne of Egypt that 
member of the royal family who was most 
bold and defiant, and who would resist 
God's plan the most and the longest, in 
order to make of him and his army a type 
of Satan and his evil servants ever seeking 
to enslave and hold in bondage God's 
covenant people. The deliverance of the 
one class by God's power and the overthrow 
of the other class were not only in 
harmony with principles of righteousness 
then, but they were also exemplifications 
of a fuller work of division and separation 
to be made in God's due time between 
him that serveth God and him that serveth 
him not.- Mai. 3:18 . 

So, too, the entrance of Canaan by Israel 



and the overthrow of the Canaanites, 
whose iniquity was come to the full, was 
not only a righteous act, but it was also a 
type of how, when the real land of promise 
(the Millennial age) is reached, all the 
old sinful ways and institutions must be 
eradicated; and it is also a type of the 
Christian of to-day, of how when he by 
faith leaves the world, Egypt, and by faith 
enters into the possession of God's promises, 
he must wage a war of extermination 
against the sinful propensities of the old 
disposition, which have entrenched themselves 
in the recesses and fastnesses of his 
fallen nature. 

When thinking of God's relationship 
to sin, in permitting it for a time, we 

R1270 : page 5 

should remember that the heart of fallen 
man is prone to sin— malice, envy, pride, 
strife, hatred, lasciviousness— and that 
these are ever ready to take advantage of 
any opportunity. That God has permitted 
opportunities for evil would, therefore, 
be all that could be truthfully said of 
God's dealings— not that he inspires sinful 
thoughts and desires and deeds. Let 
us glance at some illustrations cited as 
proof that God inspires sin, wickedness 
and crime. 

R1271 : page 5 

JOSEPH'S EXPERIENCES. 

Joseph's brethren sold him into slavery, 
and when they afterward found him the 
lord of all Egypt they feared greatly 
the punishment of their crime. But to 
quiet their fears Joseph said, "Be not 
grieved nor angry with yourselves, that ye 
sold me hither: for God did send me before 
you to preserve life." ( Gen. 45:5 .) 
But, we answer, no ground is found here for 
charging the crime of Joseph's brethren 
upon the Almighty. Stephen, filled with 
the holy spirit, declared ( Acts 7:9 ) that 
their course was not inspired by God, but 
by their own envy; which fully agrees with 
James 1:13,16 . Shall we then say that 
Joseph made a mistake in the statement 
he made? No; both Joseph's and Stephen's 
statements are correct. Joseph's 
brethren were full of envy and they premeditated 



his murder, but God caused 
fear to operate upon the mind of one of 
them, through whose suggestion the envious 
brethren took a different course of 
action and sold Joseph for a slave. Thus 
God's part in no sense altered the moral 
responsibilities of Joseph's brethren; nor 
did it inspire an evil thought. It merely 
turned the evil thought into another channel 
(to sell instead of to murder him), which 
would not conflict with God's plan in 
reference to Joseph, his servant. It is 
merely an illustration of God's power to 
overrule without interfering with the 
moral character of man. So, too, with 
all the other affairs of Joseph. Because 
Joseph was taken from prison to Pharaoh's 
throne, it is not to be argued that God 
was the inspiring cause of the crime of Potiphar's 
wife, on account of which Joseph was 
sent to prison. On the contrary, God 
could have brought Joseph to the throne of 
Egypt in a hundred different ways wholly 
aside from Potiphar's wife and Joseph's 
envious brethren. The way adopted was 
the natural course of events which God 
overruled and turned; so that without interfering 
with the wills of any, his will for 
good was carried out. 
Thus it is that God causes the wrath of 
man (the dispositions of the sinful fallen 
race, not dispositions which he inspires 
and forces upon men) to praise him, while 
the remainder which would interfere with 
his plans he will restrain. When, in the 
future, it shall be made clearly manifest 
to all that the efforts of evil men against 
God and against his children were all 
overruled and used of God for some 
testing or other expedient blessing toward 
those who love and serve him, then the 
present wrath of men will begin to praise 
the Lord by showing his wisdom and 
goodness. 

JOB'S TRIAL AND INTEGRITY. 

It is claimed, too, that Job's case is another 
proof that God is the author of 
sin, wickedness and crime. We fail to 
see any foundation for the slander there, 
either. The account given in the 
first and second chapters of the book of Job , 
which represents Jehovah and Satan communing 
together, relative to Job, we regard 
as a dressing of facts in figurative 



language for the purpose of giving certain 
lessons with clearness. God would teach 
us that we are not to attribute our calamities 
to him, to evil or viciousness on his part; 
that they are merely permitted to come 
upon us for our testing, and ultimately for 
the good of all whose faithfulness and integrity 
toward him are proved thereby. 
How much Satan has to do with calamities 
of the present time (the storms, 
earthquakes, etc.), aside from his general 
precipitation of all these upon man through 
his leading of mother Eve into sin, is not 
clearly shown in the Scriptures.* But 
though it is intimated that he has much 
to do with all of man's calamities, both 
indirectly and directly, this lesson furnished 
in Job's case shows that in the case 
of God's people at least Satan's power is 
limited. He cannot destroy them at his 
will; he cannot touch them with adversity 
except as their God will permit. And 
we have the blessed assurance that he will 
permit only such calamities as will serve 
to develop us, and to test our trust and 
obedience. 

As Job said ( Job 2:10 ), so may all of 
God's people say under affliction: Shall 
we receive blessings of the Lord's hand 
and by his providence and refuse chastisements 
and painful experiences if he sees 
best to permit them? Shall we not rather 
trust the Lord and patiently accept whatever 
experiences may come to us, knowing 
that he could interfere and protect us, and 
that whatever he permits must be intended 
for our good if we are exercised rightly 
under it? 

Another text misused to prove that God 
is the instigator of all things, good and 
bad, including sin, crime and wickedness, 
is found in Amos 3:6 , which reads:— 

"SHALL THERE BE EVIL IN A CITY AND 
GOD HATH NOT DONE IT?" 

(Literally— Shall there be calamity in 
a city and the Lord have naught to do 
with it?) Another similar text quoted in 
evidence is Isa. 45:7 . "I make peace and 
create evil: I the Lord do all these things." 

To comprehend these two texts, two 
things must be borne in mind, (1) the proper 
significance of the word "evil," and (2) 
the special covenant relationship between 
God and Israel. 



First, the primary signification of the 
word "evil" is, "Anything that directly or 
remotely causes suffering." Its synonyms 
are injury, mischief, harm, calamity.— 
Webster. "Moral badness" is a secondary 
definition of the word "evil," by the 
same authority on language. 

This secondary meaning grows out of 
the first as a matter of course: all badness 
is evil, whether it implies moral perception 
and accountability or not. The decay or 
badness at the heart of an apple is evil, 
just as truly as the decay of morals at 
the heart of a man. The one is a physical 
evil implying no moral quality or responsibility; 
the other is a moral evil and implies 
moral responsibility. 

Why any one from a good motive should 
pass by the evident sense of the word 
"evil" in these texts of Scripture, and attempt 
to prove that the Almighty inspires 
all the sin, crime and wickedness of every 
city and time, is difficult to conjecture. 
In this text the word "evil" stands in opposition 
to the word "peace," and hence carries 
the thought of trouble, war or some 
similar evil opposed to peace. If moral badness 
were meant, the contrasting word 
would be righteousness or goodness. 

Second, in considering that these words 
of the Lord relate specially to Israel, his 
typical and covenant people, we have a 
clear light thrown upon them. As God 
now has a special interest in and care 
over all his people, Spiritual Israel, bound 
to him by the ties of the New Covenant, 
so he had a special care over Israel as a 
nation under the conditions of their Law 
Covenant. Under the New Covenant 
each individual son of God is a subject of 
special supervision and chastisement and 
correction, while under their Law Covenant 
Israel as a nation was corrected and 
chastised. 

A reference to the terms of the covenant 
between God and the nation of Israel 
will show this. The Lord's declaration or 
promise to them was that, if they as a 
nation would observe the laws which he 
gave them, he would bless them with peace, 
prosperity and plenty, and would be with 
them, their God, a shield and defender 
from all evils, wars, pestilences, famines, 
etc. But if they should neglect God's 
statutes, and should become idolaters and 
promoters of evil like the nations about 



them, God declared, as a part of his covenant 

with them, that they should be afflicted 

with sicknesses, famines and pestilences, 

and be delivered into the hand of 

their enemies. See the particular description 

of the blessings promised and the 

evils threatened in Lev. 26:3-25 ; Deut. 1 1:13-28 

28:1-8,15-23,36-49,58-61 . 

Although the Lord had so particularly 
warned Israel what to expect, they seem 
to have gotten the idea that their blessings 
and calamities were matters of chance and 
circumstance, as with the godless nations 
about them; and in the above text ( Amos 3:6 ) 
God points out to them that their 
calamities could not come without his 
knowledge, nor without his permission, 
according to his covenant with them. 
This is clear also from the context ( verses 1-3 ): 
"Hear this word that the Lord 
hath spoken against you, O children of 
Israel— against the whole family which I 
brought up from the land of Egypt, saying, 
You only have I known [recognized, 
covenanted with] of all the families of the 
earth: therefore I will punish you for all 
your iniquities." 

Instead, therefore, of this passage teaching 
that Jehovah is the great sinner, the inspirer 
of "all wickedness, crime and sin" 
in every city, it teaches the very reverse of 
this— that the evils mentioned were calamities 
which God would bring or permit 
to come upon Israel because of their 
iniquities. 

The lesson of Isa. 45:7 is similar. The 
Lord, having chastened Israel by seventy 
years captivity in Babylon, points out that 
the circumstances leading to their return 
to their own land are no less remarkable, 
none the less of him and by him, because 
accomplished through Cyrus, the heathen 
warrior. The spirit of war, the lust for 
power and gold which holds sway among 
men and nations, are not inspired of God; 
but when the time for Israel's deliverance 
came, God permitted the hosts of the Medes 
and Persians to come against Babylon and 
prospered the way of the noble, benevolent 



*For this reason we cannot give to Heb. 2:14 
the full force implied in our common version. Had 
Satan the power of death fully in his control, we 
may be sure that the saints of God would have 



perished from the earth long ago. However great 
a power he may exercise over the world, we know 
that his power does not extend to the Church. 
(John 7:30; 13:1 ; Phil. 1:25 ; Matt. 10:27-31 .) 
In this instance it seems evident that the word 
translated power would have been better translated 
dominion. Satan's dominion is the dominion of 
death— i.e., death is the sure result to all who serve 
and obey him. 

R1272 : page 5 

Cyrus to the seat of power at the 
proper time to permit him to decree the 
restoration of Israel to their own land at 
the termination of the predicted seventy 
years of its desolation. 

In this case as in the others no room is 
found for charging the Almighty with sin, 
crime and wickedness. He in no degree 
interfered with the moral sense of Cyrus 
or of Israel, but, as always, merely took 
advantage of the aims and desires of carnal 
men and overruled their courses (not 
their motives) to the accomplishment of 
his plans to bless and heal his people, 
whom he had previously, according to his 
covenant, permitted Babylon to conquer 
and captivate. 

In conclusion, we assert on the foregoing 
evidence that God's Word conscientiously 
interpreted is a full vindication of 
the divine character; that even the texts 
cited to sustain the blasphemy clearly 
and emphatically contradict it. And we 
warn all to beware of theories— their own 
or other men's— which make necessary a 
defamation of the divine character for 
their support; that charge God with being 
the instigator and author of "all the sin 
and wickedness and crime" of the world, in 
order to prove that he must by and by retract 
and work righteousness in all, and 
preserve all everlastingly. Let God be 
true though it make every man a liar. 

R1272 : page 5 

GOD THE OMNIPOTENT. 

A certain class of thinkers, neglecting 
to use reason within the bounds of God's 
revelation, entangle themselves in their 
own unsound reasonings. 

They ask: (1) Is not God all-wise? 
Certainly, we answer. (2) Is he not all-powerful? 



Assuredly, we reply. Well, then, 
say they, if he be all-wise and all-powerful, 
can any thing occur in the world contrary 
to his will or contrary to his power? 
Must we not settle down to the conviction, 
held these long centuries back by people 
called Fatalists, that whatever happens, 
from a mosquito bite to an epidemic 
plague of death, or from a snowflake's fall 
to an earthquake or a tornado, is of God, 
and that all nature is fulfilling his will? 
Must we not surmise, too, that all the 
thoughts and deeds of men, both good 
and bad, are inspired of God? And if 
these arguments be admitted, are not all 
mankind like so much clay in God's 
hands, which he can and does fashion one 
way for good or the other way for evil? 
And if so, are not all our efforts for good 
or for evil futile? Since God is all 
powerful, who can resist his will for good 
or for ill? Is it not, therefore, the only 
wise course to stop all effort for good or 
evil, and merely follow the good or bad 
impulses which arise within us? 

We answer that all such reasoning is 
nonsensical— the vain imaginations of a 
foolish head and heart. It is simply reasoning 
around in a circle, without God 
and his revelation of his will and plan. 
Such reasoning merely lands where it 
started— with the proposition, Whatever 
is, is, because it is and must be so. 

While it is true that God has all power, 
and that none can resist his will or 
battle with the Almighty, yet it is also 
true that he is not now exercising this 
power in every matter, nor compelling 
his will to be done in all things. To take 
such a view as the one we are criticizing 
was bad enough in the darkness of the 
remote past for those to whom God had 
offered no revelation concerning his will 
and plan, and his attitude toward sin and 
righteousness; but such a leaning to 
pure conjecture, and totally ignoring God's 
own statement of his exercise of his 
power, is inexcusable among Christians of 
to-day. 

God assures us that sin is a rebellion 
against him and his just provisions for 
our good; that though he has the power 
to destroy the sinners, he has a more gracious 
plan with reference to them through 
Christ; that though he could have made 
them otherwise, he preferred to make all 



animals, from the worm, the ant and the 
gnat, up to man, the highest of the animal 
creation, of such organisms that each 

R1272 : page 6 

should have a will of his own— the power 
of mind to hope and to fear, to love and 
to hate, to obey and to disobey. He tells 
us his plans as they relate to man made in 
his own image. He shows us that he purposed 
a test for man in Eden, that even 
though from the first he knew what the 
result would be, yet he wished man to 
learn the lesson, that the only path to 
happiness is the one of obedience to God 
and righteousness and love. In permitting 
sin and its consequences, pain and 
death, for a time, God is subordinating his 
love of righteousness, his good pleasure, for 
our experience and instruction in the principles 
of righteousness which underlie his 
government. 

During the present time, that we may 
see how the course of sin would result, 
the Lord ignores very much that is unholy, 
hateful and abominable in his sight and 
does not swiftly mete out the deserved 
punishments. But he declares that "He 
will not always chide [reprove], neither 
will he keep [back, restrain] his anger 
forever." ( Psa. 103:9 .) Though it may 
at present appear as though the Lord is 
slack in the fulfilment of his promises, 
both in regard to well-doers and to evil-doers, 
it would be a mistake to suppose 
thus. The Lord is not slack, as men count 
slackness, says the Apostle ( 2 Pet. 3:9 ), 
but is plenteous in mercy, not desiring 
that any should perish, but that all should 
turn unto him and live. Nevertheless, 
every good deed shall in due time be remembered 
and rewarded, and every malicious 
deed likewise: "Vengeance is mine, 
I will repay, saith the Lord." God is 
merely biding his time, letting his will 
and word and character be misunderstood 
by some and misrepresented by others, 
letting men have an experience with doing 
their own wills and trying their own plans 
and theories, that thus the lesson of sin and 
its tendencies and results may be clearly 
seen and appreciated by both angels and 
men. Then the Lord will arise and through 
his Anointed Son will display his power 
and make known his will. He will proceed 



to lay righteousness to the line and 
justice to the plummet and will sweep 
away every refuge of lies. ( Isa. 28:17 .) 
His will then shall be done on earth as it 
is done in heaven. ( Matt. 6: 10 .) A knowledge 
of righteousness and an experience 
with righteousness shall be forced upon 
men through Christ's Millennial reign; 
all shall come to a knowledge of the truth; 
all shall see the effects of righteousness and 
love and peace, and the will and law of 
God, clearly contrasted with their own former 
experiences under sin and selfishness. 

God's object in all this— in thus permitting 
man now to try rebellion and selfishness, 
and under the Millennial reign of 
Christ forcing all to have an experience 
with the different results when his will is 
done— is to select from among his creatures 
such as, after full knowledge of evil and of 
good, love the good, the right, the pure, 
the holy, and abhor the evil. 

He seeketh such to worship him; for 
they can and will worship him in spirit 
and in truth. After they are fully proved 
to be such, it is his good pleasure that they 
shall live forever, and he promises them 
everlasting life and communion with himself. 
All others he will cut off from life 
in the second death, because he has no 
pleasure in them that love evil: "Evil 
doers shall be cut off, but those that wait 
upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth; 
for yet a little while, and the wicked shall 
not be; yea, thou shalt diligently consider 
his place and it shall not be: But the meek 
shall inherit the earth, and shall delight 
themselves in the abundance of peace."— 
Psa. 37:9-11 . 

Thus we see the fallacy of the circle-reasoning 
of those who would judge of the 
Lord merely by their own weaknesses and 
not by his Word. How grand the view which 
the Scriptures present— that God and his 
will and all his works are wholly on the 
side of purity and justice and truth, and 
that he is in no sense practicing or endorsing 
sin, or causing others to practice 
it, or in the slightest degree favoring it; 
but on the contrary, while reproving it 
and explaining its tendency and results, 
he merely restrains his indignation and 
justice and permits man to work out his 
wilful, sinful plans, and to learn from experience 
the lesson that sin is ever an evil 
and is to be shunned. 



GOD'S STATEMENT OF HIS WILL AND 
GOOD PLEASURE. 

As in the October TOWER we noted the 
Lord's own testimony concerning the class 
whom he specially loves, so let us now 
permit his Word to tell us what things he 
takes pleasure in and brings to pass. 

God has pleasure in uprightness.— 

IChron. 29:17. 

He has pleasure in the prosperity of his 
servants.— Psa. 35:27 . 

He taketh pleasure in his people who 
reverence him.— Psa. 147:11 ; 149:4 . 

It is his good pleasure to give the kingdom 
to his little flock.- Luke 12:32 . 

He called them to this kingdom honor 
according to the good pleasure of his will.— 
Eph. 1:5 . 

It is his good pleasure to work in those 
who are fully consecrated to him, to guide 
them both in willing and in doing his 
will- Phil. 2:13 . 

R1273 : page 6 

In such as he counts worthy he will 
fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness. 
-2Thes. 1:11. 

The words, deeds and character of our 
Lord Jesus illustrated to us what pleases 
God. In him he was well pleased. — 
Matt. 3:17 . 

He was an example for all who would 
please God.— 1 Thes. 4:1 . 

The testimony to those who have loved 
and served him in righteousness and truth 
is, that they pleased God.— Heb. 11:5 . 

God is pleased with all the painful though 
joyous sacrifices which his "little flock" 
makes in his service, following in the footsteps 
of their Redeemer and Lord. With 
such sacrifices God is well pleased. — 
Heb. 13:12-16 . 

Of his own will begat he us by the Word 
of truth.— James 1:18 . 

Our Master declares that whosoever shall 
do the will of the Father is his brother.— 
Mark 3:35 . 

And this is the will of God, even our 
sanctification.— 1 Thes. 5:14-23 . 

Through the fall, we have lost our keen 
appreciation of God's will, and hence are 
exhorted to study to prove what is that 
good, acceptable, perfect will of God. — 



Rom. 12:2 . 

This is needful if we would stand complete 
in the will of God. - Col. 4:12 . 

That we might be willing, if the will 
of God be so, to suffer for righteousness 
sake.-- 1 Pet. 3:17 . 

It is also the will of God that by well-doing 
ye should put to silence the ignorance 
of foolish men.— 1 Pet. 2:15 . 

This to the intent that we should not 
live henceforth according to the desires of 
men, but to the will of God. - 1 Pet. 4:2 . 

Because he (and only he) that doeth 
the will of God abideth forever.— 

1 John 2:17 . 

Wherefore let them that suffer according 
to the will of God [for righteousness 
sake] commit the keeping of their souls in 
well-doing unto him, as unto a faithful 
Creator.- 1 Pet. 4:19 . 

And ye have need of patience [during 
this period in which God permits sin and 
opposition to his will to flourish], that after 
ye have done the will of God, ye might 
receive the promise.— Heb. 10:36 . 

That we may have confidence in him, 
and respect and trust him, he hath made 
known to us the mystery of his will [plan] 
concerning his good pleasure which he 
purposed in himself— that in his due, full 
time he will subdue all things by and under 
Christ; that evil and sin are permitted 
to oppose his will only for a little season; 
that shortly the lessons because of which 
evil is now permitted to triumph will be 
finished; and that throughout all the ages 
to come, righteousness, his will, shall be 
done.-Eph. 1:9,10 ; 2:7 . 

This mystery of God's will, though still 
hidden from the world, was to be fully appreciated 
by his saints during this evil day 
and was to be the ground for their faith and 
patience and endurance. They were to wait 
for the Lord from heaven and to expect 
deliverance from evil both for themselves 
and the world through him who gave 
himself for our sins, that he might deliver 
us from the evil of this present period, according 
to the will of God our Father.— 
Gal. 1:4. 

Not only were the saints to have this 
knowledge of the coming triumph of God 
and righteousness, but they were to confess 
to the Lord in prayer their appreciation 
of the fact that present evil is not of his 
will, nor of his government, and their 



faith to the contrary that all holy desires 
will be fulfilled when his kingdom has come 
and when his will is done on earth as it 
is now done in heaven.— Matt. 6:10 . 

GOD'S PLEASURE TOWARD THE WORLD. 

God, our Savior, desires all men to be 
saved and to come to an accurate knowledge 
of the [this] truth.- 1 Tim. 2:4 .-- 
Diaglott. 

His good desires and plan, however, are 
all centred in Christ; hence he has appointed 
no other name by which we must 
be saved, and no other condition than 
faith in his blood (in his ransom-sacrifice) 
and obedience to his precepts of righteousness 
—love. No man can come unto the 
Father except by him. He that hath the 
Son hath life, and he that not the Son of 
God hath not life.- John 14:6 ; 1 John 5:12 ; 
John 3:36 ; 5:24 . 

To this end, the sympathetic love of 
God toward all his fallen, disobedient creatures 
was manifested in the gift of his Son 
to be our redemption price— even while 
we were yet sinners. 

For the same reason, as a part of the 
same will of God concerning men, he hath 
appointed to establish his kingdom on 
earth, and that his King and representative 
shall reign to bless men, to bring them 
to a knowledge of his goodness, his perfection, 
his hatred of sin and his desire 
toward all that they might be saved from 
death and come fully back into harmony 
with him, and of his provision through 
Christ for them all to do so.— 1 Tim. 2:3-6 . 

Yet God is not pleased to accept men 
without testing and proving them as to 
whether, after full knowledge, ability and 
choice, they will sincerely love the right and 
hate the wrong. Therefore he has been 
pleased to appoint a day [the Millennial 
Day] in the which he will judge the world 
in [try and prove men with reference to] 
righteousness. The Judge of all is to be 
Christ— Jesus and his Church; and the 
work shall be so thoroughly done that no 
lover of righteousness shall be sentenced 
to the second death, and no lover of evil 
shall escape that sentence.— Acts 3:23 . 

This trial-test of all, after full knowledge 
of good and evil, is because our God 
hates sin and every evil way. He is not 
a God that has pleasure in wickedness.— 



Psa. 5:4 . 

"Have I any pleasure at all that the 
wicked should die? saith the Lord God: 
and not that he should turn from his ways 
and live?" "I have no pleasure in the 
death of him that dieth, saith the Lord 
God: wherefore turn and live ye." "As 
I live, saith the Lord God, I have no 
pleasure in the death of the wicked; but 
that the wicked turn from his way and 
live."-Ezek. 18:23,32 ; 33:11 . 



R1273 : page 6 

CHRIST IN YOU, THE HOPE OF GLORY. 

"My little children, of whom I travail in birth 
again until Christ be formed in you, I desire to be 
present with you now and to change my tone; for 
I stand in doubt of you."-- Gal. 4:19,20 . 

The wealth of God's wonderful favor to 
the church of Christ is briefly comprehended 
in that one expression of the 
Apostle Paul, "Christ in you, the hope of 
glory." ( Col. 1:27 .) Christ in you, dear 
ones, is the only Scriptural foundation for 
that good hope of the prize of our high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus. If Christ 
be not formed in you, then indeed is your 
hope vain, no matter how much truth 
or how many advantages you may possess. 
The object of giving the truth is not to 
satisfy mere idle curiosity, but to sanctify 
us wholly; and if it does not accomplish 
this result, the knowledge of it is only the 
stronger condemnation against us. 

In writing to the congregation of believers 
at Colosse who had received the 
truth from Paul with gladness and all 
readiness of mind, the Apostle, as the 
above text indicates, was obliged to change 
his tone or manner of expression toward 
them, because their vacillating course 
since receiving the truth proved to him 
that the spirit of Christ, the spirit of the 
truth, was not yet formed in them. 
And therefore he here represents his work 
among and for them as that of a mother 
in the first stages of gestation, travailing 
in painful and laborious effort until the 
new being is formed. When the "new 
creature" is once definitely formed, the 
process of development, as illustrated in 



the development of the natural fetus, is 

less laborious and distressing; yet there is 

labor and anxiety all the way to those 

whose care over the church, like Paul's, 

is akin to that of motherhood, until the 

new creature is actually born at the resurrection. 

After the new creature is formed, 

if there be no mishap, no miscarriage, 

there will in due time be the birth of a 

glorious being, of the divine nature, in 

the likeness of our glorious Head; and 

great will be the joy then of all such as 

have taken the motherly interest in the 

formation and development of the Christian 

character of these called and faithful 

and chosen. 

There comes a time during the period 
of natural gestation, shortly after the formation 
of the new creature, when life begins 
to manifest itself in activity. This manifestation 
of activity is called the quickening. 
If this quickening never takes place, 
the sure indication is that whatever of dormant 
life there may have been is becoming 
or has already become extinct, and 
the birth of the new living creature will 
therefore never take place unless the dying 
embryo can in some way be resuscitated 
and brought to the quickening stage. 

This is precisely what Paul was endeavoring 
with much carefulness and painstaking 
to do for the church at Colosse. 
They had received the truth with gladness, 
and Paul was for a time greatly beloved 
among them as a messenger of the 
truth. But very soon after they lost confidence 
in the truth and were speedily 

R1274 : page 7 

drifting into error— the error of trusting 
to the law Covenant of God for salvation 
instead of humbly depending on Christ 
alone, who is "the end of the law for 
righteousness to every one that believeth" 
—that trusteth in him. 

The cause of this instability and sudden 
turning away from the truth on the 
part of the Colossian church is clearly intimated 
in the above text. It was because 
Christ was not formed in them. Although 
they had been begotten by the word of 
truth, the new germ of spiritual being had 
not yet progressed even to the definite 
formation of Christian character which 
manifests its existence and life in activity; 



they had not reached the quickening 
stage, although it was high time that such 
indications of life should appear in them. 
Therefore said the Apostle, "I desire to 
be present with you now, and to change 
my tone; for I stand in doubt of you." 
Ah! instead of the joyful tone, proclaiming 
the good tidings of the grace of God 
to them, as formerly, it must now be the 
tone of reproof, of warning and of 
exhortation. 

But let us inquire more particularly 
what it is to have Christ formed in us. It 
is not merely to have a knowledge of 
Christ and of the divine plan which God 
is working out through him; it is not 
merely to have an admiration for his character 
and glory, or a desire to share 
his glory in the day of his manifestation; 
it is not merely to talk loudly of the truth, 
nor to make long prayers, nor to wear 
solemn faces and make loud professions 
of holiness. This is the negative 
answer to the question, but what is the 
affirmative? We answer, It is to have a 
Christ-like character distinctly formed in 
us as a result of the begetting power of the 
truth and of the exceeding great and 
precious promises, inspiring in us love to 
God and to all his creatures; faith in his 
sure Word of promise and in his ability 
and willingness to accomplish all his purposes; 
obedience, or full consecration to 
the will of God at any cost to self, and a 
fixed determination ever to abide by his 
expressed will; and zeal, which makes 
manifest this disposition of heart in activity 
for the accomplishment of the purposes 
of God, in so far as the Scriptures 
inform us that human agency can affect 
them. These fundamental principles of 
Christian character— love, faith, obedience 
and zeal— must be established before 
the new creature can be said to exist at 
all. And if they are thus established, 
God has provided the conditions necessary 
to their gradual growth and development 
until, in due time, the new creature 
is born into the full perfection and glory 
of the divine nature. 

If these principles of the Christian character 
are not definitely formed, or fixed 
in us, we will always be vacillating in our 
faith and obedience, and lacking in love 
and devotedness to God; and we can 
therefore have no good hope of the reward 



of the faithful. If we have merely 
a little love for God which appreciates 
but slightly his blessings and promises, 
and a little faith which indolently says— 
This good news seems to be true, but I do 
not exactly know; many smart men read 
the Bible quite differently and arrive at 
opposite conclusions; it is difficult to discover 
which is right and I shall not trouble 
myself trying to find out, so I have a general 
charity for all and am no bigot; —and 
if we are willing to obey God only so far as it 
suits our convenience, to trust him as far 
as we can trace him, and to advance his 
truth only so far as our indolence will permit 
us to discover it, and as our temporal 
interests may be served by it— if such be 
our condition of heart, then the Christ 

character is not formed in us. And though 
we may have been begotten by the exceeding 
great and precious promises to a 
good hope of life in Christ, the germ of 
the new life is in a dying condition and 
will never come to the birth unless it can 
be resuscitated and developed to the actual 
formation of the Christ character, 
which always manifests itself in loving 
zeal for the Lord's cause— for the advancement 
of his truth and the upbuilding 
of his consecrated ones. 

How important, then, that each of those 
who hope to have a share with Christ in 
his kingdom sees to it that his hope is 
founded upon the fact that Christ is now 
actually formed in him, and that as evidence 
of this he has manifestly reached 
the quickening stage in the process of development, 
when love, faith and obedience 
are all full of activity and zealous in 
seeking and improving every opportunity 
for the service of God. If we hear the 
truth and merely say that we consecrate 
ourselves to God, and then go on living 
just like the rest of the world, spending all 
or nearly all of our time and our means 
merely for our stomachs, our backs and 
the temporal interests of our families and 
the business pursuits of the present life, 
what evidence have we that we are quickened, 
that the Christ character is formed 
in us, or that the hope of glory is ours? 
Many seem to make this mistake, and 
the evidences of the shipwrecked faith of 
many such lie all about us; but, thank 
God! the evidence of faithfulness— of the 
actual formation and development of 



Christian character— is also apparent in 
the quickened zeal of many. And it is a 
noteworthy fact that those whose mortal 
bodies are thus quickened in the service 
of the truth have the clearest perception 
and discernment of truth, and the evil 
one is unable to touch them with the 
shafts of error. 

Let all who aspire to the inheritance of the 
saints make sure that they have the Christ 
character formed in them, that the principles 
so notable in Christ's character are 
established in them. Let us each see that 
we do not hinder the development of this 
character by giving our time, our vitality, 
our means, etc., to the pursuit of the things 
of this world. Have you love? Is it manifested 
in fervent zeal for the honor of 
God, the spread of his truth and the 
blessing of his children? Are you seeking 
and finding opportunities for thus showing 
the Lord how much you love? Have 
you faith? Is it unmistakably manifested, 
not merely in profession, but in bold and 
definite acts of faith? If a million dollars 
were promised to any man who would 
walk from Pittsburgh to Buffalo, and a 
dozen men professed faith in the promise, 
and yet only one actually started out and 
walked, the natural and correct inference 
would be that the other eleven did not 
have the faith. If they had the faith in 
such a promise it would rouse them to activity. 
And just so, any man who appreciates 
fully and believes the exceeding 
great and precious promises of God to the 
church, will make haste and run for them; 
and he will closely observe the directions, 
too, that he may not run in vain. 

And if Christ be formed in him, those 
established principles of Christian character 
will hold him firm and steady in 
the midst of temptations and error, and 
he will not be easily moved either from 
the practice of righteousness or from sound 
Scriptural doctrine. He will demand a 
"Thus saith the Lord" for every doctrine, 
and on that sure word he will dare depend. 
And the language of his heart as 
expressed in his daily life will be, "My 
heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed. 
I will praise thee, O Lord, among the 
people." "Thy testimonies have I taken 
as an heritage forever; for they are the 
rejoicing of my heart." "Thy words 
were found and I did eat them; and thy 



word was unto me the joy and rejoicing 
of mine heart; for I am called by thy 
name, O Lord God of hosts."— Psa. 57:7,9 ; 

119:111 ;Jer. 15:16. 

While such must be the personal condition 
of every heir of the Kingdom, the 
special work of every such one should be 
to help those begotten by the Word of 
truth to arrive at this condition of fixed 
and quickened Christian character. Be 
not satisfied, beloved fellow laborers, when 
those within the range of your influence 
are merely begotten by the Word of truth, 
but, by instruction, example and assistance, 
labor diligently to have Christ formed in 
them, the hope of glory; and then, so far 
as possible, minister also to their further 
development, that they may eventually be 
born in the glorious, divine nature. 



R1275 : page 7 

THE RELATIVE CLAIMS OF LOVE AND 
JUSTICE. 

Though love and justice stand very 
closely related to each other, they are 
nevertheless distinct and separate elements 
of moral character. Justice is the exact 
weight and measure of righteousness, but 
love is the overwhelming measure of benevolence, 
pressed down, shaken together, 
heaped up and running over. 

Justice may be dealt out without love's 
overwhelming measure, but love cannot 
be dealt out without justice. The measure 
cannot overflow until it is first filled. 
Justice, therefore, is the foundation on 
which love is established. If we make 
professions of love which are not backed 
by justice, our conduct is open to either 
one of two adverse criticisms, either that 
we are ignorant of the operations of justice 
in certain particulars, or else that we 
are unfaithful in our professions. The 
former probably is most generally the case 
where the profession lacks the substantial 
foundation. 

This principle of justice, the Scriptures 
declare, is the very foundation of God's 
throne— "Justice and judgment are the 
prop of thy throne." ( Psa. 89:14 .) And 
the great value which God placed upon 
this principle was manifested in the great 



expense at which he maintained it inviolate, 
notwithstanding his overwhelming 
love for the race which it condemned to 
death and which he planned to redeem. 
Though it cost the sacrifice of his only 
begotten Son, he freely gave him up for 
us all— as a satisfaction to the claims of 
justice against his human children. If 
God is so scrupulously careful to maintain 
justice, how careful we should be to study 
and apply the same principle in all our 
dealings. As justice is the very foundation 
of all God's dealings with his creatures, 
so it should be the foundation of 
all our dealings— in our business relations, 
in the family and in society. 

In the life of every Christian strict justice 
should be manifest. He should be 
fair in his judgment of values, willing to 
pay the just equivalent for that which he 
receives if he is making a purchase, willing 
also to give to his employer a just 
equivalent in labor for wages received. 
If a competitor in business with others, 
he should not seek to undersell his fellow 
tradesman below a living price for his 
commodities. If a parent, he should recognize 
the individual rights of his children, 
male and female, when they come to 
maturity. Parental control is a necessity 
until that time, but is an injustice when 
insisted upon beyond it; and if yielded 
to, becomes a fetter to future usefulness and 
interferes with their individual relationship 
and responsibility to God. 

Justice in parents recognizes the right 
of a matured son to leave the home nest 
and carve out his future course for himself; 
and likewise of the daughter. Justice 
on the children's part also recognizes 
the claims of filial obligation— of reverence, 
love, the grateful consideration of the maturer 
wisdom of parents, and the tender care 
for their age and infirmities and declining 
years. 

When justice is thus established in these 
various relations of life, there is little 
room left for the weeds of hatred, malice, 
envy, evil-speaking, etc., to spring up. On 
the contrary, the conditions are ripe for 
the development of every virtue and every 
grace, especially if love's overflowing 
measure of benevolence overleaps the 
bounds of simple justice in its desires and 
efforts to bless. 

Let us then see to it that we are always 



just before we attempt to be generous, and 
when sure that all our actions are squared 
by justice, then let us manifest the love 
unfeigned, not necessarily by showers of 
professions, but rather by the loving ministry 
of kindly deeds, deeds of self-sacrifice 
and self-forgetfulness. Such love 
should be markedly manifest among the 
consecrated sons of God— not a love which 
merely worketh no ill to his neighbor, but 
a love which worketh good. And let no 
one deceive himself into the idea that his 
heart is filled with the love of God while 
he is unjustly depriving another of his 
rights, either of property, or reputation, 
or aught else. 

But love will go still further: it will not 
only spare a neighbor's property or reputation, 
but it will seek to protect them. 
Love will cover a multitude of sins, even, 
from the eyes of others, though it will endeavor 
to show them up to the offender. 
Let justice with love's overflowing measure 
abound in all the saints. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1276 : page 7 
THE BLOOD. 

Christian people talk a good deal about 
blood. What do they mean? Why is it 
they take such delight in singing and 
speaking about blood? 

Go into some religious meetings, and 
presently you hear some one get up and 
tell that he is saved by the blood; and then 
another one says that he rejoices to know 
he is living under the blood, and another 
says that the blood cleanses him from all 
sin; and so they continue all through the 
meeting; and they really seem to enjoy 
it. Whenever any one mentions the blood, 
you see the faces of the others light up 
with joyful emotion, and hear words of 
gladness come from their lips. What is it 
all about? Are they lunatics? No; on 
the contrary, they are the most sensible 
and moral people in the community, whose 
testimony would be received as good in 
any court of justice. Then surely they must 
have some reason for their language about 
the blood. Let us ask one of them about it. 

Friend, will you explain why you people 



are always talking about blood and seem 
to find so much comfort in doing so? 
Yes, gladly; it is the precious blood of 
Christ, the Son of God, who is called the 
Lamb of God, about which we talk and 
sing. But why is that blood so precious 
to you? Because it continually reminds 
us that our sins are all forgiven and put 
away, in perfect accordance with God's 
infinite justice and righteousness, as well 
as mercy; so that trusting in the blood we 
have actually no more consciousness of sins. 

R1276 : page 8 

But how does Christ's blood do away 
with your sinfulness? I can best answer 
you by pointing you to the record of 
Scripture concerning the penalty of sin, 
which is everywhere declared to be death. 
Under the Mosaic and Patriarchal dispensations 
this was also taught by a series of 
object lessons. Animals were killed, and 
their blood was carried in by the priest 
and presented before God as the evidence 
that death had really taken place, as the 
broken law required. In accordance with 
this God told the Israelites, "The blood 
is the life. ..and I have given it to you 
upon the altar to make an atonement for 
your souls, for it is the blood which maketh 
an atonement for the soul." The 
blood, being no longer in the victim's 
veins, was the positive evidence that the 
life was taken. 

But could the life blood of animals satisfy 
divine justice on behalf of sinful man? 
No; "the blood of bulls and goats could 
never take away sins," but it could shadow 
forth the truth that if human guilt was 
ever removed, some way must be found 
by which divine justice as well as mercy 
could be magnified, and sin be seen in all 
its awfulness through the terrible consequences 
it entailed. The doctrine of 
Scripture is, that Christ, by offering up 
himself, or shedding his life's blood, or 
pouring out his soul unto death, put away 
our sins. We read that "he died for our 
sins"— "put away sin by the sacrifice of 
himself"— "offered one sacrifice for sins 
forever:" in fact, did what the Levitical 
sacrifices had pointed to but never accomplished. 
But how could Christ become 
legally responsible for the guilt of others, 
so that his death would meet the requirements 



of justice on their behalf? By 

identifying himself with them, and offering 

himself as a sacrifice for their redemption, 

he became a new federal head 

to the human race, with power and authority 

to bestow upon those previously 

under sentence of death a new life from 

himself, over which death should have 

no power. Making himself thus a shelter 

for sinners, he became responsible for 

their sins. Justice, being unable to reach 

the sinner, demanded and received satisfaction 

at the place where the sinner thus 

legally escaped it. 

Adam, the old life-giving head, entailed 
death on his seed. Christ, the new life-giving 
head, undertook to carry the race 
safely through the death which otherwise 
would have completely and eternally overwhelmed 
it. So in order to make a way 
out of death, he was obliged to go down 
into death, bearing in his own person the 
legal responsibility for the sins of the 
world; and so the shedding of his blood 
became the evidence that he really and 
truly died. By offering new life to man 
he burdened himself with the debt which 
attached to the old life, and therefore he 
laid down forever the natural or creature 
life, that he might rise again in the divine, 
spiritual life, and become the source of 
life to all who would come into union 
with himself. Thus, the blood of Christ, 
his death, stands as an evidence before 
God and before the conscience of believers 
that the law's demands have been met 
and fully satisfied by our great federal 
Head. Do you wonder that we make 
much of the precious blood of Christ; 
and that we feel and know that it cleanseth 
us from all sin? — Selected. 



page 8 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES.-The price of 
these is reduced to 25 cents per hundred, 
or $2.00 per thousand. (This includes 
expressage or mail charges of delivering 
them to you.) We want these messengers 
to go everywhere, bearing testimony to 
the Truth, and calling attention to God's 
gracious Plan of the Ages. 



R1276 : page 8 

THE EASY YOKE. 

"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon 
you and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in 
heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For 
my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." — 
Matt. 11:28-30 . 

To take Christ's yoke upon us is to become 
a yoke-fellow with him, and to patiently 
walk with him. The yoke is a 
symbol of servitude, and he who submits 
to the yoke thereby submits to the will 
and directing of another and quietly plods 
on for the accomplishment of an appointed 
task. This our Lord Jesus did in willingly 
submitting his will to the will of the 
Heavenly Father. God did not impose 
the yoke upon him, nor does he upon any; 
but he cheerfully took it and patiently 
bore it, not esteeming it a menial service, 
though it cost him the deepest humiliation, 
but delighting to do God's will. 

The invitation to us, then, is to be 
yoked in together with Christ in the same 
service and under the same Master. The 
yoke, he says, is an easy one, and the 
burden light. But we cannot be yoked 
in with Christ unless we have his spirit. 
Two that are yoked together must of necessity 
be of one mind; and that which 
makes the yoke set lightly upon us is the 
fixedness of purpose which does not chafe 
under it or try to get away from it, but 
which delights to bear it in view of the 
end to be gained, as well as in the communion 
and fellowship of a kindred mind, 
a true yoke-fellow. 

What a blessed invitation, to come under 
the same yoke with Christ! and what 
an excellent opportunity to learn the way 
in which our Heavenly Father would have 
us walk! How, indeed, could we miss 
the way when yoked in with such a leader? 
From him we learn the way; in company 
with him we catch his blessed spirit; 
we learn of that meekness which despises 
no humiliation, however great; which is 
not only contented and happy in any situation, 
but which is always rejoicing in the 
privilege of treading the way, as well as 
in hope of the glorious end to which it 



tends. And thus we find rest unto our 

souls— rest from the vain ambitions and 

fruitless works and plans which other task-masters 

would force upon us. O! that all 

who labor under other yokes and are heavily 

burdened would cast them off and learn 

with what ease and delight they can wear 

the yoke of Christ. 

All of the greatest toilers in God's service 
gave the same testimony. Jesus said, 
It is easy and light; Paul said, "These 
light afflictions, which are but for a moment, 
work out for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." James 
said, "Brethren, count it all joy, for the 
trying of your faith [under this yoke] 
worketh patience," etc.; Peter said, "We 
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory." And all the true yoke-fellows of 
the Lord in the present day also bear the 
same testimony. They can rejoice in all 
circumstances, and in everything give 
thanks. MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1248 : page 8 

ANGER. 

Anger is wrong when it is fired by the 
lower passions. Most men are angry when 
their own interests are assailed, but bear 
with great patience wrongs inflicted upon 
others. Anger fired by self-love, or self-conceit, 
or self-will, is always despicable. 
But anger fired by the higher impulses is 
noble, manly, divine. The ancient prophets 
were angered when they heard the 
name of God blasphemed. "I count the 
enemies of God my enemies," said David; 
"I hate them with a perfect hatred." 
The spirit which flushes with resentment 
at an oath is better by far than the spirit 
which listens with indifference, or which 
laughs with pleasure. "Abhor that which 
is evil" says the divine command; and no 
man is safe unless he does. Every child 
should have such a chivalric sense of the 
purity of true womanhood that the salacious 
story, the illicit jest, the noisome 
scandal, should arouse his wrath against 
the teller of it. A moral discord should 
awaken resentment in a well-educated conscience, 
as a musical discord awakens resentment 
in a well educated ear. The 



wrath of self-esteem, of approbativeness, 
of acquisitiveness, is dangerous and degrading. 
But it is both dangerous and degrading 
to be without a wrath of conscience, 
of reverence, of faith and of love. 
The wrath of love? Aye! the wrath of 
love. This is the divinest and hottest 
wrath of all. This is the wrath of the 
Lamb which will consume the world's 
dross in the day when it is purified so as 
by fire. Do not teach your children never 
to be angry; but teach them how to "be 
angry and sin not."— Eph. 4:26 . 
Selected. 



page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Liberia, W.C. Africa. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is now 

nearly ten months since you heard from 
me last. The reason for this long delay 
has been my recent sickness for nearly 
three months, and I have been still disabled 
to write even after my partial recovery. 
The books, papers, tracts, etc., you 
sent me came to hand and are doing their 
intended work. Enclosed please find another 
order for more books. I am heartily 
gratified to hear of the book of "POEMS 
AND HYMNS OF DAWN." You may 
recollect that I called your attention, some 
two years ago, to the necessity of having 
such hymns, so we might "sing with the 
spirit and with the understanding;" hence 
I am greatly rejoiced to know that you 
have felt the same need and have prepared 
such a book for our use. 

I am also glad to advise you that the 
harvest work here is still going on with 
unabated zeal and perseverance amidst opposition 
and persecution from the nominal 
church and the world. We feel assured 
that the presence of the Lord is with us, 
which in great measure stimulates and 
cheers our otherwise drooping hearts. 
The circle of interested ones is gradually 
becoming wider in Africa. A recent letter 
from Bro. C. J. George to me, in reference 
to the Church of Christ, as a proof 
of this fact, says: "When you communicate 
to America you will not fail to remind 
Bro. Russell of the interest that is 



being awakened at L , and also to send 

me a few more of his tracts (assorted), 
missionary envelopes, and a copy of the 

Emphatic Diaglott." 

Thus you see how the truth is gaining 
ground, and must eventually prevail over 
errors and sophistries of the devil, and 
traditions of long standing. May the 
good Lord still bless your labor for his 
own glory! With best regards, very truly 
your brother in the harvest work. 
S. W. SETON. 

California. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO. GENTLEMEN:- 
Enclosed find $1.50, and send MILLENNIAL 
DAWNS to addresses given. We have 
just read this most remarkable book with 
great interest. Should it strike others as 
it has me, it will certainly meet a long felt 
want, and prove to be a wonderful power 
for good. I always felt restrained in my 
allegiance to a God with no moral attributes 
above man. 

This book brushes away all the narrow 
views of a half century's gathering, and sets 
forth the wisdom, justice, and mercy of 
God in a far more exalted light. The 
Bible is all a new revelation to me now, 
and is wonderfully interesting. 

I send for these volumes to pass around, 
and should they give others the pleasure 
they have brought to me and mine, I will 
further continue the orders. Personally 
thanking the author of the book for the 
blessing and comfort it has brought to me 
through its vindication of the character of 
our God, I am sincerely and truly yours, 
A. MARTIN. 

England. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Very 

many thanks for your gracious letters and 
postal card. I rejoice that you give me 
permission to translate the beautiful DAWN 
into French, and I note very carefully the 
instructions you give, which I wish to 
comply with to the letter. I find I must 
be in Paris to carry them out as you desire. 
I intend to win, with the Lord's 
help, many Frenchmen to the cause of 
this truth. I have been particularly blessed 
by reading recent numbers of the WATCH 
TOWER. 

Brother Cooper, who but recently came 
to see the light through the first volume, 



which I loaned to him, is in quite a glory 
season. He has been forbidden to preach 
any more among the Wesleyans so long as 
he spreads this light. With respect and 
love to Sister Russell, ever yours in heavenly 
love. E. H. CAREY. 

Florida. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Yours received, 
and as usual read with pleasure and 
profit. I thank you sincerely for your kind 
reply and advice. God bless you, and 
the saints at Allegheny. I felt that I had 
the assistance of your prayers last Sunday. 
I had the pleasure of meeting the pastor 
of my old congregation. He undertook 
a very unfair arrangement, all in his favor, 
but was met and completely routed, and 
actually fled the field. The Lord be 
praised! He compared me to "Judas Iscariot," 
and "Benedict Arnold." When 
I got up to reply, he tried to dismiss the 
congregation, failing in which, he left with 
precipitation, although I gave him a kind 
invitation to remain. 

A small number of his friends undertook 
to create some confusion by laughing 
and talking, even after I had kneeled down 
in prayer. I prayed the Lord to forgive 
them, for it was evident they were ignorant 
and knew not what they did. They 
finally subsided and fled with their leader, 
leaving me a large, orderly and interested 
company. It seemed to me that my understanding 
and lips were opened. I felt 
liberated and inspired, and like a flash the 
thought occurred to me, "The brethren and 
sisters of Allegheny are praying for me." 

I can't help thinking, good was done 
that day. I preached at 1 1 o'clock, A.M., 
also, and distributed a lot of tracts, and 
all the Z.W.T.'s you sent me, and then 
all that wanted could not be supplied. I 
am to preach there again soon. Dear 
friends, pray for us. And oh! pray the 
Lord to bless me with a meek and quiet 
spirit. I expect to be attacked furiously 
in all kinds of ways. 

God bless you and sister R. Long may 
you be spared to instruct and encourage 
the Church. Yours in the one faith, 
W. D. WILLIAMS. 



