





Encourage One Another “All the More So”

“Let us consider one another . . . , encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.”​—HEBREWS 10:24, 25.
SONGS: 90, 87
HOW WOULD YOU ANSWER?
Why did the apostle Paul tell Christians to encourage one another “all the more so”?

Who need encouragement today?

Who can encourage fellow Christians?







 1. Why did the apostle Paul urge the early Hebrew Christians to encourage one another “all the more so”?
IN THE first century, the apostle Paul gave this advice to the Hebrew Christians: “Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.” (Hebrews 10:24, 25) The brothers may have wondered why Paul told them to be even more encouraging to one another. Less than five years later, one reason became clear. At that time, they saw that Jehovah’s day of judgment on Jerusalem was near. They recognized that they needed to flee from the city as Jesus had told them to do. (Luke 21:20-22; Acts 2:19, 20) That day of Jehovah came in the year 70 when the Romans destroyed Jerusalem.
 2. Why should we think even more about encouraging one another today?
2 Today, we are in a similar situation. Jehovah’s “great and very awe-inspiring” day is near. (Joel 2:11) The words of the prophet Zephaniah also apply to our time: “The great day of Jehovah is near! It is near and it is approaching very quickly!” (Zephaniah 1:14) For this reason, we should “be concerned about one another so as to incite to love and fine works.” (Hebrews 10:24, footnote) We need to become even more interested in our brothers so that we can encourage them when they need it.



WHO NEED ENCOURAGEMENT?

 3. What did the apostle Paul say about encouragement? (See opening picture.)
3 “Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down, but a good word cheers it up.” (Proverbs 12:25) All of us at times need encouragement. Paul made it clear that even those who are responsible for encouraging others also need to be encouraged themselves. He wrote to his brothers in Rome: “I am longing to see you, that I may impart some spiritual gift to you for you to be made firm; or, rather, that we may have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith, both yours and mine.” (Romans 1:11, 12) So even the apostle Paul needed encouragement at times.​—Read Romans 15:30-32.
4, 5. Whom can we encourage today, and why?
4 Today, we can encourage those who serve Jehovah full-time, such as faithful pioneers. Many of them have sacrificed things they enjoy in life so that they can pioneer. This is also true of missionaries, Bethelites, circuit overseers and their wives, and those who serve at remote translation offices. They all make sacrifices in order to spend more time serving Jehovah. So we should encourage them. There are also many who wish they could still be in full-time service but are no longer able to. They too are grateful when they receive encouragement.
5 Who else deserve encouragement? We can encourage the many brothers and sisters who have chosen to remain single because they want to obey Jehovah and marry “only in the Lord.” (1 Corinthians 7:39) Wives are encouraged when their husbands tell them they love them and are grateful for all they do. (Proverbs 31:28, 31) Christians who endure persecution or sickness also need to be encouraged. (2 Thessalonians 1:3-5) Jehovah and Jesus comfort all these faithful ones.​—Read 2 Thessalonians 2:16, 17.



ELDERS CAN ENCOURAGE US

 6. What do we learn about the role of the elders at Isaiah 32:1, 2?
6 Read Isaiah 32:1, 2. We live in difficult times and could easily become sad and discouraged. Jesus Christ uses his anointed brothers and faithful “princes” of the other sheep to encourage us. These congregation elders are not “masters” over our faith but “fellow workers” for our joy. They want to help us be happy and stay faithful.​—2 Corinthians 1:24.
7, 8. How can elders encourage others by what they say and by what they do?
7 Elders can imitate the apostle Paul, who always tried to encourage his brothers. He wrote to Christians in Thessalonica who were being persecuted: “Having tender affection for you, we were determined to impart to you, not only the good news of God but also our very selves, because you became so beloved to us.”​—1 Thessalonians 2:8.
8 Elders can be very encouraging by what they say. But is that always enough? Paul told the elders from Ephesus: “You must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the Lord Jesus, when he himself said: ‘There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.’” (Acts 20:35) Paul was willing to “spend and be completely spent for” his brothers. He proved by his actions that he was willing to do his best for them. (2 Corinthians 12:15) In a similar way, elders should encourage and comfort others not only by what they say but also by what they do. This shows that they really care about us.​—1 Corinthians 14:3.
 9. How can the elders give counsel in an encouraging way?
9 To strengthen the brothers, elders sometimes need to give counsel. Elders can learn from the Bible how to do this in an encouraging way. Jesus set an excellent example in giving counsel when he sent messages to the congregations in Asia Minor after his death and resurrection. He had some strong counsel for the congregations in Ephesus, Pergamum, and Thyatira. But before he gave the counsel, he commended them for all the good things they were doing. (Revelation 2:1-5, 12, 13, 18, 19) Jesus told the congregation in Laodicea: “All those for whom I have affection, I reprove and discipline. So be zealous and repent.” (Revelation 3:19) Our elders try to imitate Christ in the way they give counsel.



NOT ONLY THE ELDERS NEED TO ENCOURAGE OTHERS






Parents, are you training your children to encourage others? (See paragraph 10)




10. How can all of us strengthen one another?
10 Elders are not the only ones who need to encourage others. Paul urged all Christians to speak “what is good for building up as the need may be, to impart what is beneficial” to others. (Ephesians 4:29) Each of us should be aware of what others need so that we can help them. Paul wrote to the Hebrew Christians: “Strengthen the hands that hang down and the feeble knees, and keep making straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be put out of joint but, rather, may be healed.” (Hebrews 12:12, 13) All of us can strengthen and encourage one another by what we say, even if we are very young.
11. What helped Marthe when she was depressed?
11 A sister named Marthe was depressed for a while.a (See footnote.) She wrote: “One day when I was praying for encouragement, I met an older sister who showed me affection and compassion, which I was in particular need of at the time. She also shared with me her own experience with the kind of test I was going through, and I felt less alone.” That sister probably did not even realize how much her words helped Marthe!
12, 13. How can we apply the advice found at Philippians 2:1-4?
12 Paul wrote to the Christians in Philippi: “If, then, there is any encouragement in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any spiritual fellowship, if any tender affection and compassion, make my joy full by being of the same mind and having the same love, being completely united, having the one thought in mind. Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism, but with humility consider others superior to you, as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.”​—Philippians 2:1-4.
13 All of us should look for ways to help one another. We can offer “consolation of love,” “spiritual fellowship,” and “tender affection and compassion” to encourage our brothers and sisters.



SOME WAYS TO ENCOURAGE

14. What is one way we can give encouragement?
14 It makes us happy to hear that those whom we helped in the past are remaining faithful. The apostle John wrote: “No greater joy do I have than this: that I should hear that my children go on walking in the truth.” (3 John 4) Many pioneers are thrilled when they find out that someone whom they helped to learn the truth long ago is still serving Jehovah faithfully, maybe even pioneering. So if pioneers feel discouraged, we can remind them of all the good they have done to help others.
15. What is something we can do to encourage those who are serving faithfully?
15 Many circuit overseers have said that they and their wives were encouraged when they received a thank-you note after they visited a congregation. This is also true for elders, missionaries, pioneers, and Bethelites, who all serve Jehovah faithfully. By thanking them, we may encourage them more than we know.



HOW ALL OF US CAN BE ENCOURAGING

16. What simple things can encourage someone?
16 What if you do not find it easy to tell others how you feel about them? Actually, it is not so difficult to encourage others. Try giving someone a nice smile. If they do not smile back, it could be that they are having a problem and need someone to talk to. You may comfort them simply by listening.​—James 1:19.
17. What encouraged one young brother?
17 A young brother named Henri was very upset when several of his close relatives stopped serving Jehovah. One of these was his father, who had been an elder. A circuit overseer noticed that Henri was sad and took him out for coffee. He listened carefully as Henri expressed his feelings. Henri realized that the only way he could help his family come back to the truth was to stay faithful himself. He was also comforted by reading Psalm 46, Zephaniah 3:17, and Mark 10:29, 30.





All of us can strengthen and encourage one another (See paragraph 18)




18. (a) What did King Solomon write about encouragement? (b) What did the apostle Paul suggest?
18 What can we learn from the experiences of Marthe and Henri? Any of us can comfort and encourage a brother or a sister who needs it. King Solomon wrote: “A word spoken at the right time​—how good it is! A cheerful glance makes the heart rejoice; a good report invigorates the bones.” (Proverbs 15:23, 30, footnote.) Can you think of someone you know who is feeling discouraged or sad? Why not do something as simple as reading to him from The Watchtower or our website? Also, Paul taught that singing Kingdom songs together can make us feel better. He wrote: “Keep on teaching and encouraging one another with psalms, praises to God, spiritual songs sung with gratitude, singing in your hearts to Jehovah.”​—Colossians 3:16; Acts 16:25.
19. Why will encouragement soon become more and more important, and what should we do?
19 As we get closer to Jehovah’s day, it will be even more important for us to encourage one another. (Hebrews 10:25) We will be happy if we do as Paul advised: “Keep encouraging one another and building one another up, just as you are in fact doing.”​—1 Thessalonians 5:11.



Names have been changed.

