Insight on the News
Donated Blood a Sacrifice?
● The “Philippines Daily Express” of April 11, 1977, reported: “Penitents in Negros Occidental have come up with a unique way of gaining absolution for their sins. The Diocesan Lenten Action Committee of Alay Kapwa 77 in the province organized a unique blood donation program that replaced the flogging and the bearing of the cross.” It was reported that about a hundred males had “donated blood as sacrifice.”
To some it may appear humanitarian for persons to donate blood that will be used for transfusion purposes. Obviously, at least some individuals believe that there is religious merit and spiritual benefit in doing this. However, when viewed from a Biblical standpoint, such a “sacrifice” is of no benefit to the donor and actually violates the law of God.
Wise King Solomon of ancient Israel properly acknowledged in prayer to God that “there is no man that does not sin.” (1 Ki. 8:46) And no imperfect and sinful human can provide any “sacrifice” that would absolve him of his own sins or would have this effect on the sins of others. Only the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ has this cleansing power. As the Christian apostle John put matters in writing to fellow believers: “The blood of Jesus . . . cleanses us from all sin.”​—1 John 1:7; Ps. 49:6-8.
Moreover, God’s law to his people of ancient times specified that blood, when taken from a body, was not to be used for anything, but was to be disposed of. (Deut. 12:16) Later, Christians were specifically required to ‘abstain from blood.’ (Acts 15:28, 29) So, ‘donating blood as sacrifice’ is neither effective nor approved by God.
Selling Sermons
● “Parade” magazine reports: “For ministers who are ill, lazy or not disposed to produce updated sermons on Sundays, there is a sermon-for-sale service that has been thriving for years.” This sermon service is available on a subscription basis from Eric Thomas, the pastor of St. Mary’s Anglican Church at Alverstoke, England. He says that he has sold around 1,000 sermons to persons of “all religious denominations throughout the world.”
The thought of regularly receiving prepared sermons by subscription for use from the pulpit may appeal to some clergymen, and undoubtedly it saves them time and effort. But how could such sermons reflect their knowledge of the Bible or their own heartfelt sentiments? It is not at all likely that such sermons could do so. Nor could it be expected that ministers using them could thereby manifest the same deep regard for others that the Christian apostle Paul displayed. He was able to tell the elders of the Ephesus congregation that, while with them, he was “slaving for the Lord with the greatest lowliness of mind and tears and trials,” while he ‘had not held back from telling them all the counsel of God.’ (Acts 20:17-20, 26, 27) Truly, Paul spoke in a heartfelt way that honored Jehovah God and helped others.
Double Standard
● “Christianity Today” of April 15, 1977, reports: “The 4,500-member Mennonite Conference of Ontario, which condemns lotteries on moral and religious grounds, recently accepted a $250,000 grant from Wintario, a Canadian lottery. Conference delegates approved acceptance after they were told that rejecting it could delay the building of a $3.4 million senior citizens’ community center at a Mennonite retirement complex. They agreed to take the money on condition that the conference look into ways of repaying it.”
“If we don’t accept the money,” one conference delegate reportedly reasoned, “someone else will get it and not spend it responsibly. We as Christians have a responsibility to see that the money is spent properly.”
While some persons may reason similarly, it is not possible to escape the fact that lotteries are a form of gambling, which is not approved in God’s Word. Those adhering to the Scriptures do not trust in luck. (Isa. 65:11, 12) They are not eager to acquire funds and valuable things without working for them. (2 Thess. 3:10) Moreover, recognizing that “greedy persons” will not inherit God’s kingdom, godly individuals shun all forms of gambling because of the greed that it can produce in a person’s heart. (1 Cor. 6:9, 10) Consistently, the Christian congregation does not sponsor gambling, or seek to benefit from gambling in any way.

