Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
These are days when materialism makes such demands that it easily crowds spirituality out of one’s life. Avoiding this snare, Jehovah’s witnesses will demonstrate their devotion to Jehovah God during September by sharing fully in the ministry, presenting to all persons the books Your Will Be Done on Earth” and “Let Your Name Be Sanctified,” together with two booklets, on a contribution of $1.
WHO WILL WIN IN THE CLASH OF WILLS?
Today as never before there is a clash of wills on all fronts, between nations, between business and labor, between political and racial groups. But what is God’s will in these issues? Is he involved? What will be the final outcome of the present struggle for supremacy? Read the two fascinating and revealing books “Your Will Be Done on Earth” and “Let Your Name Be Sanctified.” Both are only $1. Send now and receive free two timely booklets on Bible subjects.
ANNOUNCEMENT OF ANNUAL MEETING
Yearly the annual meeting of the members of Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania is held on October 1, and in 1963 this date falls on Tuesday. The meeting will be at ten o’clock in the forenoon on Tuesday October 1, and will be held at the office of the Society located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
A regular letter of notice of annual meeting will be sent to each of the members of the corporation. The members will wish to be certain that these letters of notice reach them by seeing to it that the secretary’s office has their present mail address to which to send the notices.
As is the usual procedure, the notices will be accompanied by proxies. The proxies should be returned by the members promptly in order to reach the office of the secretary of the Society not later than September 15. The proxy should be returned by each member whether the member is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 29: Studying the Word of Life. Page 521.
October 6: Improving Personal Study. Page 527.

