Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● How can grief for a lost mate be assuaged?
By the truths of God’s Word; by doing good to others; by prayer.—P. 260.a
● What assets can a Christian use for the benefit of others?
Time, Bible knowledge, strength, influence, natural abilities and aptitudes.—Pp. 271-274.
● Why did Jehovah accept Abel’s sacrifice but not Cain’s?
Because Abel’s was of the right sort and offered in faith and sincerity. Cain’s was lacking in these respects.—P. 288.
● Of what is godly discipline a proof?
That one is loved by the one administering the discipline.—P. 297.
● Why should one not belittle discipline?
For one’s own good, for the good of others and for the praise of God.—P. 297.
● From what various sources may discipline come?
Jehovah God, Jesus Christ, the Bible, the theocratic organization (by the printed page or by overseers), one’s Christian companions, parents, oneself by exercising self-control.—Pp. 298, 299.
● In what spheres is steadfastness required of Christians?
In resisting materialism, in right conduct, in the face of persecution, in the field ministry, in meeting attendance.—Pp. 302-307.
● How far below sea level is the surface of the Dead Sea?
Upwards of 1,200 feet. (To be exact, 1,287 feet.)—P. 312.
● Why did Jesus answer Pilate the way he did when Pilate asked him if he was a king? (John 18:37)
To avoid the charge of sedition.—P. 320.
● To qualify for dedication and baptism, what two basic requirements must be met?
Accurate knowledge of the significance of these and cleanness morally and spiritually.—Pp. 329, 330.
● What will result from compromise under persecution in the case of a Christian?
It will lead to torment of conscience because of unfaithfulness. It will incur the displeasure of Jehovah God. If that compromise consists of “an act of worship” of Satan or any part of his organization, the compromiser can no longer represent Jehovah’s Kingdom interests. It may result in loss forever of the prospect of life in God’s righteous new order.—Pp. 346, 347.
● What are some of the desires incidental to youth that Christians must shun?
Recklessness, obscene talk, “practical jokes,” overindulgence in sports, suggestive styles of dress, improper conduct between the sexes.—Pp. 363, 364.
● What should be the Christian’s attitude toward efforts to unite all religions?
Have nothing to do with them, as Bible-based religion is exclusive, opposed to all interfaith.—Pp. 391, 392.
● Which kind of maturity is the most important one?
Spiritual maturity.—P. 396.
● Of what value is encouragement?
It gives strength and hope; it helps others to endure.—P. 424.
● In what various ways can encouragement be given?
By words of commendation, words of appreciation, by an act of kindness, by fellowship, by a friendly smile, by imparting hope from the Word of God.—P. 432.
● How does a life of faith manifest itself?
By works; by giving the truth to others.—P. 468.
● Why should one who commits a serious sin confess it to his Christian overseer?
Not because he thinks that overseer can grant him forgiveness, but because Jehovah requires it. Until the matter is set straight, he will always be plagued with a guilty conscience. He cannot acceptably serve Jehovah under such circumstances. If he has sinned, Jehovah knows that, and if the sinner tries to cover over his wrong without accepting the discipline from Jehovah, God sees that lack of true repentance and humility, and He will see that such a person is eventually cleaned out of his organization unless he undergoes a change of heart.—Pp. 473, 474.
● Why is the record of Papias, of postapostolic times, of interest to Christians?
Because of the testimony he gives to the canon and the creditability of the Christian Greek Scriptures.—P. 477.
● What kind of giving does the Bible not encourage?
The giving away or the betrayal of the fault of an intimate acquaintance.—P. 483.
● When should parents begin training their children?
From earliest infancy, as did the parents of Moses.—P. 491.
● How many distinct meanings does the term “spirit” have in the Scriptures?
At least seven: Jehovah God, Jesus Christ, the angels, life force of earthly creatures, mental disposition, inspired expressions, and God’s active force.—P. 503.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1963.

