Truth Spreads Despite Opposition
◆ A woman who is devoting her full time to preaching God’s kingdom in Quebec, Canada, reports this experience: “After a circuit assembly in Quebec, a young couple left their name with me to call on them. The man is a French Canadian who had spent four years studying for the priesthood. The things he saw and experienced turned him against all religion, and he became very bitter. His wife is a Spanish girl, a devout Catholic. Being very sincere in her religion, she kept trying to get her husband to go to church with her. He refused to go because of his former experiences. He decided that the fastest way to discourage his wife in her views was to acquaint her with Jehovah’s witnesses. That is why they were at the assembly.
“Later on I called at their home and, for the first time in her life, she heard the marvelous hope that the Bible gives. How her face lit up as I told her about the restoration of paradise on earth! After two studies she tried with greater zeal and determination than ever to get her husband to bring her to the Kingdom Hall. She witnessed to everyone, even writing to her family in Spain, sending them a Paradise book. They burned the book, telling her not to write anymore about the Bible. However, she continued to do so and quoted scriptures.
“Soon everyone in her district knew she was studying with Jehovah’s witnesses, so they began to bring pressure against her husband. He, in turn, brought her books back to me and told me not to return to his home anymore. He was very angry. In his determination to stop her he took his gun, showed her the bullet, then loaded the gun and pointed it at her head and told her to make her choice. She tactfully answered him without compromise, and he finally put the gun away. That same week she started in the field ministry with me
“When she attended a circuit assembly in Montreal, she symbolized her dedication to Jehovah. This made her husband angrier than ever. In desperation he decided to send her back to her people in Spain. Just as all the arrangements were ready, she received a letter from her mother saying that all the family there were studying with Jehovah’s witnesses. This was quite a blow to the husband, so he decided that the only way to stop her was to make her a prisoner in her own home. When she tried to go to the meetings, he would sit by the door and not let her out. In the daytime he telephones every hour or two to make sure she is in. So she started a magazine route with her bread man, started a Bible study with her neighbor, placed a double subscription with her shoemaker.
“Later a lady whose husband had forbidden Jehovah’s witnesses to call at her home met her on the street, and she asked her to study the Bible with her. She has since brought her to some meetings.
“One morning, as we were working together in the field service, the young woman’s husband came and put her in his car. He took her to one of his friends, a person who was opposed to the truth. His wife was to stay with this opposed person for the day. After a while the lady of the house became curious and started to ask questions. The young woman took the opportunity to witness to her, placing a Bible, two books and two magazines. The lady was so interested she asked her to return and help her understand the Bible.
“This sister has proved to be the right kind of minister even under the most difficult circumstances. She has recently reported thirty hours a month and places over fifty magazines a month. Her great hope is that someday she will have the freedom to attend all the meetings at the Kingdom Hall.”

