From Our Readers
Diabetes
I wish to commend you for the fine article on “Diabetes​—How to Live With It.” (October 8, 1985) As an insulin-dependent diabetic for 17 years, I am very grateful for your fine and well-written article, which revealed the problems and the magnitude of the complications facing diabetics. It’s hard for a nondiabetic to understand this disease.
K. C., Pennsylvania
Thank you for your article about diabetes. My late father was a diabetic, and I never really understood what the illness meant. After reading your article, I wondered if, had we known more about diabetes, my family and I would not have been as impatient with him when he got into some of his moods. I pray that other readers who have a diabetic in the family will give him a little more understanding in the future.
C. G., Scotland
Thank you for the material on diabetes. I have a little girl nine years of age, and for the past three years she has had Type I diabetes. In the beginning, it was not easy to accept such a painful situation, as she had to have two shots of insulin a day. I am pleased that my little girl has accepted her disease with the prospect of being cured soon. She always has the scripture of Isaiah 33:24 in her mind.
R. S., Italy
Gutenberg and Paper
I enjoyed reading your article “Paper​—That Versatile Product!” (November 8, 1985) However, on page 23 there is a picture of Johannes Gutenberg and his press, and the caption states, “Without paper he could not have printed the Bible.” However, the Gutenberg Bible was printed on vellum as well as on paper. So paper alone was not necessary to print the Gutenberg Bible.
F. S., Pennsylvania
The caption is not correct. A limited vellum edition was made, but a more widespread edition was printed on paper. It was about this time that the development of paper joined with printing by movable type to make for widespread printing of Bibles and other publications.​—ED.
Drugs and Youths
I think that your articles on drugs are depressing. (“Young People Ask . . .” July 8, September 8, September 22, October 8, 1985) It seems as if adults are always lecturing us kids to be careful about drugs. I agree, but I personally think that adults should be just as careful. I wish you wouldn’t always use young adults as the subject in your articles about drugs.
B. F., Wisconsin
Yes, adults need to be just as careful about drugs, and not a few older adults do set a bad example in use of drugs and alcohol misuse. However, “Young People Ask . . .” articles deal especially with the problems facing youths. Further, older adults have usually established their pattern in life, and they are not as susceptible to peer pressure and efforts to get them to try something new. On the other hand, youths, who are less experienced in life, often possess a strong curiosity and a desire to try new things, and they are often easily influenced by peer pressure. Our purpose in publishing these articles is to help young people avoid getting hooked on things that will cause them much grief and sorrow.​—ED.

