God​—Does He Really Exist?
IS THERE a God of peace? For many, that question should be more precise​—is there really a God?
Millions of atheists answer no! Agnostics hold the view that “any ultimate reality (as God) is unknown and probably unknowable.” Yet, over a billion and a half religious people say there is a God, even though they may be seriously divided about their beliefs regarding him.
Is there a way of arriving at a satisfying answer to the question? By a satisfying answer we mean one that appeals to our power of reason as well as to emotion.
What, then, are some of the obstacles to having a belief in God? We have one in the words of the Bible writer John: “No man has seen God at any time.” (John 1:18) Millions reason that since they have not seen God, he does not exist. “Seeing is believing,” they say. But is that strictly logical?
In actual fact, all of us believe in things we have never seen. Why? Because by circumstantial evidence and deduction we know that such things must exist. To illustrate: Who has seen radio waves? Or television waves? Or X rays? Yet we know they exist by reason of the effects produced in a radio, on a television set, and on an X-ray plate. Similarly, we can use circumstantial evidence and deduction to establish God’s existence.
Following the Clues
Today we take the solar system for granted. Yet just 140 years ago man’s understanding of it was limited. At that time Neptune and Pluto​—the two planets farthest away from the earth and the sun were not known. Yet Neptune’s existence was suspected. Why? Because of clues​—effects—​that pointed to its existence.
National Geographic explains: “In the 1840’s, a Frenchman and an Englishman, working separately, concluded that the gravitational tug of an unknown [and thus far unseen] planet was forcing Uranus to wander from its predicted orbit.” So, what did they do? They calculated where the missing planet ought to be, “and Neptune was found within an hour’s search.”
As in so many other cases, the astronomers studied effects, or clues, and then by research found the cause. Are there any effects to establish the existence of an intelligence higher than man’s?
[Picture on page 3]
Even before Neptune was seen, its existence was indicated by its gravitational tug on Uranus. In a similar way, can God’s existence be established?

