‘I Am So Thankful That They Called’
THE Watch Tower Society in Brooklyn, New York, received this letter of appreciation from a woman living in New Zealand:
“I am writing this letter to express my appreciation of your wonderful organization. I am a twenty-five-year-old mother of three boys. For some time I wanted to understand the Holy Bible. My husband was a Baptist, and I had no religious background at all. When he gave me a Bible I began going to church with him, but I did not learn anything about the Bible there. After our sons came along we could not go to church, and we were too shy to contact the Baptists in the new area where we moved.
“One day a young lady came around asking us if we would like to enroll our boys in the Sunday school. We agreed and she told us that we would be notified when to bring them. They never did this. They just were not that interested in us. Jehovah’s witnesses had called on us, but I never listened to them. I took their literature, but I never read it. I thought they were just a bunch of cranks.
“After our disappointment with the Baptists, we did not know what to do. I did not know how to find the true religion and I could not see myself going to every church. That was impossible! One day we were so desperate to understand the Bible that we prayed to God to show us the truth. Three days later there was a knock on the door and there stood a man who said, ‘I am a Bible student.’ I was so thrilled that I just dragged him in. I eagerly accepted his offer to help me learn the Bible. It was not until after he left that I realized that he was a witness of Jehovah, and this made me a little apprehensive. But I began studying the Bible and later my husband did also.
“In the course of time we knew we had found the true faith. And the happiest day of my life was when we were both baptized at the 1969 ‘Peace on Earth’ Assembly. I go down on my knees and thank Jehovah God for answering our prayers that day. Yes, I thank him that his Witnesses called back on us regularly. No matter what the weather was, they came to help us. Yes, they were genuinely interested in us.
“If that dear Witness had not gone out in the preaching work that morning we might not have God’s truth today. Jehovah’s witnesses brought us the greatest gift any man could bring​—the hope of living with our children forever in God’s new order.”

