God’s Word Is Truth
 1. What important information does the Bible contain?
1 “The substance of your word is truth,” wrote the psalmist. (Ps. 119:160) Through his inspired Word, Jehovah gives satisfying answers to life’s most important questions. He offers comfort and hope to those who are troubled. And he shows us how we can draw close to him. “Learning the truth from the Bible is like leaving a very dark and gloomy place and entering a clear, bright, and pleasant room,” said one appreciative woman. Do you endeavor to share the truth from God’s Word at every opportunity?
 2. How does the Bible improve people’s lives?
2 Transforming Power and Universal Appeal: Bible truth has the power to touch hearts and transform lives. (Heb. 4:12) A young woman named Rosa had become involved in prostitution, as well as alcohol and drug abuse. “One day, when I was at the very depths of despair,” she says, “a Witness couple spoke to me about how the Bible can help us solve our problems. I began to study God’s Word, which I found fascinating. Within a month I had the strength to make a clean, fresh start in life. Now that I had a purpose in life, I no longer needed the crutch of alcohol or drugs. And since I wanted so much to be Jehovah’s friend, I was determined to live by his standards. If it hadn’t been for the practical wisdom of God’s Word, I am sure that by now I would have put an end to my life.”​—Ps. 119:92.
 3. Why should we not hold back from sharing the Bible’s message with others?
3 Unlike most books today, the Bible appeals to people of ‘all nations, tribes, peoples, and tongues.’ (Rev. 7:9) God’s will is “that all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) Therefore, we should never presume that a person will be unreceptive to the good news simply because of his background. Rather, share the Kingdom message with all, doing so directly from the Bible whenever possible.
 4. How can we use the Bible when giving a witness?
4 Feature the Scriptures: There are many opportunities to use the Bible in the ministry. When presenting the magazines, try to include the scripture that appears in the suggested presentation. When using the literature offer for the month, some find it effective to include the reading of a carefully selected scripture in their opening remarks. When making return visits, share one or more Bible texts each time to help the householder progressively acquire accurate knowledge. When conducting a Bible study, center the discussion on the key scriptures. When not sharing in the formal ministry, have a Bible handy to use when opportunities arise to witness informally.​—2 Tim. 2:15.
 5. Why should we strive to use the Bible in our ministry?
5 May we help others benefit from the motivating power of God’s Word of truth by using the Bible at every appropriate opportunity in our ministry.​—1 Thess. 2:13.

