International Kingdom Hall Building in Some European Lands
1 In recent decades the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses in a number of European lands, including Eastern Europe, was restricted. In most cases, the restrictions were quite severe. It was difficult to hold meetings openly, and having the use of a Kingdom Hall was nearly impossible. In recent years, however, “Jehovah has done a great thing in what he has done with us. We have become joyful.”​—Ps. 126:3.
2 Beginning in 1983, the oppressive grip on Jehovah’s Witnesses began to loosen. By 1989, Poland and Hungary had granted Jehovah’s Witnesses legal recognition. In 1991, Jehovah’s Witnesses were granted legal registration in Russia. Since then, the work has prospered in Russia and in the former republics of the Soviet Union. Between March 1996 and October 1998, the Governing Body gave approval to 359 Kingdom Hall loan requests from branch offices overseeing 11 European lands.
3 As you look over the pictures in this insert, reflect on the great and wonderful things that Jehovah has done in behalf of his people. (Ps. 136:4) Take pleasure in knowing that contributions of the worldwide brotherhood are being put to excellent use, reflecting what Jesus stated, as recorded at John 13:35: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”
4 Among the European countries benefiting from an arrangement to help build Kingdom Halls in lands with limited resources is Romania, where 36 Kingdom Halls have been built since July 2000. By using a standard pattern for almost all their Kingdom Halls, Ukraine built 61 in the year 2001 and 76 more in 2002. With the aid of moneys contributed to the Kingdom Hall Fund, hundreds of Kingdom Halls have been built in Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Moldova, Russia, and Serbia and Montenegro.
5 Building Kingdom Halls in some lands has not been easy, and much effort must be put forth before actual construction can begin. Often the process is time-consuming. Then, too, the cost of building a Kingdom Hall in that part of Europe is much greater than in many parts of Africa or South America. However, because of the large increase in the number of those who worship Jehovah, hundreds of Kingdom Halls are still needed in European countries with limited resources!
6 How marvelous it is to see such rapid increase in the building of these Kingdom Halls! An excellent witness has been given in neighborhoods where they have been built, as many experiences show. In some areas, local authorities are impressed by the willing spirit shown in following building guidelines.
7 Isaiah aptly prophesied about the increase in true worship at this time. Through the prophet God foretold: “I myself, Jehovah, shall speed it up in its own time.” (Isa. 60:22) Certainly, the last decade has proved to be Jehovah’s time for increase in Eastern Europe. May Jehovah continue pouring out his rich blessing upon our efforts to speed up the building of Kingdom Halls in many lands as we give further support to the Kingdom Hall Fund! This will result in many more Kingdom Halls being added in lands with limited resources. It will contribute to the growth of pure worship in many parts of Europe and to a greater witness being given to “the extremity of the earth.”​—Acts 13:47.
[Pictures on page 3]
Kingdom Hall Complex Moscow, Russia
[Pictures on page 4-6]
New Kingdom Halls in Eastern Europe
  Strumica, Macedonia
  Daruvar, Croatia
  Bitola, Macedonia
  Sokal, Lviv District, Ukraine
  Sofia, Bulgaria
  Krasnooktyabrskiy, Maykop Area, Russia
  Bački Petrovac, Serbia and Montenegro
  Plovdiv, Bulgaria
  Tlumach, Ivano-Frankivsk District, Ukraine
  Rava-Ruska, Lviv District, Ukraine
  Stara Pazova, Serbia and Montenegro
  Zenica, Bosnia and Herzegovina
  Sokal, Lviv District, Ukraine
  Zhydachiv, Lviv District, Ukraine

