VOL. XIV. MARCH 15, 1893. NO. 6. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



How sacred the memories which gather around 
the anniversary of our Lord's death. It calls 
to mind the Father's love as exhibited in the 
entire plan of salvation, the center of which 
was the gift of his Son as our Redeemer. It 
calls specially to our thoughts him who gave 
himself a ransom— a corresponding price— for 
all. Then faith comes still nearer to him who 
"suffered, the just for the unjust," and with 
grateful, overflowing hearts and tear-dimmed 
eyes we whisper, My Savior! My Redeemer! 
My Lord and Master! "He loved me, and 
gave himself for me." Ah, yes!— 

"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 

Which before the cross I spend: 
Life and joy and peace possessing 

From my best and truest Friend." 

How blessed the thought that he cares to 
have us think of him and call him ours— he 
so great— "far above angels and every title 
that is named; next to the Father himself;— 
and we so insignificant, so imperfect, so unworthy 
of such a friendship. And yet to think 
that "he is not ashamed to call us Brethren," 
and that he is pleased to have us memorialize 
his death and that he gave us the bread to emblemize 
his broken flesh and the wine to emblemize 
his shed blood— the one to represent 
the human rights and privileges purchased for 
all and of which all may partake, the other to 
represent the life he gave which secured everlasting 
life for all who will accept it. 

How delightful, too, to count, as he and the 
Jews did, the days and the hours, even until 
finally "the hour being come," he sat down with 
his disciples to celebrate the death of the typical 
Paschal lamb, and to consider the deliverance 
of Israel's firstborn from the great destruction 
which came upon Egypt, and the 
subsequent deliverance accomplished through 
those first-born ones for all the typical Israel 
of God. 

How precious to look beyond the type which 
was commemorated, and to hear the Master, as 
he took new emblems, say, "This [celebrating 
of the Passover] do [henceforth] in remembrance 
of me." Ah yes! in the crucified one we 
can now see "The Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world." "Christ our passover 
[lamb] is sacrificed for us, therefore let us 
keep the feast;" for as oft as we do this, we do 
show forth our Lord's death until he come 



again— until, his kingdom having come, we shall 
be permitted to drink with him the new wine 
(the new life and joy) in the Kingdom.— Matt. 26:29; 
ICor. 5:7,8; 11:26. 

But we are not only privileged to enjoy the 
favors of our Lord's sacrifice (by partaking of its 
merit and its consequent advantages, viz., justification, 
and restitution rights and privileges 
as redeemed men), but more than this: we are 
invited to share with our Master in the sacrifice 
and in its glorious reward. He says to us, 
Whoever is in sympathy with my work and its 
results— whoever would share my Kingdom and 
join in its work of blessing the world, let him 
also be broken with me, and let him join me 
in drinking the cup of self-denial, unto death. 
To all such he says, "Drink ye all of it." 

Gladly, dear Lord, we eat (appropriate to our 

R1504 : page 84 

necessities) the merit of thy pure human nature 
sacrificed for us— for our justification. 
Gladly, too, we will partake of the cup of suffering 
with thee, realizing it to be a blessed privilege 
to suffer with thee, that in due time we 
may also reign with thee;— to be dead with 
thee, that in the everlasting future we may live 
with thee and be like thee and share thy love 
and thy glory as thy Bride. Oh! that we may 
be faithful, not only in the performance of the 
symbol, but also of the reality. Blessed Lord, 
we hear thy word saying, "Ye shall indeed 
drink of my cup and be baptized with my baptism. 
Lord, thy grace is sufficient for us, for 
we are wholly thine, now and forever. 

Oh! what a thought: that if faithful in the 
present privilege of drinking of his cup and being 
broken with our Lord as his body, we with 
him will soon be that "Church of the first-born 
ones whose names are written in heaven," and 
as such shall constitute the Royal Priesthood, 
which, under our great High Priest, will lead, 
out of the Egyptian bondage and slavery to 
sin, all those slaves of sin whose groanings and 
prayers for deliverance have entered the ears 
of the Lord of Sabaoth. 

These will be some of the thoughts which will 
constrain numbers of the Lord's people all over 
the world to meet in little groups, and sometimes 
quite alone with Jesus, on the evening of 
March 30th, next, after six o'clock, to celebrate 

R1505 : page 84 

on its anniversary the most notable event in 



the history of the Universe of God. 

Eat and drink, O beloved, says the King to 
his spouse. (Sol. Song 5:1.) Let us eat and drink 
reverently, devotedly, thoughtfully, prayerfully, 
tearfully perhaps, as we each think of our 
Redeemer's love and sacrifice, and pledge ourselves 
afresh to be dead with him. Meet with 
any who recognize him as their ransom, and 
who are pleased to do this in remembrance of 
him— or else do it alone. 

Let your heart be so full of the reality that 
forms and ceremonies will generally be forgotten, 
except such as are needed for decency 
and order. Prepare beforehand some sort of 
"fruit of the vine." Our preference is for 
stewed-raisin juice or unfermented grape juice, 
and for either Jewish unleavened bread or plain 
water-crackers, which are about the same in substance 
—flour, water and salt, without leaven. 
Leaven being a symbol of sin or corruption, 
yeast-raised bread is not an appropriate symbol 
of our Lord, the undefiled and separate 
from sinners. 

The Church at Allegheny will meet at "Bible 
House" chapel, Arch Street, at the hour above 
named. All, who trust in the substitutionary 
sacrifice finished at Calvary, and who are fully 
consecrated to the Redeemer's service, and 
who can make it convenient to meet with us, 
will be made very welcome. Some who profess 
that their wills are fully immersed into the 
will of Christ, desire to symbolize their baptism; 
and an opportunity will be afforded at 
3 o'clock on the afternoon preceding the Memorial 
Supper. On the subject of Baptism see 
your TOWER for May '88, of which issue we have 
no more. For further particulars concerning 
the Memorial Supper see March '91 TOWER. 



R1504 : page 84 

CHRISTIAN UNION VS. UNITY. 



We have pointed out repeatedly the tendency 
of Christian people toward Union; showing, too, 
that such a union is predicted in Scripture; 
but that its results, while designed to be good, 
will really be bad; and this because it will be 
a mechanical union instead of a heart unity. 
The following clip from the Pittsburg Times, 
February 22d, shows that worldly people discern 
that the various denominations, while crying 



aloud for union, are far from united in 
heart or head. 

STRUGGLING FOR THE UNATTAINABLE. 



"We have read with care most of the last 
number of The Church Union, and seldom anything 
more melancholy. The object of this 
paper is to induce believers and congregations 
everywhere "to manifest to the world their 
essential unity in faith and spirit," and almost 
every article in it is evidence that the object is 
unattainable. 

"A distinguished Bishop of the Episcopal 
Church writes that there are two theories of the 
ministry, personal and official, that his denomination 

R1504 : page 85 

holds to the latter, 'and enjoins it upon 
her members as the one exclusive ministry, 
which they must accept or fall under discipline 
as law-breakers.' To the many who deny this 
'one exclusive ministry' there is not much 
hope for unity in that quarter. 

"Another writer lays down as prerequisites 
to unity, belief in the Bible as the sole guide to 
spiritual life, faith in the divinity of Jesus, and 
baptism; but a third writer, mocking at creeds 
as they exist, says: Let us have more thinking, 
then, upon the higher criticism, evolution, 
the intermediate state, the duration of future 
punishment, and such like matters, but whenever 
anyone rises to impose his opinions in 
regard to such subjects upon the brotherhood, 
let us resist him to the uttermost.' The latter 
permits the discussion and the overthrow, if it 
comes to that, of what the former sets forth as 
final truths, without the acceptance of which 
there can be no union. 

"A fourth writer asks: "Why not come together 
in a loving fellowship of worship and 
work on the basis of the Christian religion as 
propounded by Jesus and his elect ones in the 
New Testament?" Upon this a fifth writer remarks 
that upon it all churches, Greek, Roman, 
Protestant orthodox and Protestant heterodox, 
ought to be able to unite, as they one and all 
"claim to hold a primitive belief and to 
practice the primitive ordinances." Whether 
he meant it or not he revealed the absurdity 
of attempting to find a basis of union in that 
which in its very nature is the cause of disunion, 
and which was never more incisive than 



R1508 : page 85 
PALESTINE. 



"A good land and a large, a land flowing with milk and 
honey."— Exod. 3:8. 

Blest land of Judea! Thrice hallowed of song, 
Where the holiest of memories pilgrim-like throng: 
In the shade of thy palms, by the shores of thy sea, 
On the hills of thy beauty, my heart is with thee. 

With the eye of a spirit, I look on thy shore, 
Where pilgrim and prophet have lingered before; 
With the glide of a spirit, I traverse the sod 
Made bright by the steps of the angels of God. 

Blue seas of the hills! in my spirit I hear 
Thy waters, Gennesaret, chime on my ear; 
Where the lowly and just with the people sat down, 
And the spray on the dust of his sandals was thrown. 

Beyond are Bethulia's mountains of green, 
And the desolate hills of the wild Gadarene; 
And I pause on the goat crags of Tabor to see 
The gleam of thy waters, O dark Galilee! 

Hark! a sound in the valley where, swollen and strong, 
Thy river, O Kishon, is sweeping along; 
Where the Canaanite strove with Jehovah in vain, 
And thy torrent grew dark with the blood of the slain. 

There, down from his mountain, stern Zebulon came, 
And Napthali's stay, with his eyeballs of flame, 
And the chariots of Jabin rolled harmlessly on, 
For the strength of the Lord was Abinoam's son! 

There sleep the still rocks, and the caverns which rang 
To the song which the beautiful prophetess sang, 
When the princes of Issachar stood by her side, 
And the shout of a host in its triumph replied. 

Lo, Bethlehem's hill-site before me is seen, 
With the mountains around and the valleys between, 
There rested the shepherds of Judah, and there 
The song of the angels rose sweet on the air. 

And Bethany's palm-trees in beauty still throw 
Their shadows at noon on the ruins below; 
But where are the sisters who hastened to greet 



The lowly Redeemer, and sit at his feet? 

I tread where the twelve in their wayfaring trod; 
I stand where they stood, with the chosen of God- 
Where his blessing was heard, and his lessons were taught, 
Where the blind were restored and the healing was 
wrought. 

Oh, here with his flock the sad Wanderer came— 
These hills He toiled over in grief are the same— 
The founts where He drank by the wayside still flow, 
And the same airs are blowing which breathed on His 
brow. 

And throned on her hills sits Jerusalem yet, 
But with dust on her forehead and chains on her feet; 
For the crown of her pride to the mocker hath gone, 
And the holy shechinah is dark where it shone. 

But wherefore this dream of the earthly abode 
Of humanity clothed in the brightness of God? 
There my spirit but turned from the outward and dim, 
It could gaze, even now, on the presence of Him. 

Not in clouds and in terrors, but gentle as when 
In love and in meekness He moved among men; 
And the voice which breathed peace to the waves of 

the sea, 
In the hush of my spirit would whisper to me! 

And what if my feet may not tread where He stood, 
Nor my ears hear the dashing of Galilee's flood, 
Nor my eyes see the cross which he bowed Him to bear, 
Nor my knees press Gethsemane's garden of prayer. 

R1508 : page 86 

Yet, loved of the Father, thy spirit is near 
To the meek and the lowly and penitent here; 
And the voice of thy love is the same even now, 
As at Bethany's tomb, or on Olivet's brow. 

Oh, the outward hath gone!— but in glory and power, 
The spirit surviveth the things of an hour; 
Unchanged, undecaying, its Pentecost flame 
On the heart's secret altar is burning the same. 
-J. G. Whittier. 



R1505 : page 86 

THE ONENESS OF THE DIVINE FAMILY. 



"I pray for them... which thou hast given me; for 
they are thine; and thou hast given them to me; and I 
am glorified in them."— John 17:9,10. 

There is a touching pathos in this prayer of 
our Lord for his disciples as he was about to 
leave them which draws us very near to his 
loving heart; especially when he adds, "Neither 
pray I for these alone [then present with him], 
but for them also which shall believe on me 
through their word; that they all may be one, 
as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that 
they also may be one in us, that the world may 
believe that thou hast sent me. And the glory 
which thou gavest me I have given them, that 
they may be one, even as we are one— I in them 
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect 
in one, and that the world may know that thou 
hast sent me and hast loved them as thou hast 
loved me."— Verses 20-23. 

As we come to consider this beautiful expression 
of the Lord's sentiments with reference to 
the Church, we catch a glimpse of the glory of 
the blessed oneness of the divine family. It is 
a oneness of purpose, a oneness of confidence, 
a oneness of sympathy, a oneness of love, a 
oneness of honor, and a oneness of mutual 
possession. This oneness our Lord described 
as already existing between himself and the 
Father, but so far as his disciples were concerned 
it was and still is only prospective; and 
its full accomplishment is the ideal goal towards 
which we are taught to aspire. 

But let us study this exemplified oneness more 
closely that we may be enabled the more fully 
to enter into it. In the first place we notice 
that the one purpose which is common to both 
the Father and the Son is the Father's purpose, 
which was gradually revealed to the Son in due 
time and order, whose it also became by adoption. 
Since Jesus himself said, "Of that day 
and hour knoweth no man, no not the angels 
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the 
Father" only (Mark 13:32), it is manifest that 
the revelation of that plan to him was a gradual 
one; and that he was led into the knowledge of its 
various features as they became due to be worked 
out through his instrumentality. Thus he was 
allowed to grow in knowledge; and thus, too, 
he was spared the sad spectacle of subsequent 
trouble which also lay along the pathway of the 
divine plan. Thus, while he joyfully worked 
out the grand plan of creation (John 1:3; Prov. 8:22-31), 
he probably knew nothing of God's 
purpose for the subsequent permission of evil 
and the necessity for the great work of redemption. 



Before he came to that test of faith in God 

his confidence in his almighty power, wisdom 

and love had been firmly established by the experiences 

of the past. For centuries he had seen 

his mighty works, marked his wondrous wisdom 

and experienced his tender love. Could he 

doubt him then when another feature of his 

plan made manifest the great work of redemption 

and restitution, and gave to him the privilege 

of undertaking this work, also for the joy 

that the Father set before him? No: doubtless 

he did not at first realize the depths of humiliation 

and sorrow through which he must pass, 

but, step by step, along the painful way of humiliation 

and suffering, his faith in the Father, 

founded upon his previous experimental knowledge, 

sustained him, as it is written— "By his 

knowledge shall my righteous servant justify 

many."— Isa. 53:11. 

We next notice between the Father and the 
Son a beautiful oneness of confidence. The 
Son trusted the Father fully— at first, because 
it was easy and natural. Created in the likeness 
of God, trust in the Being who brought 
him into existence was spontaneous, and experience 
served but to develop and establish it. And 
the Father trusted the Son fully— first, because 
he recognized in him the inherent principles of 
righteousness and truth and filial loyalty which 

R1505 : page 87 

he himself had given him; and, as the course 
of time and experience developed and the more 
firmly established his Son in righteousness, his 
confidence in him became firmly established. 
And so strong was the Father's confidence in 
the subsequent fidelity of his beloved Son, that 
he did not hesitate to declare the results of his 
faithfulness thousands of years before he even 
began the work of redemption. He even declared 
all the special features of his work, by the 
mouth of his holy prophets at various intervals 
for four thousand years before he began the 
work. And still he declares that the work shall 
in due time be gloriously accomplished. How 
wonderful and how beautiful is this mutual 
confidence! 

We further notice a oneness of sympathy between 
the Father and the Son. The Son glories 
in the Father's plan, saying, "I delight to do 
thy will, O my God." He delighted in it because 
he discovered therein the worthy features 
of his Father's glorious character; and though 
his faith may have been temporarily tested 
by the permission of evil, his knowledge of 



God's character and resources and of the 
depth of his wisdom did not permit him to 
doubt, but held him still in loving trust in his 
infinite goodness and grace, and therefore in 
readiness to acquiesce fully in the measures 
proposed for the final triumph of righteousness 
and truth. 

And the Father was likewise in loving sympathy 
with the Son, not permitting him to be 
tried above what he was able to bear; and not 
leaving him to bear any trial alone, but always 
granting him the light of his countenance and 
a joyful sense of admiring approval (John 11:42; 
Matt. 3:17), except when, for our sakes, he permitted 
him for a moment to feel that he was 
forsaken; when, in the anguish of his soul, he 
cried out at this unusual experience, "My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" 

Now mark the oneness of love manifested. 
In every act we have already noted we have 
seen it expressed. It was mutual love that delighted 
to manifest and express mutual confidence, 
that gloried in the same loving and benevolent 
purposes, that sympathized fully with 
each other's thoughts and feelings, and that delighted 
in the close and blessed relationship of 
Father and Son. The Father did not treat the 
Son as a servant and hide his purposes from 
him, but delighted to take him into his confidence 
in so far as his wisdom and prudence 
dictated— i.e., as the truth became meat in 
due season to him. And, in turn, the Son did 
not serve the Father as a hireling, but as a son 
with a common interest. The Father declared, 
"This is my beloved Son;" and the Son said, 
"I delight to do thy will." 

How blessed the fellowship! It was a fellowship 
of joy and a fellowship of suffering— of 
joy in a common anticipation of the future 
glory; and of suffering in mutual participation 
of the preliminary trials to secure that end. 
The Son suffered in his humiliation and his dying 
agony; and the Father suffered in giving 
his only begotten Son— an intensity of suffering 
which the loving, yearning hearts of devoted 
parents can best imagine and appreciate. 

There was further a recognized oneness of 
possessions clearly expressed by our Lord, who 
declared, "All things that the Father hath are 
mine." (John 16:15.) And the Apostle says, 
God hath appointed the Son the "heir of all 
things," and hath "set him at his own right 
hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality 
and power and might and dominion, 
and every name that is named, not only in this 
world, but also in that which is to come."— 



Heb. 1:1,2; Eph. 1:20,21. 

And lastly we notice a oneness of honor. 
In honor each seems to prefer the other. The 
Father says, Let all men honor the Son, even 
as they honor the Father. (John 5:23.) God 
has made him the brightness of his glory and 
the express image of his person, and exalted 
him to his own right hand, to the chief seat of 
power in his kingdom, giving him all power in 
heaven and in earth. --Heb. 1:2,3; Matt. 28:18. 

In the work of creation he has set him forth 
in great prominence and glory, saying, "Without 
him was not anything made that was made." 
In the work of redemption and restitution God 
has set him forth so prominently that his name 
is the theme on every tongue, almost to the 
eclipse of the Father's own glory, who of necessity 
is himself greater than the Son (1 Cor. 15:27), 

R1505 : page 88 

and to whom the glory pre-eminently 
belongs, as the Son also declares, saying, "My 
Father is greater than I;" and again, "I can 
of mine own self do no thing.... The Father 
that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works."— 
John 5:30; 14:10. 

The Son's corresponding anxiety to glorify 
the Father is most marked in the instance when, 
realizing that he was approaching the dreadful 
hour of his dying agony, he exclaimed, "Now 
is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? 
Father save me from this hour? But for this 
cause came I unto this hour. Father glorify 
thy name"— even at this cost to me. (John 12:27,28.) 
Again we hear him say, "Father, 
the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy 
Son also may glorify thee." (John 17:1.) 
And when the great work of redemption and 
restitution is accomplished we see him delivering 
up the kingdom to God, the Father, and 
subjecting himself to his further direction that 
Jehovah himself may be universally recognized 
as all in all. (1 Cor. 15:24,28.) And we, 
like him, may surely trust that his purposes for 
the ages to follow will but the further express 
and emphasize the same lines of his glorious 
character— his justice, his wisdom, his love and 
his power. 

Glorious oneness! who could suggest an improvement 
to its wondrous beauty and completeness? 
But the wonder and joy increase 
when we learn that it is also our privilege to 
come into this same blessed oneness with God. 
What! we inquire— the very same oneness as 
above described? Yes; undoubtedly it is our 



privilege to enter into the very same relationship 
and privileges and blessings. To this end 
consider the exceeding great and precious promises 
and see that it is ours to have the same oneness 
with God— of purpose, of confidence, of 
sympathy, of love, of honor and of possession. 

The same plan of God is presented to and 
adopted by us, and we also are invited to become 
co-workers with God in carrying it out 
(2 Cor. 6:1); and in so doing we are counted 
in with Christ Jesus as filling up the measure of 
the sufferings of the anointed body necessary 
to the accomplishment of that plan. Our heavenly 
Father also similarly manifests his confidence 
in us— in the loyalty of our hearts toward him 
and in the sincerity of our consecration to him 
—even though he recognizes our inherent weaknesses 
and inability to carry out fully our own 
determinations. But, notwithstanding this, so 
great is his confidence in our sincerity and integrity 
of heart, that, on our profession of faith 
and consecration, he fully accepts us as his sons 
and heirs, supplementing our weaknesses and 
shortcomings with the all-sufficient merit of our 
Redeemer, in whom we humbly trust. And 
not only so, but as sons, honored and beloved, 
he makes known to us also, his secret counsels, 
which others cannot know (Matt. 13:11), and 
invites us to confide in him as children and to 
speak to him freely of all that concerns us, in 
full assurance of his loving interest even in our 
smallest affairs. (Psa. 103:13,14.) And then 
he commits a portion of his great work to us. 
He gives us certain talents, certain portions of 
his goods, and tells us to invest them for him 
according to our best judgment as to the profitableness 
of the results, not dictating all the 
minutiae of the management as to hireling servants, 
but merely submitting to us the general 
principles which should govern us. Thus, for 
instance, he gives us his plan as to the work in 
hand with such general directions as, not to 
cast our pearls before swine; to be wise as serpents 
and harmless as doves; to give meat in 
due season; to do good to all men as we have 
opportunity, but especially to the household of 
faith; and to observe the times and seasons, 
and the character of the work in each— seed-sowing 
in the spring and reaping in the harvest 
time; etc., etc. Thus with general directions 
he sends us forth— not like machines to do a 
monotonous treadmill service, but as intelligent 
beings, to use our brains as well as our hands 
and feet. So he counsels us to "study" to show 
ourselves workmen approved, and to consider 
and think, and not to be "as the horse, or as 



the mule, which have no understanding, whose 
mouth must be held in with bit and bridle." 
(Psa. 32:9.) Then, according to our zeal and 
faithfulness, not only in the use of our hands, 
but also of our brains, in the Lord's service his 
confidence in us increases and we are entrusted 
with more and more of his goods and given a 

R1505 : page 89 

corresponding sense of our heavenly Father's 
approval. And the mutual confidence and fellowship 
of purpose and work, draw our hearts 
closer and closer to the heart of the Eternal, 
and the joyful realization of sonship and mutual 
interest and confidence and sympathy fills 
our hearts. 

We are also assured of the same love from 
our heavenly Father which he exercises toward 
our Lord Jesus. The statement seems almost 
startling; but yet, hearken to our Lord's prayer 
—"I pray for them. ..that they may be one 
...that they may be made perfect in one... 
that the world may know that thou hast... 
loved them as thou hast loved me." (John 17:20-23.) 
In amazement we inquire, How 
can this be? Our Lord Jesus was always in perfect 
harmony with the Father, a son which 
gloriously reflected his likeness; but it has not 
been so with us: we were sinners and had 
nothing in us worthy of love. Yes, but we have 
been washed and cleansed, and, however imperfect 
our earthen vessels may still be, our 
hearts are perfect in his sight who is able to 
read the heart. And, as he sees us with a perfect 
heart— a perfect purpose and intention- 
striving to overcome the weaknesses and disabilities 
of our imperfect flesh, and with painful, 
yet determined, effort to do his will, and humbly 
trusting in the provision which he has made 
for our redemption from the fall, God recognizes 
in us that which is worthy of his love. 
And so our Lord Jesus gives us clearly to understand 
that the Father loves us, even as he 
loves the Son. 

And not only is this equality of the Father's 
love for us as for Christ Jesus thus declared, 
but it is also manifested; for we are called to 
be joint heirs with his Son and partakers of his 
glory; and even as all things are his, they are 
also said to be ours.— Rom. 8:17; 
1 Cor. 3:21-23. 

While such is the oneness between the heavenly 
Father and all his anointed sons, it is blessed 
also to mark the same oneness between Christ 
Jesus and his anointed brethren. The Lord 



Jesus does not selfishly grasp all the glory and 
seek to retain it for himself, but the rather with 
admiration he contemplates their acquired 
worthiness and says, They "are mine and I am 
glorified in them" (John 17:10); and he would 
have them all bound up together with himself 
in the Father's love. He would also have them 
with him, beholding and sharing the glory which 
the Father had given him from the foundation 
of the world— the glory of his mighty creative 
works, with all the other evidences of his Father's 
love.-John 17:22-24. 

Thus all the divine family are bound together 
in one bond of love and fellowship and confidence 
and sympathy and harmony and common 
interest; and the honor and glory of one are 
the honor and glory of all. The Lord's prayer 
abounds with petitions for this oneness. Mark 
the expression (verse 21)— "That they all may 
be one; as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee" 
[thy spirit or disposition and purposes and aim 
being common to us all]. Hence he would have 
us adopt the same Father's spirit, aim and purpose, 
and devote all our powers with zeal and 
faithfulness to the accomplishment of the Father's 
will. Amen, so let it be. 



page 89 

INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSON, APRIL 2, '93. 



R1505 : page 89 

THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST. 



II. QUAR., LESSON I., APR. 2, MATT. 28:1-10. 

Golden Text— "Now is Christ risen from the dead and 
become the firstfruit of them that slept."— 1 Cor. 15:20. 

The familiar account of the Lord's resurrection 
is before us, and the brief record calls 
up a train of reflections worthy of our deepest 
reverence and profoundest gratitude. In the 
resurrection of Christ we have the assurance 
that death shall not always have dominion 
over us. His death satisfied the claims of 
justice against us, and his resurrection is the 
proof to us of the Father's acceptance of his 
sacrifice— our corresponding price— for the 



cancellation of our debt. 

So important was this feature of the divine 
plan that the Apostle says that if Christ be 
not risen our faith is vain and there is no 
evidence that our sins are forgiven. (1 Cor. 15:14-18.) 
"But," he adds, "now is Christ 
risen from the dead and become the firstfruit 

R1505 : page 90 

of them that slept." (Verse 20.) And 
if the resurrection of Christ was but a first 
fruit, then the after fruits must in due time 
also appear. And so we read, "Marvel not 
at this; for the hour is coming when all that 
are in their graves shall hear his voice [the 
voice of the Son of God], and shall come 
forth; they that have done good, unto the 
resurrection of life; and they that have done 
evil unto the resurrection of judgment" 
[krisis, trial].— John 5:28,29. And again 
we read that "God hath appointed a day [the 
Millennial age] in the which he will judge 
the world in righteousness by that man 
whom he hath ordained"— Jesus Christ- 
Acts 17:31. 

Thus in the resurrection of Christ we have 
assurance of a resurrection of all men— both 
of the Church and the world. The former are 
to have part in "his resurrection"— "the first 
resurrection"— and are to be joint-heirs with 
him in his Millennial kingdom; they are to 
be kings and priests unto God, and of the 
"Seed" of promise through whom all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed (Rev. 20:6; 
Phil. 3:21; Rom. 8:17; Rev. 1:6; Gal. 3:29; 
Gen. 28:14), while the latter, through 
this risen and exalted body of which Christ 
Jesus is the head, are to be granted (offered) 
the blessings of full restitution to the former 
estate of human perfection lost in Eden,— 
a full resurrection or lifting up to human 
perfection.— Acts 3:19-21. 

It is only the long deferment of the "appointed 
day" of resurrection or restitution 
that makes this hope and promise seem like 
an idle tale, but now the time draws very 
near, as all may see who study the evidences 
presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vols. II. 
and III., "The Time is at Hand" and "Thy 
Kingdom Come." 

In this lesson we have also a beautiful example 
of the loving devotion of some of the 
Lord's followers— the Marys who improved 
the very earliest opportunity to honor him 
whom they so loved. And their devotion 



was richly rewarded in being the very first 
to see the Lord and receive from him the 
message to bear to the other disciples. 

For a particular account of our Lord's 
doings during the forty days after his resurrection, 
and the character of his change from 
natural to spiritual conditions, etc., see MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., pages 107-172. 



page 90 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1505 : page 90 
THE BOOK OF JOB. 



The Book of Job is credited with being the 
finest piece of literature in the Hebrew language. 
It is a poem: and all scholars admit 
that no translation yet given does it justice. 
Martin Luther, after reviewing his last effort to 
translate it into the German, said, "Job is suffering 
more from my version than from the taunts 
of his friends, and would prefer his dunghill 
to my translation of his lamentation." The 
Book of Job "is admitted, with hardly a dissenting 
voice, to be the most sublime religious 
poem in the literature of the world," said 
Samuel Cox. "I call that one of the grandest 
things ever written with pen. ...There is 
nothing written, in the Bible and out of it, of 
equal literary merit," said Thomas Carlisle. 

Whoever was used of God as the penman, his 
name is not given. The book is introduced 
with a prose narrative of Job's losses and sufferings, 
and of his patient endurance, then follow 
the poetic colloquies between Job and his 
three friends, then Elihu's argument, then the 
Almighty's address, then Job's confession. 
The conclusion, relating Job's return to favor 
and blessing, and his death, is in prose. 



Some have assumed that the Book of Job is 
merely a parable and Job himself, therefore, 
merely an imaginary character. But if this were 
the case, the teachings of the book would not 
be different. However, we see no cause to 
doubt that such a person did live and pass 
through the experiences related. In Ezek. 14:14 
and James 5:11, Job is classed with other 
holy men, which would not be the case were 

R1505 : page 91 

this narrative merely a parable. Besides, there 
are particular details given (respecting Job, his 
family and friends, and especially Elihu's genealogy), 
such as are not common to parables. 

The fact that Job lived one hundred and 
forty years after his adversities, or in all probably 
over two hundred years, together with the 
fact that neither he nor his friends make any 
allusion to Israel or Moses or the Law, nor to 
Abraham and God's covenant made with him, 
seems to indicate beyond doubt that he belonged 
to the Patriarchal age; possibly living about 
the same time as Abraham. His home was 
evidently in Arabia and probably not far from 
Palestine. 

Job is introduced as a man of great learning 
and influence; as a man of great piety who knew 
and reverenced God and appreciated justice; 
as a man of great generosity, who considered 
the widow and the orphaned; and as a merchant-prince 
of great wealth, who, by his numerous 
servants and three hundred camels, carried on 
an extended and very prosperous traffic. Suddenly 
disaster came upon him and he was bereft 
of his children, his wealth, his influence and 
his health. He sought in vain for an explanation 
as to why God should permit such evils to 
befall him, yet still trusted in God, saying, 
"Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him,"— 
while his wife urged that it had been without 
divine appreciation that he had sought to do 
justice and mercy all his life, and exclaimed, 
"Curse God and die!" 

His three friends came to visit him, and, taking 
much the same view, told him in lengthy 
argument that he must have been a great sinner 
and a hypocrite. But, conscious of his own 
heart-honesty toward God, Job defends himself 
and goes to too great an extreme in declaring 
his innocence, but silences his critics. He 
seems to realize his need of some one to represent 
his cause before the Lord, and cries out 
that he is as righteous as he knows how to be; 
that he cannot reason the matter with God, 



being so much beneath him in knowledge and 

power; that the wilfully wicked are not so 

troubled, while he who has pursued righteousness 

is so afflicted that life has no further 

pleasure and he wishes he had never been born. 

(Chapters 9, 10 and 16.) Feeling his own insufficiency 

R1506 : page 91 

to state his case before the great 

Jehovah he desires "a days-man [i.e., a mediator] 

betwixt" God and himself.— Chapters 9:33; 

16:21. 

Job's masterly reply to the false reasonings 
of his friends (which many improperly quote as 
inspired), and his expressions of confidence in 
God and of his ultimate deliverance, are clearly 
presented in Chapter 13:1-16. And then 
with prophetic wisdom, in Chapter 14, he presents 
a most wonderful statement of the course 
of God's dealing with mankind. 

The question which perplexed Job and confused 
his reasonings was the same that for 
centuries has confused others of God's people; 
namely, Why does God permit evil (calamities, 
afflictions, etc.) to come upon his faithful servants? 
and why are the wicked permitted to 
flourish? But not until the Gospel dispensation 
was it possible for any to know the mind 
of God on this subject; for it is one of the 
"deep things" which could only be revealed 
by the Spirit of God, and only to those begotten 
of that spirit as Paul explains. (1 Cor. 2:10-14.) 
And the Holy Spirit was not thus 
given, as a guide and teacher, until after Christ 
had redeemed us and ascended up on high, 
there to present his sacrifice as the price of 
our return to divine favor, peace and 
communion. 

Although many are still in the dark on this 
subject, it is now open and clear to all the 
earnest ones to whom "it is granted to know 
the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven," to 
understand "the deep things of God." (Matt. 13:11; 
1 Cor. 2:10.) These see that the reign 
of evil, the reign of sin and death, under 
Satan, the prince of this world, is permitted for 
two reasons: first, that all men may gain a full 
experience of the exceeding sinfulness of sin 
and the bitterness of its legitimate fruit; and 
secondly, that God's people may be fully tried 
and tested as to their loyalty to God in the 
shadow of affliction and trial, as well as in the 
sunshine of health and prosperity. Thus, while 
God did not directly cause the evil state of things 
which surrounds us in nature and among men, 



but let it come upon men as the legitimate result 

R1506 : page 92 

or fruit of disobedience, sin, yet he does 

make use of even the wrath of man and the sins 

of men and the animosity of Satan to work out 

grand designs which they do not comprehend, 

and of which his children know only by faith 

in his Word of revelation. For instance, how 

little did Satan and those malicious Jewish 

priests and Pharisees and those heartless Roman 

soldiers know that they were assisting in the 

working out of the divine plan when tempting, 

mocking, insulting and crucifying the Lamb 

of God! And so it is with the many afflictions 

of God's people— especially those of the "little 

flock," "the bride of Christ,"— they are designed 

to fit and polish them for the greater 

usefulness and honor in the future developments 

of God's great plan; and thus, regardless of 

the wilfulness or the ignorance of the persecutors, 

these trials of faith and patience are working 

out for such a far more exceeding and 

eternal weight of glory— preparing the called 

ones to be heirs of glory, by cultivating (in 

those who are properly exercised by such experiences), 

patience, experience, brotherly sympathy 

and love— which is God-like-ness. Such, 

and such only, can rejoice in tribulation and 

realize that all things (bad, as well as good, 

unfavorable, as well as favorable) will be overruled 

in God's providence for their ultimate 

benefit. 

But, returning to our consideration of Job, 
let us note in Chapter 14 some of his prophetic 
wisdom. The first four verses graphically 
picture what all of experience realize— that human 
life under present conditions is full of trial 
and sorrow, from the cradle to the tomb. And 
Job shows that he realizes that as a son of fallen 
parentage he could not be perfect, free from 
sin, "clean," in the full sense of that word. 

In verses 5,6, he tells the Lord that he recognizes 
the fact that the authority and power 
to limit man's days are in his hands, but urges 
(not seeing the ministry of trouble), Why not 
let me and all men live out our short time in 
peace— even as we would not afflict a hireling 
who already has a heavy, burdensome task! 

Verses 7-10 are close reasonings respecting 
the utter hopelessness of man in death, so far 
as any powers of his own are concerned. A 
tree may die and yet its root retain life, which, 
under favorable conditions may spring up into 
another tree. But when man dies there is no 



root left, no spark of life remains— he giveth 
up the spirit of life, and where is he? 

Having confessed that there is no ground for 
hope inherent in man, Job begins to express 
the only, the real hope of our race— a resurrection 
—see verses 12,13. Man lies down in 
death and loses all power to arouse himself— 
nor can he be resuscitated from the sleep of 
death by anyone, until God's due time— the 
resurrection morning, the Millennial day— 
when the present symbolic "heavens" shall 
have passed away, and the "new heavens" or 
new spiritual ruling power— Christ's Kingdom 
—shall have come into control of the world. 
In this Job fully agrees with the teachings of 
our Lord and the apostles. 

The more he thinks of that blessed time when 
evil shall no more have dominion, but when a 
King shall reign in righteousness and princes 
execute judgment, the more he wishes that he 
might die and be at rest, and exclaims (verse 13), 
"Oh, that thou would'st hide me in the 
grave [sheol]; that thou would'st keep me secret 
[hidden] until thy wrath be past; that thou 
would'st appoint me a set time and remember 
me." Job had faith in a resurrection, else he 
would never have uttered this prayer for death, 
—for hiding in the grave. But he preferred 
death, and desired to "sleep" (verse 12) until 
the "morning," for one reason only— that he 
might have no further experience with sin and 
with God's wrath— evil. 

While a short period in the end of the Gospel 
age is specially called "the day of wrath and 
revelation of the righteous judgment of God," 
because it will be "A time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation," yet the entire 
period from the time when Adam fell is 
called a time of divine wrath, and properly so, 
because in all this long period "the wrath of 
God is revealed against all unrighteousness," 
in a variety of ways. While love is a controlling 
principle in the divine government, it can 
operate only in harmony with justice and wisdom; 
and it was both just and wise to let man 
feel the real weight of condemnation to death 

R1506 : page 93 

incurred by wilful transgression, in order that 
when love should in due time provide a ransom 
and a resurrection, the culprit might the 
more gladly avail himself of the provided favors 
of restitution and everlasting life. Thus, death 
and all the evils now permitted to come upon 
the culprit race (in which also the "new creatures 



in Christ" are given a share, for their development 
in grace) are manifestations of God's 
wrath which will be yet further shown in the 
great time of trouble; to be followed by full 
and clear manifestations of divine love and 
favor in Christ and the glorified Church during 
the Millennial age.— Rom. 1:18. 

Job desired to be hidden in the grave until 
the reign of sin and death should be ended;— 
until in due time the light of the goodness of 
God, shining in the face of Jesus Christ, our 
Lord, shall bless all nations;— until, as the Sun 
of Righteousness, Christ shall shine upon humanity 
with healing beams. It was for this 
culmination that Job longed and prayed and 
waited. 

In verses 14 and 15, he puts the question 
pointedly, as though to determine and settle 
his faith; but he immediately answers affirmatively. 
"Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee 
[and awake out of the sleep of Adamic death. 
Compare John 5:28,29]: Thou wilt have a desire 
to the work of thine hands"— for his people 
are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus.— 
Eph. 2:10. 

When Job had refuted the arguments of his 
three friends, Elihu (whose name signifies, God 
himself) spoke from a different standpoint, reproving 
the three friends as well as Job himself. 
Elihu shows Job that he had been reasoning in 
part from a wrong premise— that he must not 
expect to fully comprehend all the ways of one 
so far above him, but must trust in God's justice 
and in his wisdom. And in Chapter 33:23,24 
he shows the one thing needful to man's 
recovery from the power of death and his restoration 
to divine favor, saying, "If there be with 
him a messenger as defender, one of a thousand 
[i.e., a rare one] to declare his own righteousness 
for man, then will God be gracious unto 
him [man] and say, Release him from going 
down to the grave: I have found a ransom." 

This is indeed the case with man. God's 
wisdom and justice cannot be impugned— the 
sentence of death is justly upon all men through 
father Adam (Rom. 5:12), but God has provided 
us "a days-man," an advocate, Christ 
Jesus our Lord; and he, in harmony with the 
Father's plan, became a man, and then gave 
himself a ransom-price for all by paying the 
death-penalty that was upon Adam. And as 
soon as "the bride," otherwise called "his 
body" and "the temple," is complete, this 
great Mediator will stand forward to declare 
his righteousness as for or applicable to every 
one who will accept it when brought to a full 



knowledge of God's provision. 

Then will follow restitution, as pictured in 
verses 25 and 26. Physically these for whom 
the Mediator stands shall be restored to a perennial 
youth, in which death and decay will 
find no place: they shall find acceptance and 
communion with God in joy and peace; and 
he will restore to them the original perfection 
lost through sin in Eden. But an acknowledgment 
of God's justice and that the restitution 
was unmerited will be required as is indicated 
by verses 27,28: "He will chant it before 
men, and say: I have sinned and perverted the 
right; and it was not requited me. He has 
redeemed my soul from going into the pit and 

R1507 : page 93 

my life that it may be brought to the light." 

In conclusion Jehovah addresses Job, reproving 
his temerity in attempting, with his little 
knowledge, to judge God. This Job acknowledges, 
and finds peace in trusting God. Job's 
three friends, however, are severely reproved by 
God; but when their sacrifice is offered for them 
by Job they are restored to divine favor, while 
at once Job's prosperity returns— his friends 
and influence, the same number of children as 
before, and his wealth exactly doubled,— for he 
had twice as many flocks and herds and camels. 

This ending of Job's career with a general 
restitution, is incomprehensible to those who 
have never seen that the plan of God in Christ 
provides for a time of restitution of all things 
lost in Adam, to all of his race who will accept 
them under the terms of the New Covenant. 
(Acts 3:19-21.) But those who do see this 
plan of God can readily see, too, that Job's experience 

R1507 : page 94 

was not only actual, but also typical. 
He seems to represent mankind. Man was at 
first in divine likeness and favor with all things 
made subject to him. (Psa. 8:4-8.) Because 
of Adam's sin Satan* obtained an influence in 
human affairs which has resulted in degradation, 
sickness and death; but God has never really 
forsaken his creatures, and is even now waiting 
to be gracious unto all in and through Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 



*The account of Satan's conversation with God concerning 
Job should be understood as allegorical— after the 



style of "Pilgrim's Progress." 

page 94 

AFFLICTIONS VIEWED DIFFERENTLY. 



II. QUAR., LESSON II., APRIL 9, JOB 5:17-27. 

Golden Text— "For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth. 
-Heb. 12:6. 

This lesson is from the words of Eliphaz, 
whom God reproved for speaking unadvisedly 
according to human philosophy. It 
was his own wisdom as expressed in verse 27. 
The same false impressions prevail in 
many minds, dark respecting God's dealings 
with his children. The Golden Text expresses 
the true view. 

page 94 

JOB'S CONFIDENCE. 



II. QUAR., LESSON III., APRIL 16, JOB 23:1-10. 

Golden Text— "What I do thou knowest not now, but 
thou shaltknow hereafter."— John 13:7. 

Job's error in assuming himself just before 
God has already been shown. However, his 
faith in God is commendable. 

page 94 

JOB'S CONFESSION AND RESTORATION. 



II. QUAR., LESSON IV., APRIL 23, JOB 42:1-10. 

Golden Text— "Ye have heard of the patience of Job 
and have seen the end of the Lord: that the Lord is very 
pitiful and of tender mercy."— James 5:11. 

See article foregoing. 



R1507 : page 94 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



page 94 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-How grateful 
I feel that the Lord has brought me 
the precious "meat in due season;" and, in 
common with many of the other dear ones 
of the household, I love to feast upon these 
inspiring truths. But I am beginning more 
and more to see the grave responsibility 
connected with the entrusting of the Lord's 
truth to us in this testing time; and what 
a testing time it indeed is! How some are 
falling away on the right hand and on the 
left! Well might the prophet, referring to 
this day— the day of his wrath now beginning 
—exclaim, "Who shall be able to stand?" 
But, praise the name of the Lord, if our feet 
are planted squarely on the Rock, Christ 
Jesus and his ransom, none of these things 
will be able to move us; and though a thousand 
may fall at our side, it shall not come 
near us, for the "everlasting arms shall be 
underneath us." 

The Lord has graciously brought us "out 
of darkness into his marvelous light;" but 
unless our dying in the Lord is complete, 
with self and selfish ambitions buried, the 
tendency will be, as it too often is, to think 
we know even more than God has revealed, 
and to go beyond the limit of his Word and 
his glorious plan. "Therefore we ought to 
give the more earnest heed to the things 
which we have heard, lest at any time we 
should let them slip."— Heb. 2:1. 

But it can be only a little while longer before 
our time is ended. Let us pray the 
Lord to help our feet onward in the narrow 
way, that we stumble not nor fall, and, being 
"diligent, may be found of him in peace, 
without spot, and blameless." Take courage, 
then! "Let us lift up our heads, for our redemption 
draweth nigh." Pray for your 
brother who sometimes is weak and tempted, 
as I make mention of you in my prayers— 
"that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of glory, may give unto you the 
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge 
ofhim."-Eph. 1:16,17. 

Yours in his name, J. A. MITCHELL. 



R1507 : page 94 

New York. 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., DEAR BRETHREN: 

—Having withdrawn my subscriptions 
from all so-called orthodox institutions, I 
feel that I can give to the "Good Hopes" 
Fund $25.00 a month, as my offering for the 
spread of the truth that has done so much 
for me. Not having many talents in other 
directions, I want to use this one to my full 
extent. The "Evil One" tries to make me 
think that I can not afford it; but as all I 

R1507 : page 95 

have belongs to him who died for me, it is 
but giving back to him that which is his. 

Occasionally I have an opportunity to 
speak for the truth, but in most cases find a 
very deep seated prejudice against it, though 
from what I, at times, hear about it, the stand 
we have taken has made many Christian 
people think. The other day a friend asked 
me to subscribe to a Methodist missionary 
box, but I refused to do so, and thus made 
an opportunity to speak to her about the 
truth. She seemed quite interested, and 
said that when she had heard of my course 
she was astonished, I being the last one she 
would have thought of as leaving the church; 
but when she heard the reasons, she was far 
more charitable, and said that I was much 
misunderstood. 

Was in New York to hear Brother Russell 
preach a few Sundays ago, and was 
much refreshed and greatly profited thereby. 

Believe me, your brother in the faith once 
delivered to the saints. M. T. LEWIS. 



page 95 

Michigan. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am one of 

the many readers of your valuable paper, and 
still want it as an aid to help me along the 
"narrow way;" for it ever comes freighted 
with sweet ministries of religion, and is indeed 
"meat in due season"— giving strength 
to all those who would walk therein with 
earnest consecration. 

I may say that for the last two years it 
has been a sorrowful way for me; for it has 
brought me many afflictions. When the 



bitter cup was pressed to my lips, I found it 

hard to bring the prayer of my fainting heart 

to God, and say submissively, "Thy will be 

done." And lest this situation bring temptations, 

I feel I must be active, if I would 

have God still feed my hungry soul with 

heavenly manna. I have always believed 

that Christians owe their fullest love and 

service to Him who gave himself as our ransom-price: 

but I cannot say this has been 

my experience, specially in regard to service, 

for I have been too easily satisfied to sit 

quietly down and let the spirit of God work 

in my heart, satisfying myself with ardent 

expressions and songs and prayers, and have 

put aside the stern realities of a life with 

Christ. I often read the experience of Paul 

as told by himself, and say, This is the school 

by which he reached that true experience 

which worketh hope, which maketh not 

ashamed; while I cannot say I "glory in 

tribulation," for I have not been "zealously 

affected always in good things," or "gloried 

in the cross of our Lord Jesus with humbleness 

of mind and meekness." And now that 

a chastening hand has shown me the measure 

of my weakness and my unproven Christian 

life, my soul is longing for something better. 

I do want the victory through our Lord 

Jesus Christ; I do want to retain that robe 

of righteousness which Christ gives to all 

his chosen ones; and I am resting my hope 

on his finished work and unchanging love. 

I wonder if I could be of advantage to the 
cause of truth as a colporteur. Situated as 
I now am, I can give all my time to this 
specially useful service. I do not want to 
make any mistake, but to make the work a 
success, and will abide by the judgment of the 
Tract Society as to whether I would best 
enter this field of service. I have never 
done such work, and do not know that I am 
adapted to it, but I realize the responsibility 
of this harvest time, and am willing to lay 
this in God's hand, believing he will guide 
and give spiritual discernment. 

And now I want to say that the truth as 
set forth in the MILLENNIAL DAWN series is 
wonderful and glorious to me; and I am glad 
to acknowledge the strength and grace I have 
derived from reading and studying the three 
volumes. 

May God bless you all for showing the 
religion of Jesus Christ in so cheering a light 
—the hopes and promises it sets before all, 
the patience and resignation it inspires under 



affliction. I believe it is Scriptural to request 
the prayers of God's people, and I need 
this help. Pray for me, and for all the afflicted 
ones. 
In Christian love, MRS. W. P. 



R1507 : page 95 

Texas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Owing to a 

combination of circumstances it has been 
some time since I last wrote you. As soon 
as I received the five sets of DAWNS, I 
began to distribute them where I thought 
they would do the most good. So far, there 
has not been a dissenting voice among all 
who have read them. One friend was so 
pleased with Vol. I that he asked for Vols. 
II. and III., and said that, if he were a minister, 
he would sever his connection with all 
ecclesiastical organizations, and preach the 
doctrine taught in those books. 

In a prayer meeting recently the question 
was asked, "What penalty did Adam and 
Eve suffer for their sin? or, were they eternally 
damned?" A physician present, who 

R1507 : page 96 

also has been reading, replied in the sentiment 
of DAWN, causing no little confusion, 
which did not end there, nor has it ended yet. 

The pastor was informed of the episode, 
and inquired of the physician where he got 
those books, and was told that I put them 
into his hand. This raised a war-cloud against 
me, but I have already committed myself, and, 
unless shown that I am wrong, I will never 
retract a single word. I do not know what it 
will cost me, but I am satisfied that, whatever 
the cost, the good Lord will foot the bill. 

Fraternally, N. G. MURPHY. 



page 96 

Missouri. 
DEAR BROTHER:-My report for the week 
ending to-day is fifty-two DAWNS, fourteen 
Booklets and five Bibles, No. 307-a little 
better showing than last week. My work 
here has not been very profitable financially, 
yet I trust that I will receive my reward in 



"that day," that every thing done (though 
little) will result in good to the Master's 
cause, and that the great Reaper will be 
pleased with his servant's work. 
Yours in the Lord, W. A. DAVIS. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Enclosed please find 
$1.00 for the TOWER. The "Old Theology" 
is ever new! In the middle of this day and 
the crotchety utterances of "advanced theological 
thought" (?), how blessed to have a 
gospel that is bolted, riveted and clinched— 
by divine truth— to the eternal throne! "Behold, 
I thought," said Naaman; and so it has 
been with many: They "think"— but to what 
purpose? They continually say, "Abana and 
Pharpar are better than the waters of Israel." 
Better or not better is not the question. Obedience 
is the subject in hand— not metaphysics, 
not philosophy, not speculation! Platonic 
religion is not Christianity. 

Please pardon this digression. I started 
to say that I like to read the TOWER. 

Yours hopefully, J. H. VENT. 



R1507 : page 96 

British Columbia. 

MY DEAR BRETHREN:-In December last I 
received through your colporteur the three published 
volumes of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, 
for which I desire to express my deepest gratitude. 
Since then they have been my constant 
study. They came in due time to a mind prepared 
by the spirit for the reception of the great 
light therein contained. The outlines of the 
first two volumes were grasped as quickly as the 
facts could be verified from the written Word 
of God, and now they are proving, together 
with the precious third volume, truly a "helping 
hand in Bible Study." The requirements 
in the remark of Ralph Waldo Emerson, that 
"The value of a principle is the number of 
things it will explain; and there is no good 
theory of disease which does not at once suggest 
a cure," are most fully satisfied in these 
volumes. The truths now due illuminate every 
page of the Holy Scriptures, and the plan of 
God daily becomes clearer. 

For some years the Lord has shown me that 
the nominal church had become a great social 



organization, filled with the spirit of this world, 
in which the truth-hungry soul sought in vain 
for growth in the knowledge of Christ. My 
friends and relatives (with the exception of my 
dear wife) have been greatly distressed and very 
angry with me for expressing my belief that the 
nominal church was not the body of Christ, 
that her days were numbered, and that very 
shortly she would become a thing of the past. 
I did not see the prophecies relative to this 
matter, but the fact became firmly established 
in my mind. 

For some eighteen months past I have been 
patiently waiting, watching and praying for a 
message from on High; and during this time 
the conviction was deepening that more light 
would be sent, together with a message to go to 
work in the vineyard. I thank God that this 
light has now come and with it also the message 
looked for. My only desire now is to be 
permitted to help spread the glorious tidings 
that "the Lord reigneth," to be one of the 
"feet," to give my life to this most important 
of all work. I observe in Mr. Russell's preface 
to the third volume of the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
series that you make arrangements to send out 
colporteurs, and I wish to have the opportunity 
of being one of them. Every day I seem to 
hear the Lord saying to me, "Give yourself entirely 
to me and my work. What have you to 
do with the things of this world? You are not 
of it, you have now no interest in the aims and 
ambitions of worldly men that you should be 
found in their service." My wife is one of the 
covenanted ones and is also desirous of working 
for the Saviour. I observe that your conditions 
for this service are just what our Lord 
Jesus himself requires of his own, of those who 
would be his disciples indeed, namely, entire 
consecration to do his work, even unto death. 
It is unnecessary to say that I am willing to go 
wherever I may be sent, and to carry the message 
in the way that your experience suggests. 
The whole matter now rests in the Lord's direction; 
for "without me ye can do nothing." 

Your servant in Christ, G. C. 



page 98 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION. 

As per appointment in our last issue quite a 
goodly company gathered at Bible House 
chapel, Allegheny, on March 30th. About two 
hundred were present, chiefly the Allegheny 
congregation— about fifty coming from the surrounding 
towns of Pennsylvania; New York, 
Ohio, District of Columbia, Missouri, Iowa, 
Kansas and Nevada being also represented. 

Eighteen adults symbolized their full consecration 
even unto death and their hope of a 
resurrection, by immersion. The interest was 
good, the feeling deep; and while the signification 
of the unleavened bread and the unfermented 
fruit of the vine were explained, hearts 



full of gratitude for the great gift of God's 
love promised renewed zeal in being broken 
in the service of the Lord as members of the 
one loaf (1 Cor. 10:17), and in drinking of his 
cup of self-denial and suffering for righteousness' 
sake. 

R1514:page98 

PROTESTANT ENGLAND. 

The following we take from a recent number 
of the Pall Mall Gazette:— "For the first time 
for 334 years, or at any rate since the Reformation, 
the Mayor and corporation of Southampton 
[England], on Sunday morning, in 
their official robes, and attended by the mace 
bearers and borough police, attended divine 
service at St. Joseph's Roman Catholic Church. 
The occasion was made a great festival, and 
Mozart's Seventh Mass was sung to the accompaniment 
of a string band.... In the course 
of his sermon Canon Scannell said that day 
was the highest and most beautiful day for 
Southampton after the last three hundred years 
of estrangement and mismanagement. There 
had been no brighter day than that in his life, 
which had brought them together for the first 
time for three centuries. That day had been 
approaching for the last twenty years. Some 
of his best friends had been Protestants, and he 
felt happy that that day had come which had 
brought them together. At the close the civic 
body was escorted from the church by the 
canon, the officiating priests, acolytes, and choir 
in their vestments, carrying the candles, crosses, 
banners, etc., and the procession was watched 
by thousands of people. It is, perhaps, worthy 
of note that not one member of the corporation 
is a Roman Catholic, and the Southampton 
corporation are said to be the first public body 
in the country to officially attend a Roman 
Catholic Church in this way." 

And thus it is that Roman Catholic influence 
is increasing. Poor, weak-kneed, short-sighted 
Protestantism ! 

BINDERS FOR 1893-1894. 

Patent Binders of a size suitable for the 
TOWER for two years' issues, and with the name 
of our journal and the dates 1893-1894 stamped 
in gilt on the side, are now ready. Those 
therefore who hereafter order Binders should 
specify whether they want these for coming 
years or those for 1891-1892 which have no 



dates stamped on them. These are extremely 
desirable for preserving your TOWERS in a convenient 
form for future reference. Price fifty 
cents each. 



R1508 : page 99 
