From Our Readers
Internet  I am studying computer engineering, and I want to compliment you on the series “The Internet—Is It for You?” (July 22, 1997) The articles were concise, informative, and scientifically accurate. You did not endorse the pointless prejudice and alarm that has surrounded the Internet. On the other hand, you did not hide the real dangers.
L. E., Italy
I teach computer classes, and to keep myself up-to-date, I often buy computer-related magazines. Not one has been courageous enough to talk so openly about the pros and cons of the Internet.
A. A. S., Brazil
I had been hearing a lot about the Internet lately, but I could not understand it clearly. Your series explained the subject in a very simple and easy-to-follow way.
A. H., India
You wrote in a way that even readers with little or no knowledge of the World Wide Web could easily understand. You also helped us to pause and calculate the expense of using this service.
E. K., Ethiopia
Getting Blamed  I am 15 years old, and the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Is It Always My Fault?” (July 22, 1997) made tears roll down my face. I am the baby of the family and get picked on all the time. Thank you for writing about this.
N. H., United States
Rift Valley  I was exceptionally pleased to read, many times, the article “The Great Rift Valley.” (July 22, 1997) It was like taking a safari. My husband worked in Africa, and I was able to take a trip to the southern part of Tanzania. My face was glued to the window of our Land Rover. Everything is so vivid and colorful in Africa; it made an indelible impression on my mind.
B. S., Canada
Thriving Children  I want to thank you for the splendid series “Help Your Children to Thrive.” (August 8, 1997) I found it very useful and encouraging. I have a three-year-old boy, and this article helped me to understand his point of view and to improve the way I discipline him. My profound thanks go to Jehovah for these articles.
P. S., Italy
I was deeply touched by the article “Harsh Words, Crushed Spirits.” All my life I have judged myself severely. I am pleased to find that instead of severely judging, you lovingly try to help all those who have lived through so much suffering. May Jehovah continue to bless you and guide the writing of articles that are so beneficial and soothing.
L. D., Canada
I hope that the articles will open the eyes of others to the root cause of much of the inner turmoil that many of us have suffered. Thank you for addressing this subject.
L. B., United States
Articles like these help me to accomplish my work as a teacher in a nursery school in a better way. A thousand thanks for keeping us up-to-date and helping us to improve.
G. R., Mexico
The articles gave me some hope. I came from a dysfunctional family and often find it hard to feel worthy of serving Jehovah and caring for my little girl. I will do my best to apply the suggestions in the article. Thanks for caring.
A. A., United States

