Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 1
Song 25
20 min: Question-and-answer coverage of insert material on “Attend the 1981 District Convention.”
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Making Return Visits.” An elder and a ministerial servant discuss information, involving audience. Have capable teacher demonstrate return visits by calling back on interested person. Review key points of presentation with congregation, stressing need for advance preparation.
10 min: Review current Topic for Conversation with congregation, illustrating how current literature offer can be effectively tied into Bible presentation. Highlight specific points such as chapters and illustrations that can be used from 192-page books congregation has in stock. Highlight service arrangements for week. Local announcements. Remind all to review chapters 14 and 15 from Happiness book to be covered in public talk.
Song 8 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 8
Song 108
12 min: Accounts report and other announcements, including field service arrangements for congregation. Consider Question Box.
18 min: “Have Love for the Whole Association of Brothers.” Questions and answers. On paragraph six, ask audience how they have found it helpful working with others in the service and in other ways.
15 min: “We Need Jehovah’s Organization.” Talk by elder. For source material consult Watchtower, December 15, 1962, pages 758-763; Watchtower, July 1, 1979, pages 20-30. In conclusion, encourage all to review chapters 16 and 17 of Happiness book in preparation for this week’s public talk.
Song 65 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 15
Song 102
 5 min: Announcements and field service arrangements.
17 min: “Congregation Meetings—Part IV.” Questions and answers. Highlight section “Advance Preparation Needed” and apply material to local needs.
13 min: “Directing People to the Christian Congregation.” Discussion and demonstration by brother who takes lead in Bible study activity. Jesus was appointed by his Father as head of Christian congregation. (Eph. 1:22, 23) He appointed a “faithful and discreet slave” class to care for his interests on earth. (Matt. 24:45-47) Individual Christians must recognize arrangement and work closely with organization. (Isa. 2:2, 3; Heb. 10:23, 24) It is recommended that we develop a regular program of progressively directing students to organization. A few minutes can be taken at conclusion of weekly study to do so. Subjects can be considered, such as location and function of Kingdom Hall; purpose of each meeting and how conducted; no collections at meetings (Matt. 6:2, 3); appointed elders have no titles (Matt. 23:8-10); all in congregation share in witnessing and teaching (Acts 8:1, 4). What other topics can be considered? What visual aids could be used? Why is it necessary for students to learn function of the organization on both global and local scale?
Have demonstration of qualified publisher directing student to organization by covering a specific point outlined above. Review key points, as time allows.
10 min: Talk on subject “Share Regularly in Magazine Distribution.” It is vital that we appreciate the part The Watchtower and Awake! have in spreading the good news of the Kingdom. Even though persons may have limited interest in our message, they are often willing to accept magazines. Distribution has increased during last service year. (Note current Yearbook.) A constant effort is being put forth to make magazines more interesting and appealing. Are we making full use of this provision? All will want to have a regular share in magazine activity. Select specific theme that ties in with a preselected article or subject from current issues. Highlight illustrations. (Illustrate talking points from current issues.) Young publishers can be effective in placing magazines. Prepare and participate in this activity as a family. While congregations may have arrangements for publishers to participate in the magazine activity every Saturday, it is suggested that all make special effort to share in some feature of magazine distribution on the second and fourth Saturdays of each month, whether it be regular house-to-house or store-to-store work, engaging in street work, or building up a magazine route. All will want to endeavor to be magazine conscious, appreciating the full value of these publications.
Encourage congregation to review chapters 18 to 20 in Happiness book in preparation for public talk.
Song 99 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 22
Song 73
10 min: Announcements and field service arrangements. Consider main points of articles “Making Good Use of Circuit Overseer’s Report” and “Unworked Territory.”
15 min: “Dating and Courtship.” Based on Youth book, chapter 19. Talk and demonstration by brother who is a parent, if possible. It is normal for single persons to think of courtship and marriage. It is vital, however, that those contemplating marriage follow Bible principles and endeavor to please Jehovah. Be careful not to imitate spirit of world. (Gal. 5:19-21) Follow direction of Christian parents and elders.—Phil. 4:8, 9; Eph. 6:1.
Demonstration: Father and teenage son consider subject of dating. Son respectfully asks why he cannot date as others do. Father kindly gives direction, using material from Youth book, pages 142-151. Purpose of dating. Why many young people want to date. Dangers of pairing off together. Premature dating can hinder one’s development. Reason with son on Bible principles involved.
Chairman reviews basic points considered. Frankly outline need for engaged couples likewise to maintain wholesome conduct during courtship. (Youth book, pp. 152-156) Invite congregation to comment on practical value of heeding Scriptural counsel during dating and courtship.
10 min: “Marry ‘Only in the Lord.’” Talk based on Awake! of March 22, 1979, pages 27, 28. Highlight blessings received from heeding Scriptural direction.
10 min: Interview two publishers who have recently participated in the auxiliary pioneer work. Outline how they were able to adjust their schedule to pioneer even though having responsibilities similar to many in congregation. Also encourage all to participate in field service next Sunday, the first Sunday in March.
Song 70 and prayer.

