Part IV—Congregation Meetings: A Provision to Help Us Make Disciples
1 Jesus Christ was a disciple-maker! He also taught his disciples to share in the preaching and disciple-making work as well. (Matt. 10:5; 11:1) Those early disciples recognized the importance of sharing the truth with others in compliance with Jesus’ command as recorded at Matthew 28:19, 20.
2 Likewise, today, the heartfelt desire of each Christian should be to influence others to follow Jesus Christ and become his disciples. What a grand privilege we have to engage in ‘publicly declaring’ the truth of God’s Word in a manner worthy of the “good news.” (Rom. 10:9, 10, 13, 14) If we appreciate that our salvation as well as that of those to whom we preach is at stake, we will be moved to share whole-souled in this lifesaving work. (1 Tim. 4:16; Acts 20:26, 27) This will enhance our appreciation for the numerous provisions that stimulate our desire to share fully in the preaching and disciple-making work. One of these provisions is the service meeting.
BENEFITS RECEIVED
3 Information presented on the service meeting serves to build us up spiritually and equips us to share more zealously and effectively in the preaching and disciple-making work. Consider specific ways in which we personally benefit.
4 We are encouraged to participate regularly in the house-to-house work, not only because of this fine apostolic example, but also because of the fine results obtained. Our Kingdom Service often provides detailed presentations that we can use in the field. Suggestions are given showing how to start conversations, use tact, adapt ourselves to different situations, and so forth. Additionally, we are shown how we can assist our brothers to become more effective.
5 Service meetings also help us to appreciate better our responsibility to return and help persons who display an interest in the truth. We have been shown why we need to keep accurate records of interest found, how to prepare for these calls, and how to use the Bible effectively in teaching sheeplike persons. Have not these suggestions aided us to be more concerned about people and our responsibility toward those who respond?
6 Conducting Bible studies has also been given considerable attention. What will help more of us to share in this privilege of service? In an article entitled “Is Your Witnessing Purposeful?” in the April 1979, Our Kingdom Service, the question was raised: “Do we make the finding of sheeplike ones and the desire for a Bible study a subject of our prayers? (1 John 5:14) After praying, do we become easily discouraged if such prayers seemingly go unanswered for a time? Or, do we persevere in our prayers and work in harmony with what we are praying for?” Many apply the fine suggestions and encouragement given at service meetings with respect to the Bible study activity. Are you doing so? If so, has it not made you a more effective teacher?
7 Practical suggestions about informal witnessing have enabled many of us to take advantage of daily opportunities to give a Kingdom witness. Have you enjoyed interesting experiences by witnessing informally? What particular suggestions helped you?
8 Much attention has been given to the needs of young people. Service meetings have pointed out how they can develop spiritually, share fully in field activity and cope with problems at school or in divided households. Many youths have expressed appreciation for program parts that were designed especially for them.
ADVANCE PREPARATION NEEDED
9 Elders and ministerial servants should prepare program parts well and employ the art of teaching. Endeavor to follow closely the direction outlined in the section “Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples.” When preparing your assignment, ask yourself: Why is this part appropriate, and how can I make it helpful and applicable to the congregation? What are the main points that the audience should learn? What methods should I employ to teach effectively? (or, pp. 97, 98) The presiding overseer may provide assigned brothers with helpful suggestions, as needed.
10 After receiving a new issue of Our Kingdom Service, it is good to read it through. Later make a more careful study of the printed information in preparation for each week’s service meeting. Where audience participation is called for, be prepared to comment. (Heb. 10:23, 24) Such participation builds up faith and is an expression of our love for the brothers and for Jehovah. It also aids us in retaining points we have learned so that we can apply them in the field and in our daily life.
11 So, there are many good reasons to do our utmost to derive the fullest possible benefit from the service meeting. It is one of the provisions designed to help us to accomplish our disciple-making work and to gain divine approval.—2 Tim. 2:15.

