Presenting the Good News—By Making Return Visits
1 In his parable of the sower, Jesus compared the spreading of Kingdom truth to a farmer sowing literal seed. Not all the seed would sprout and produce, but some would fall on good soil and grow. This would bring joy to the sower. The spiritual sowing and reaping we participate in today likewise brings great joy as Jesus promised.—John 4:36.
2 After our initial sowing of seed by means of a literature placement or simply a Scriptural discussion, further cultivation is needed. This is usually best accomplished by making return visits. Since far more literature is placed than return calls are made, there is a great potential for making effective return visits. Some may hold back from making such calls, thinking that only the skilled and outgoing publishers are qualified to make return visits. However, it is not as difficult as some may have imagined.
3 Having made the first friendly contact, you have common ground for the return visit. So when should the second call be made and what can be said to the one showing interest? In some cases, if the person has shown genuine interest, a return visit can be made as soon as a day or two after the initial contact. While he may or may not have had opportunity to read any literature that was left with him, your first visit will be fresh in his mind. Waiting too long may allow the interest to wane.
4 As for what to speak about when you return, a helpful suggestion is to lay a good foundation first on the initial call and then build on it. Some record should be kept of what you spoke about. If possible, find out the name of the individual and then on the return visit you can greet that person by name. Be warm and friendly and indicate you have something additional to share with the person. If no one is at home, try again at a different time. Be persevering. Lives are involved and we want to make every effort to cultivate further the initial interest shown. In some cases you might even phone before leaving for the territory to ensure that someone will be home, impressing the person with the importance of your call.
5 Preparation is the key to success. Before making the call, think about what you wish to consider with the person. Bible Topics for Discussion offers some fine suggestions on various subjects of interest, such as “Bible,” “Earth,” “Jehovah, God,” “Kingdom,” “Last Days.”
6 Some do not make return visits because they do not schedule a definite time for them. Return visits can be made in the evenings, on weekends, just after completing house-to-house calls, or at other times convenient to your personal schedule. All are appropriate. Your joy will greatly increase as you regularly share in this important field.
7 In view of the fine success we have enjoyed in placing the pocket-size books with the public in the past, February is a month that will feature one of the 192-page books on a contribution of 60c. It is hoped that during the month you will make time available for return visits on those potential sheeplike persons you contact in your field service activity.

