From Our Readers
Breaking Free From Drugs
I wish to commend you for the knowledge and insight your articles manifest concerning the Bible as well as in displaying practical wisdom in every aspect of life. However, a statement you made somewhat puzzled me. In the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Break Free From Drugs?” you stated, “Total abstention from drugs is essential to recovery,” and “it’s best to ‘cut off,’ or make a clean break from, anything that can stumble us in life.” (September 22, 1985) I’ve had the impression that some drug addiction is so severe that for the addict to refrain abruptly and completely from any further use of the drug would cause severe sickness and quite possibly death.
J. C., New York
We agree that sudden withdrawal can be dangerous for some addicts. That’s why on page 16, paragraph 8, we stated: “In light of the dangers involved, it would be wise to enlist the aid of a competent physician who is familiar with drug detoxification.” But the point the article was making, which is valid, is that one must determine to cut off the use of drugs completely, and once detoxification has taken place, one should stay totally free of drugs.​—ED.
I was involved with drugs from when I was 14 until I was 23 years old. For nine long years I was held captive to their horrible agony. At first I didn’t think drugs were bad. They helped us to escape the pain of our parents’ failing marriages, our own low self-images, and life’s everyday pains of growing up. In time my life fell apart. I felt trapped; suicide seemed appealing at times. It took three long years to break my ties with drug dependency. Why? Because I didn’t have access to the kind of information you presented in your issue of September 22, 1985. If only I had known that the secret to breaking free from drugs was to change my whole way of thinking or approach to life, that I had to enjoy life more without drugs than I did with them. With our Creator’s help, I’ve been able to grow up emotionally and learn how to face life’s hardships without drugs. I know that reasoning on the information in your article will help any who have a drug problem if they sincerely wish to break free.
M. H., Texas
Unfair Teachers?
Thank you so much for your article “Young People Ask . . . Why Is My Teacher So Unfair?” (August 22, 1985) Now I really have a different outlook on why teachers have pets. It’s because teenagers aren’t interested in school or education but in other things. That’s why they pay more attention to the ones that are concerned with learning.
N. S., Wisconsin
I am 15 years old and want to thank you for the article “Why Is My Teacher So Unfair?” Since I have always felt that my teacher treated me unfairly, this article helped me to see the matter from the teacher’s standpoint. Now I have come to the conclusion that I was often to blame when my teacher treated me badly or unfairly.
N. S., Federal Republic of Germany

