VOL. XXXIII NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D. 1912-A.M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

Mean Christians and Noble Unbelievers 351 

Need of Good Physician Not Realized 351 

The Law of Heredity Involved 352 

In Dreamless Sleep Dead Await Christ's 

Return 355 

"No Man Hath Ascended to Heaven" 355 

"Be With Me In Paradise" 356 



Consecration Normal Attitude for God's 
Intelligent Creatures 357 

The High Calling Not For All 358 

Forgive Seventy Times Seven 358 

"Owed Him a Hundred Pence" 359 

Unto Us a Son is Given 360 

The First Step of Redemption 360 

Know of the Doctrine 361 

"One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism" 361 

The Doctrines of Christ 361 

Two Years More (Poem) 362 

Interesting Questions 363 

Interesting Letters 363 

page 350 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. 
Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please 
address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 



FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



ALBANY, N.Y., NOVEMBER 17 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10 o'clock, discourse 
to the interested at 7:30 p.m., in VanVechten Hall, 1 19 State Street. 

Discourse to the Public at 3 p.m. in Harmanus Bleecker Hall, 
Washington Avenue. 

ROCHESTER, N.Y., NOVEMBER 24 

Morning meeting for Praise and Testimony, and discourse to the 
interested at 10:30 o'clock, Musicians' Hall, 95 Main Street, East. 

Public service at 3 o'clock in the afternoon in the Temple Theatre, 
35 Clinton Avenue, S. 

DENVER, COLO., DECEMBER 1 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony, and discourse to 
the interested in Normal Hall, 1545 Glenarm Street, at 10:30 o'clock. 

Public meetings at 3 p.m. and 8 p.m. in The Auditorium, corner 
14th and Curtis Streets. 

CINCINNATI, OHIO, DECEMBER 8 

Testimony meeting and discourse to the friends at 10:30 a.m. in 
The Odeon, Elm Street near Twelfth Street. 

The afternoon service for the Public will be held in the Emery Auditorium, 
corner Canal and Walnut Streets. 

BUFFALO, N.Y., DECEMBER 15 

DETROIT, MICH., DECEMBER 22 

LOUISVILLE, KY., DECEMBER 29 

R5137 : page 350 

ARMAGEDDON SERMON IN NEWSPAPERS 

We learn that Brother Russell's Armageddon sermon 
preached at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, November 3, 
has been published in a great many newspapers which do 
not publish the sermons regularly. We trust that such publishers 
will be encouraged to continue the service. We will 
be glad to receive sample copies of all such papers. Mark 
these "Special" on the wrapper. 

When your newspaper fails to print the sermons, the proper 
place to write your protest is to its Editor or Publisher or both. 

Brother Russell supplies the sermon regularly, and if they 



are not printed the Editor and Publishers are responsible. 

The only way the publishers have of certainly knowing 
whether a sufficient proportion of their readers really appreciate 
the sermons, is from letters of approval when the sermons 
are published; or prompt letters of regret when they are 
discontinued. 

The Fourth Volume of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES will 
hereafter be entitled The Battle of Armageddon. The Armageddon 
sermon will constitute an additional feature. The 
price is uniform with the other volumes, 35c. delivered. 

page 350 

ADDRESS LETTERS, ETC., TO THE SOCIETY 

Money orders, drafts, checks, letters, should all be addressed 
to the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY (and 
bequests should all be made in that name), 17 Hicks Street, 
Brooklyn, New York. 

On the envelope you may say "In care of" any certain 
department or individual likely to handle your matter most 
speedily. Make each letter complete in itself. 

PRIZE PUZZLES 

We still have Prize Puzzles for judicious use. Order 
only so many as you can use, free. Lay a few each week on 
hotel writing tables and in other conspicuous places, where 
they will come under the eye of intelligent and good people. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR DECEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for December follow: (1) 273; (2) 109; (3) 332; (4) 14; (5) 
259; (6) 12; (7) 120; (8) 170; (9) 167; (10) 152; (11) 208; 
(12) 105; (13) 305; (14) 288; (15) 67; (16) 101; (17) 93; (18) 
43; (19) 7; (20) 144; (21) 53; (22) 145; (23) 4; (24) 273; 
(25) 16; (26) 243; (27) 195; (28) 255; (29) 176; (30) 85; 
(31)249. 



R5135 : page 351 

MEAN CHRISTIANS AND NOBLE UNBELIEVERS 

"Ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men 
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are 
called."-l Cor. 1:26. 

SURELY NONE will dispute the statement 
that there are noble characters amongst 



unbelievers as well as amongst Christians; 
neither will any one of experience dispute 
that there are mean people amongst Christians 
as well as amongst the worldly. But 
how shall we account for this? Should we 
not reasonably expect that the noble principles 
of true Christianity would attract all 
of the best minds of the world, and rather 
repel the meaner disposition? Should we not expect 
that the doctrines of Christ, the spirit of His teachings- 
meekness, gentleness, brotherly kindness, love— would 
attract all who have sympathy with these qualities, hence 
all of the nobleminded of the world? And should we not 
likewise expect that since the Scriptures and the Spirit 
of the Lord condemn all anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife, backbitings, evil speakings, impurities, etc., all 
those who have sympathy with such works of the flesh 
and of the Devil would be repelled by the Gospel of 
Christ? 

Whatever the tendency of our mental philosophy on 
the subject, the facts of the case prove to us that proportionately 
a larger number of the world's nobleminded 
children reject the Lord and His Gospel, and that a 
larger proportion of the world's ignoble children accept 
the Gospel of Christ. The still more interesting and perplexing 
question therefore is, How shall we account for 
this very peculiar condition which seems contrary to all 
and every expectation? 

We account for it along the lines of our Lord's statement, 
that He came not to call the righteous, but sinners 
to repentance. (Matt. 9:13.) True, "There is none 
righteous, no, not one. ..All have sinned and 
come short of the glory of God" (Rom. 3:10,23); the 
fall of Father Adam involved every one of his posterity; 
hence all are sinners and all need the grace of God in 
Christ for the forgiveness of their sins. But those who 
find themselves morally and intellectually less fallen than 
some of their neighbors are inclined to a self-righteous 
feeling, even though they would disclaim perfection. 
They are, therefore, less inclined to acknowledge themselves 
to be nothing, unworthy of Divine favor, to bow 
themselves in the dust at the foot of the cross, and to 
receive, as an unmerited gift of God, the boon of eternal 
life through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

THE NEED OF THE GOOD PHYSICIAN NOT REALIZED 

This class feel that some of the more degraded of the 
race need Divine pity and forgiveness, and are glad that 
God has compassion for these, and will help them; but 
somehow they feel that they do not need the imputed 
Robe of Christ's Righteousness to cover them; that they 
are so respectable that if God accepts any one to a future 
life, He will surely not exclude them. They look about 
them and compare themselves with Christians, and often 
with a large degree of complacency assure themselves 



that their ideas of right and wrong and of moral responsibility, 
and of benevolence, etc., are higher, nobler, 
better than those of professed Christians. They say to 
themselves, "God is just; and while I am not perfect, 
I am a great deal better than the majority of Christians, 
and I am sure, therefore, that God in justice will take as 
much care of me as He will of others, who I see are 
inferior to me in some of the good qualities of heart and 
mind." Like the Pharisee of old, they thank God that 
they are not as other men; and they neglect the only 
"name under heaven given among men, whereby we must 
be saved."— Acts 4:12. 

The class which we are describing is a numerous 
class, more numerous than many persons would suppose 
until they reflect upon the subject; and it includes many, 
far from hypocritical, who have never understood the 
Gospel. Several of the Presidents of the United States 
have been men of this class— reverent toward religion, 
moral in their course of life, just in their dealings; for 
instance, Lincoln and Grant, whom we mention merely 
as examples of a class. Besides, many properly of this 
class are either Church attendants or Church members. 
They appreciate the fact that directly or indirectly the 
moral uplift of civilization is associated with Christianity, 
and are pleased to take their stand on the moral and 
popular side, though they have never accepted, at the 
hands of Divine grace, the forgiveness of sins through 
faith in the precious blood of Christ. 

We see their difficulty; it is that they do not recognize 
that the Lord is dealing upon principles of strict justice 
and law. Divine Law and Justice declare that all imperfection 
is contrary to God, that God's work was perfect 
originally in Adam, and that He can never accept to 
harmony with Himself anything that is imperfect. They 
fail to see that under this Law, whoever is guilty in that 
which is least, is nevertheless, guilty; and comes under 

R5135 : page 352 

the same death penalty with him who is guilty of many 
and more serious offenses. 

Since, then, all men are imperfect— none absolutely 
righteous— the one sentence of death includes every member 
of the human family; and there is no door of escape 
from death, no door of entrance into life, except the one 
which God has provided— Christ Jesus, the Righteous, 
who became man's Redeemer by the sacrifice of Himself. 
He who fails to go through this door never attains to 
life, however much he may strive against sin, and however 
closely he may approach the door. Only passage 
through the door can gain an entrance into eternal life. 
"I am the door; by Me if any man enter in, he shall be 
saved." "He that believeth not the Son shall not see 
life, but the wrath of God [the sentence of death] abideth 
on him. "-John 10:9; 3:36. 

The same philosophy of the subject shows to us why 



it is that a proportionately larger number of the world's 
ignoble than of its noble children come to Christ. Only 
those who feel that they are sinners, who feel that they 
need relief from sin, appreciate the offer of forgiveness. 
Only the sick, who realize that they are sick, feel the 
need of the Great Physician. Many indeed seek the 
Lord's grace because they realize to some extent their 
own fallen, degraded condition, and that they are meaner 
people than others; only this seems to awaken them to a 
realization of their position; only this leads them to cry 
out, "Have mercy upon me, Thou Son of David." And 
this realization of personal unworthiness of the Divine 
favor is necessary to all who would accept the grace of 
God on the only conditions upon which it is offered. 

CONTINUANCE IN THE SCHOOL OF CHRIST CONDITIONAL 

Having thus found the philosophical basis of our subject, 
we proceed to inquire concerning the result. What 
is the legitimate result of acceptance of Christ? We 
answer, The inevitable result of a proper acceptance of 
Christ must be moral uplifting; for the condition upon 
which Christ receives any one is, that he desires not only 
to be forgiven the sins that are past, but also to forsake 
sin for the future. 

The lower one may be in the scale of morality, the 
more radical will the change eventually be; but the less 
proportionately will he realize at the beginning of his 
conversion all the steps of purification of word and 
thought and act, which lie before him in the Christian 
pathway. He will at first think of the reform of merely 
the grosser manifestations of sin; but step by step and 
lesson by lesson he will be instructed by the Great 
Teacher, and brought onward in knowledge and in appreciation 
and in character upbuilding, if he continue in 
the School of Christ. 

The requirement of the Great Teacher, through the 
Apostle, is that those who come unto Him, in full consecration, 
after being accepted on the ground of faith, 
must at once begin to "put away all filthiness of the flesh 
and of the spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence of 
the Lord." (2 Cor. 7:1.) Whoever will not make the 
attempt to do this will not be continued in the School of 
Christ; for he has not Christ's Spirit, and not having His 
Spirit he is "none of His." "Whosoever practices sin 
[knowingly, willingly] is of the devil." (I John 3:8.) 
Nevertheless, it may require years of schooling and discipline 
under the Great Teacher before some of those 
who were deeply sunken in the mire of sin and selfishness, 
and many consequent meannesses of disposition, 
become even moderately or passably good, noble 
characters. 

Character is more like the oak than like the mushroom; 
it requires time for its development. Yet as the 
oak might be quickly killed with an axe, so even a strong 
character might be quickly undermined, prostrated, overthrown 



by sin. In other words, upward development is 
slow, but downward tendencies may take effect rapidly, 
if permitted. Consequently, many Christians can see that 
while the religion of Christ has done much to help them 
and their friends out of the miry clay of sin, and to put 
them on the Rock, Christ Jesus, and has cleansed them of 
many of the defilements of the flesh, and of its meannesses 
of disposition, yet perhaps after ten, twenty or 
forty years of such discipline and perseverance, they may 
with surprise behold some unbeliever whom they must 
acknowledge to be their equal in moral probity, uprightness 
or generosity. 

THE LAW OF HEREDITY INVOLVED 

The question arises, How is this? We answer, that 
as moral deflection affects the children to the third and 
fourth generation, so moral attainments may affect the 
children to several generations. Hence not only do parents 
who have been upright and God-fearing, who have 
endeavored to cultivate in themselves the graces of the 
Spirit, benefit themselves, and approach more nearly than 
at first to the grand standard of perfection, but their 
children will be born with better natural qualifications, 
as well as under conditions more favorable to righteousness 
and nobility of soul. For the heart attainments of 
the parents are reflected in the physical condition of their 
children. 

And this, by the way, proves conclusively that many 
professedly pious parents are less noble at heart than we 
could have hoped; for, if during the period of conception 
and gestation, parental thoughts, feelings, sentiments had 
been cultivated along the lines of nobility, purity, holiness, 
reverence, benevolence, justice and love, their children 
would show it; and results would be blessed both to 
the children and the parents. The natural qualities of 
the child were willed to it before its birth, chiefly by the 
mother; and the mother's ideals were considerably those 
of the father, if they were well mated. 

Christian parents should awake to their responsibilities 
in the exercise of their procreative powers entrusted 
to them by the Almighty. It is a disgrace to our civilization 
that so many in civilized lands are low-born, even 
amongst those who recognize the laws of heredity and 
who carefully guard the breeding of their cattle and 
sheep and dogs and horses. It must be that the influence 
of the parental mind upon posterity is not recognized. 
Let these thoughts not only guard parents in respect to 
future offspring, but also make them very patient and 
painstaking with young children, when attempting to 
train out of them blemishes of character which they 
helped to implant. The first duty of a parent to his child 
is to give him the most favorable start in life within his 
power. 

If children of Christian parents, favorably bred, also 
become Christians, and begin a warfare in their own 



hearts against moral uncleanness and sin, and against all 
the mean and selfish propensities of the fallen nature, 
they may, by the grace of God, attain to a moral position 
higher than that attained by their parents, through putting 
into practise the instructions of the Great Teacher. 

But here comes in another side of the question. God 
does not accept the children of believers on account of 
parental faith, beyond the period of their minority. As 
soon as years of accountability have been reached, a personal 
covenant with the Lord is required, if they would 
be His in any special sense; otherwise they are recognized 

R5135 : page 353 

as being of the world and under its condemnation, 
and not under the justification which extends only to 
believers and their minor children. (I Cor. 7:14.) God 
makes the entrance into His family and School an individual 
matter. 

And here we find the secret of how it comes that 
some of the noblest men of the world are not the Lord's 
people. They are the children of those whose feet have 
been lifted out of the miry clay of sin. They have inherited 
through their parents a share in the uplifting 
which the teaching of Christ brought into the world, 
amongst those who follow His teaching. Thus we see 
that Infidelity has nothing to boast of in its noblest sons, 
for what they have that is noble and great came generally 
through the belief, the faith, of their ancestors. 

On the contrary, the tendency of unbelief is toward 
sin and degradation. It may not come in one generation, 
or it may. The son of noble Christian parents, who has 
inherited a more noble mind than the masses, may maintain 
that mind to some extent through life; and if he take 
pride in his morality he may, at least on the surface, 
keep up a good appearance, and may transmit some of it 
to his posterity. But eventually selfishness will undermine 
and destroy nobility; and we may as surely expect 
a degradation in the posterity of such who do not receive 
Christ, as we may expect an advancement on the part of 
all who accept the Savior. 

ILLUSTRATED IN THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH 

The general operation of this law can be appreciated 
only as we look out over a grand scope of territory and 
over centuries of time. As we look back to the days of 
our Lord and the Apostles, we find that the Gospel was 
laid hold upon by the very class that we have here described 
—the publicans and sinners, the lower classes- 
while it was rejected by the worldly-wise, the hypocritical 
and the pharisaical, who were morally and intellectually 
the superior class, and who on this very account rejected 
Christ— not feeling their need of a Savior. Looking 
intently at the Gospel Church, with its lowly beginning, 
in the poorest class, we find that whoever entered the 



School of Christ and was taught of Him was uplifted by 
obedience to that Teacher. 

This higher teaching of the Master became the standard 
among His followers. They learned that, as the 
Lord's people, they should not only love one another, but 
should sympathetically love even those who hated them, 
who maligned them and who persecuted them, saying all 
manner of evil against them falsely for Christ's sake; 
and that Divine blessing rested upon the meek, the 
patient, the humble, the peacemakers; and that the sum 
of all the graces is love. We find the very same teaching 
coming from the humble fishermen and publicans who 
accepted Him, and whom He sent forth as the Apostles 
of His grace. 

For instance, we find the Apostle Peter saying, "Add 
to your faith knowledge, self-control, patience, godliness, 
brotherly kindness, love." (2 Pet. 1:5-8.) We find the 
Apostle John saying, "He that loveth not his brother, 
whom he hath seen, how can he love God, whom he hath 
not seen?" (I John 4:20.) We find the Apostle James 
saying that all who are taught of the Lord should "show 
out of a good conversation [life, conduct] his works 
with meekness of wisdom. But if ye have bitter envying 
and strife in your hearts, glory not." "Submit yourselves 
to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you. 
Draw nigh to God, and He will draw nigh to you." 
"Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord and He will 
lift you up. Speak not evil one of another, brethren." 
"Hearken, my beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the 
poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom 
which He hath promised to them that love Him?"— 
James 3:13,14; 4:7,10,11; 2:5. 

We hear the Apostle Paul, who once was of the 
nobler, the Pharisee class, giving utterance to the same 
truth, and in all humility acknowledging that "there is 
none righteous, no, not one." (Rom. 3:10.) He explains 
that only as we accept Christ have we the forgiveness of 
sins or reconciliation with the Father; that, having put 
on Christ, we should be New Creatures in Him; that old 
things should be past and gone forever, and that we 
should walk henceforth in newness of life, not according 
to the will of the flesh, but according to the purpose 
of the Lord. Hear him exhorting those who have taken 
the name of Christ, assuring them that they must also 
take His Spirit, or disposition, and have the same mind 
[disposition] which was also in Christ Jesus, our Lord— 
a mind in opposition to sin and meanness and selfishness, 
but in harmony with truth, goodness, purity, benevolence 
and love. 

And the Apostle explains this, saying: "Love worketh 
no ill to his neighbor; love is the fulfilling of the Law"; 
"Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness and let 
us put on the armor of light. Let us walk honestly." 
"Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision 
for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof." "Recompense no 
man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of 



all men. If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live 
peaceably with all men. Avenge not yourselves, but 
rather give place unto wrath, for it is written, Vengeance 
is Mine, I will repay, saith the Lord. Therefore, if thine 
enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink."— 
Rom. 13:10,12-14; 12:17-20. 

St. Paul explained in particular the love which is the 
essence of the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ, and 
which all followers of the Lord must have if they would 
continue to be His, saying: "Love suffereth long and is 
kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth not itself; is not 
puffed up; doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not 
her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth 
not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth; beareth 
all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, 
endureth all things. Love never faileth."— I Cor. 13:4-8. 

"THE TESTIMONY OF THE LORD IS SURE, MAKING WISE 
THE SIMPLE" 

It would be impossible for any class of people, however 
mentally and morally degraded they might be, to 
receive such instructions into good and honest hearts, 
without being uplifted by them, made more noble, more 
Christlike, more Godlike. It does not surprise us, 
therefore, to find that even in the first century, the Lord's 
people became noted for their high principles and morality, 
insomuch that the masses of the people "took 
knowledge of them that they had been with Jesus and 
learned of Him."— Acts 4:13. 

Then we see how the Adversary corrupted the Truth 
from the simplicity in which it was presented by the Lord 
and the Apostles. We see forms and ceremonies, genuflections 
and masses, bondage to creeds and theories of 
men, taking the place of the pure Gospel of Christ; and 
we note the result, that in proportion as the teachings of 
Christ were ignored, in the same proportion superstition 
came in, and the Spirit of Christ was lacking. 

Nevertheless, with all the corruption which came into 
the world with the second century, there was a sufficiency 
of the true spirit intermixed with the error to work a 
vast reformation in the savages of Europe, and to bring 

R5135 : page 354 

them into a condition of civilization higher than that of 

the rest of the world. And when in the Divine providence 

the Reformation movement was inaugurated, it 

lifted the same class of people immeasurably higher in 

moral tone. It restored much of the primitive purity of 

Christianity and of the Spirit of Christ; and in proportion 

as the Word of God has been free amongst the 

people, and in proportion as they have received it gladly 

and have permitted its ennobling sentiments to germinate 

in their hearts and bring forth its fruitage, in this proportion 

we have seen the peoples which came under the 



direct influence of the Reformation lifted still higher 
than the remainder of the world. 

THE WASHED SOW STILL CRAVES THE MIRE 

In all of this we observe the principle at first set 
forth; namely, that the Spirit of Christ, the spirit of 
Truth, the spirit of righteousness from the Word of the 
Lord, is the civilizing, enlightening and ennobling influence 
which has wrought the marvelous changes of this 
Christian Era and especially of this last century. Papacy 
and sectarianism hindered, but could not thwart, its influence. 
It still continues to take hold on the lower 
classes of society, and lifts them up; and the tendency is 
still observable, that those who are already lifted up are 
the less likely to be appreciative of the Divine goodness. 
Thus it is that not many great, not many learned, not 
many wise, according to the course of this world, hath 
God chosen; but the poor of this world, rich in faith, to 
be heirs of the Kingdom. 

The broader and clearer our view of the situation, the 
more shall we be able to sympathize with those of our 
brethren in Christ who by nature are mean, ignoble, 
selfish, lacking in benevolence of thought, word and conduct. 
When we realize that God has accepted them— not 
because of their good and noble character, but because 
they admit its deficiencies and because they desire to become 
reformed— transformed, by the renewing of their 
minds— then all who have the Lord's mind or Spirit will 
likewise receive them. 

In proportion as we have the mind of Christ, the holy 
mind, we shall view others from the Divine standpoint 
of sympathy for their weaknesses and ignoble qualities; 
and instead of condemning them, spurning them, and cutting 
their acquaintance because they do not come up to 
the noblest standards, we shall desire all the more to help 
them up, and shall seek kindly to point out to them the 
matters which they do not clearly see. We shall be 
patient with them as we see them striving to overcome. 
We shall realize that they contend against a mental disease 
which they have to some extent inherited, and which 
can only gradually be eradicated. 

From this standpoint we shall learn to view them 
and to think of them, not according to their flesh, not 
according to their natural tendencies and dispositions, 
but according to the spirit, according to the intentions of 
their minds, according to their covenant with the Lord. 
Thus, as the Apostle declares, we know each other no 
longer after the flesh, but after the spirit— 2 Cor. 5:16. 

Each one who has accepted God's grace, and become 
a partaker of the spirit of holiness, and is striving 
against sin in all its forms— in thought and word and 
conduct— all such are striving for the grand perfection 
of character of which our dear Redeemer is the only 
perfect illustration. All such profess themselves imperfect 
copies of God's dear Son and seek to grow in His 



likeness. All such are seeking to put away all the works 
of the flesh and the devil— not only the grosser evils 
(murder, theft, etc.), but also the more common elements 
of an ignoble, perverted nature— anger, malice, 
hatred, strife, etc. And all these are seeking to put on 
more and more the complete armor of God, to resist sin, 
and to cultivate in themselves the same mind which was 
also in Christ Jesus— meekness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love. 

"SEE THAT YE LOVE ONE ANOTHER" 

Let us (Christians), then, take a broader view of 
matters, and especially of all who have named the name 
of Christ, and who give any evidence of seeking to walk 
in His footsteps. Let our love for them cover, not only 
the little, trifling blemishes and differences from ourselves, 
but let it also cover a multitude of imperfections 
in the flesh, so long as we see that their hearts are loyal 
to the Lord, and that they are seeking to walk not after 
the flesh, but after the spirit; so long as they profess to 
be seeking to get rid of the meanness and selfishness and 
littleness of the fallen nature, and to cultivate in themselves 
the nobility of character which belongs to perfect 
manhood, the image of the Divine nature. 

And let each one who has taken the name of Christ 
be on the lookout to apprehend and eradicate every trace 
of the meanness, selfishness, rudeness, dishonesty, which 
still cling to us as members of the fallen race, and are 
become so much a part of us that we are often disposed 
to call them natural traits. Let us remember that, even 
if our Lord and our brethren in Christ overlook these 
blemishes (rightly distinguishing between the "New 
Creature in Christ" and these contrary elements of our 
old nature reckoned dead), yet the world cannot so distinguish 
and will charge to the cause of Christ all the 
faults and imperfections they see in His professed followers. 
Thus that Holy Name is profaned among the 
Gentiles, daily, by many. 

Let us remember too, that ill nature cannot be transformed 
into good nature in a day. Transformation of 
mind, speech and conduct requires patience and perseverance; 
but it can be accomplished by those who have been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit and who are obedient to the 
commands of the Great Teacher. "See that ye refuse 
not [obedience to] Him that speaketh" from Heaven. 
(Heb. 12:25.) Whoever neglects His teachings, neglects 
the great salvation offered during this Gospel Age; 
for none will be among the Elect except those who in 
their hearts at least are noble, true and good— conformed 
to the image of God's dear Son.— Rom. 8:29. 

If all could fully realize the influence of our minds 
over our own bodies, as well as their less direct influence 
over the minds and bodies of others, a great Thought 
Reform Movement would speedily begin in the world; 
and especially amongst God's consecrated people. Surely 



such should co-operate with the inspired prayer— "Create 
in me a clean heart [will], O God; and renew a right 
spirit [disposition] within me. ..Then will I teach 
transgressors Thy ways, and sinners shall be converted 
unto Thee."-Psa. 51:10,13. 

May the love of God be more and more shed abroad 
in our hearts, and our consciences be always tender, and 
may we ever abstain from the appearance of evil. May 
we be enabled at all times to be circumspect in our conversation, 
and to scrutinize our thoughts and words and 
doings, to the intent that we may ever be ready and able 
to serve our Heavenly Father and His dear flock, the 
"Feet" members of the Body of Christ! 

Grudge no loving word, my brother, 

As along through life you go, 
To the ones who journey with you; 

If you love them, tell them so. 



R5131 : page 355 

IN DREAMLESS SLEEP DEAD AWAIT CHRIST'S RETURN 

"If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive 
you unto Myself, that where I am there ye may be also."— 
John 14:3. 

THE ERROR OF supposing that men are 

alive when they are dead lies close to the 

foundation of every theological error the 

world over. We have all erred in taking 

the guess of Plato instead of the Word of 

God, and we can get rid of our difficulties 

and theological entanglements only by retracing 

our steps. Notwithstanding all 

that we have said and written, calling attention 

to the words of the Scriptures, the question 

frequently arises, Do you mean to tell us that our 

friends do not go to Heaven immediately when they die? 

That is exactly what we are endeavoring to demonstrate 
to be the teaching of the Bible. The Bible alone, 
of all religious books, teaches that a dead man is dead, 
and knows nothing, and that his only hope is in the Divine 
arrangement through Christ, by a resurrection of the 
dead— "both of the just and of the unjust."— Acts 24:15. 

When we remember that, according to nearly all the 
religious creeds and theories of the world, 999 out of 
every thousand pass immediately at death into most horrible 
sufferings, one would think that all would be glad 
to promptly accept the Bible testimony, that death is a 
dreamless sleep until the resurrection awakening. Why 
anyone should prefer to think of his friends and neighbors 
and the heathen millions as suffering torture, rather 



R5132: page 355 

than to think of them as being asleep, is beyond our 
comprehension. 

The fact probably is that selfishness has such a hold 
upon the masses that they care and think little respecting 
others than their near relatives and friends; and the 
same selfishness inclines them, with infatuation, to believe 
that they and their relatives, though no better than 
the rest of mankind, are special favorites of Heaven, and 
will be granted the reward of the saints, however unsaintly 
their lives may have been. Some one has suggested 
that the ideal prayer for such is: 
"God bless me and my wife, 
My son John and his wife; 
Us four, and no more." 

In harmony with this we find that when death invades 
a family circle this selfish egotism assumes that the deceased 
is acceptable to God as a saint, and wafted immediately 
to heavenly bliss— regardless of how unsaintly 
had been the life and how little of the spirit of Christ 
was ever manifested. The deception is reinforced by the 
Christian minister called to conduct the funeral service. 
Whatever he may read from the Bible to the effect that, 
if there be no resurrection, they that have fallen asleep 
have perished, his sermon is sure to give the inference 
that the deceased needs no resurrection, because he has 
not died, but has merely been transferred from a lower 
plane of life to a higher one. 

Proof of this is not given and not asked. The proof 
is not given because there is no Scriptural proof to give. 
It is not asked because the people are not sufficiently 
intelligent on religious subjects to demand a reason and 
a proof for what is presented to them. The remedy for 
all this will come when we become more intelligent, 
more reasoning. No minister of Christ should be abashed 
to be asked the reason for his faith. St. Peter exhorted 
that every Christian should be so thoroughly informed 
respecting the Divine Message as to be able to give a 
reason to whoever would ask concerning his own faith 
and his presentations to others. 

Here note our text. In it the Master says not a word 
about our going to Him, but quite the contrary— that he 
will come again and receive us unto Himself. This is 
in full accord with the teachings of the Apostles. Do 
they not tell that at the second coming of Christ the resurrection 
of the Church will be the first item in order; 
that then that which was sown in weakness will be raised 
in power; that sown in dishonor will be raised in glory; 
that sown an animal body will be raised a spirit body; 
and that so we shall ever be with the Lord? Do they not 
tell us that this will be an instantaneous change? Is it 
not styled an awakening from the sleep of death? 

Hearken to St. Paul: "Behold, I show you a mystery; 
we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump 



(seventh trumpet); for the trumpet shall sound," "and 

the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are 

alive and remain shall be caught away together to a 

meeting with the Lord in the air." (I Cor. 15:51,52; I Thess. 4:16,17.) 

How plain, how simple! That will be 

the first meeting of the Church with her Lord. All of 

her members dying before that time will "sleep," while 

those dying since that time will not need to sleep and wait 

for the glorious change. But, says one, does not the second 

coming of Christ take place whenever His holy ones 

die? Does He not immediately come to receive them 

unto Himself? 

Surely only a very lame theory could seek to bolster 
itself up by such a perversion of the Scriptures. If Christ 
were to come every time one of His saintly ones dies, 
would it not mean many comings instead of merely a 
second coming? And even if His faithful were very few 
indeed, does it not seem that this would keep the Redeemer 
busy coming and departing every few minutes? 

Only crass ignorance of the Bible could excuse any 
such misapplication of its teachings. Not merely one 
statement of the Scriptures bears upon this subject, but 
hundreds of statements of Scripture, by Jesus and the 
Apostles; and all these contradict any such thought. 

"NO MAN HATH ASCENDED TO HEAVEN" 

Hearken to Jesus' words, "No man hath ascended up 
to Heaven." (John 3:13.) Only the Son of Man has 
ever been in heaven. He has ascended up where He was 
before, with additional glory and honor. He is now preparing 
a place for His Bride class and preparing the 
Bride class for the place— the place of honor at His own 
right hand. He is overseeing her experiences and causing 
all things to work together for her good, that she at 
His Second Coming may be prepared and be accepted as 
His Bride and granted a share in His glory, honor and 
immortality. 

It is in full harmony with this that a little later on 
the Great Teacher declared that all the dead are in the 
grave, and that at His second advent He will first call 
forth His faithful ones to the perfection of life; and 
later will call forth the remainder of mankind, not as yet 
found worthy of life, that they may have an opportunity, 
a testing as respects their worthiness or unworthiness of 
everlasting life on the human plane. 

Hear His assurance again respecting His faithful 
ones— that they shall share in His resurrection, the Chief 
Resurrection, to glory, honor, immortality, on the spirit 
plane. He said, "Blessed and holy are all they that have 
part in the First Resurrection; they shall be priests unto 
God and Christ, and shall reign with Him a thousand 
years."— Rev. 20:6. 

Be it noted that in all these assurances the Church is 
spoken of as a class, all of whom will enter into glory 



R5132: page 356 

together, at Christ's second coming, and not separately, 

as each may die. True, each has an individual trial or 

testing to determine whether or not he or she will be accounted 

worthy, or fitted for a place in the glorious Body 

of Christ, in the glorious Bride company, but the statement 

is repeatedly made that we shall be glorified together, 

that we shall have part in the one resurrection. 

"DAVID NOT ASCENDED TO HEAVEN" 

In full accord with all the foregoing is St. Peter's 
statement on the Day of Pentecost: "For David is not 
ascended into the heavens"; "his sepulchre is with us 
unto this day." (Acts 2:34,29.) St. Peter's words imply 
that if King David had ascended to Heaven he would 
have no sepulchre on earth. Similarly, we might say of 
all of the Prophets, and of all other persons that, if 
once they ascended to the heavenly plane, they could not 
be said to have any sepulchre on earth, for the very 
thought connected with the word sepulchre is that of a 
personality awaiting a resurrection, awaiting deliverance 
from the state and condition of death. So the Scriptures 
always refer, not to a resurrection of the living, which 
would be an absurdity, but to a resurrection of the dead. 

Note the connection in which the Apostle Peter uses 
this expression: "David is not ascended into the heavens." 
He had just called attention to the fact that David 
prophesied of the resurrection of Jesus. In the prophecy 
he personated Jesus, and said, "Thou wilt not leave My 
soul in Sheol (Hades), nor suffer Thine Holy One to see 
corruption." (V. 27.) St. Peter argues that this was 
not true of David, that he did see corruption, that his 
soul was left in Sheol, and is still left there, and will not 
be reclaimed until Messiah, in the resurrection morning, 
shall call him forth. 

"BE WITH ME IN PARADISE" 

But, says some one, did not the dying thief go with 
Jesus to Paradise the very day in which they both died? 
And if so, does not this prove that all in harmony with 
God go to heaven when they die, whatever may be the 
condition of others in death? 

No, we have made a stupid blunder and misinterpretation 
of our Redeemer's dying words to the thief. The 
wrong thought being in our minds we misinterpreted 
in harmony therewith. And our interpretation has done 
an immense amount of harm. Thousands of people have 
been encouraged to continue a life of sin, trusting that 
with their dying breath they may have the opportunity of 
saying, "God be merciful to me," and then be immediately 
ushered into glory, honor and immortality, as joint-heirs 
with the Savior, and in as honorable a station as those 
who "have fought to win the prize, and sailed through 



bloody seas" of trial and persecution and self-denial. 

What a travesty of Justice to suppose such an application 
of this principle! For instance, two ungodly persons 
quarrel. Both draw revolvers and fire; one dies instantly; 
the other, the worse of the two, lives a moment, 
in which he says, "God, be merciful to me." Then, theoretically, 
he passes into glory, while his victim, not having 
the opportunity for a cry for mercy, we are told by 
the same theory, is doomed to endless torture. 

Note the circumstance. (Luke 23:39-43.) Jesus hung 
between two thieves, one of whom joined with the multitude 
in railing at Him as an imposter, crying out, "Yes, 
if you be the Christ, save yourself and us from death." 
The other, of better heart, honestly admitted his own 
guilt and the guilt of his comrade, but defended Jesus, 
declaring that He was innocent. Following this, he addresses 
Jesus. We paraphrase his words: "Lord, I have 
defended you against an unjust attack; remember this 
poor thief if you ever have an opportunity to do a kindness 
to me in return. I heard you before Pilate say that 
you have a Kingdom, but not of this Age; some heavenly 
Kingdom, I therefore presume. I know little about such 
matters, but from what I have seen of you I can well 
surmise you King of such a Kingdom. My request is, 
'Remember me, when Thou comest into Thy Kingdom.'" 

To this Jesus replied, "Verily, verily (so be it, so be 
it, as you have asked)— verily, I say unto thee this day 
(this dark day, in which it would appear that I have not 
a friend in Heaven or on earth— this dark day in which 

R5133 : page 356 

I am crucified as a malefactor, a falsifier and a blasphemer 
—I say unto thee this day), thou shalt be with 
Me in Paradise." 

On the day of their dying all three went to Hades, to 
Sheol, to the tomb, to the state of the dead. The two 
thieves still remain there, and are amongst those mentioned 
by the Prophet Daniel when he refers to those 
"who sleep in the dust of the earth," who will come forth 
in the resurrection morning. (Daniel 12:2.) But Jesus 
arose from Sheol, from Hades, from the tomb, from the 
state of death, on the third day. He had not been to 
Paradise, for Paradise is not even yet in existence. He 
had not been to Heaven, for He had been dead. Let us 
hear His own words to Mary on the morning of His resurrection: 
"I have not yet ascended***to My Father, 
and your Father, to My God, and your God." (John 20:17.) 
Could anything be plainer, simpler, more 
harmonious? 

"DEPART AND BE WITH CHRIST" 

Ah, says one, I have great faith in St. Paul, and I 
remember his words: "I am in a strait between two 
things: having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, 



which is far better." (Phil. 1:23.) If St. Paul expected 
to depart and be with Christ, why is it not reasonable to 
suppose that he did so, and that all others, at least of the 
saintly, at death so depart and pass at once into the presence 
and fellowship of Jesus? 

Yet such a misunderstanding of St. Paul's words and 
thoughts are excusable in view of the general trend of 
Christian thought on this subject for centuries, and in 
view of the error made in this case by the translators. 
We are not faulting the translators, because they had 
the erroneous thought firmly embedded in their minds 
and presumably were trying to make the Apostle here say 
what they conscientiously thought he ought to say. 

But what we are interested in knowing is, What did 
he say on the subject? 

Let us read the Apostle's words critically. He was in 
a strait between two things— whether he would prefer to 
live and suffer further for the Truth's sake, and assist the 
brethren, or whether he would prefer to die and rest 
from his labors. Between these two positions he had no 
choice. But there was a third thing— and if this had 
been a possibility he would have had no difficulty in deciding 
—he had a real, positive desire respecting it; 
neither of the things which were possible to him would 
have stood in comparison at all, this third thing would 
have been so desirable. 

Now what was this third thing? It was not to live 
and suffer and help the brethren, nor was it to die and be 
at rest from his labors. The third thing, according to a 
literal translation, is expressed thus: "I have a desire for 
the returning, and being with Christ, which is far better" 
—far better than either living under the present trying 
conditions or dying, sleeping, resting and waiting for the 
Kingdom. 

But, says one, by what authority do you render the 

R5133 : page 357 

word depart by a word of very opposite meaning, namely 
return. We answer that we give this rendering on the 
authority of the Greek text. The Greek word is analusai; 
it is found in one other place in the Bible, and there it is 
rendered return. In this other case there can be no question 
as to the proper translation.— See Luke 12:36. 

Let us, then, dear fellow-Christians, turn from the 
follies of the Dark Ages and take the inspired words of 
Jesus, the Apostles and Prophets, and have, indeed, 
"beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for the spirit of heaviness," 
in respect to the understanding of the Heavenly 
Father's Program. Thus we will find fulfilled in us more 
and more the Master's prayer: "Sanctify them through 
Thy Truth; Thy Word is Truth." 



R5133 : page 357 



CONSECRATION THE NORMAL ATTITUDE FOR GOD'S INTELLIGENT 
CREATURES 

"The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, 
for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know 
them, because they are spiritually discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

BY THE EXPRESSION "natural man" we 
understand the Scriptures to mean all who 
have not experienced a change of nature in 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit. All mankind, 
including Adam himself, are natural 
men. Even a perfect human being cannot 
receive the deep spiritual truths which God 
reveals to His consecrated children through 
the Holy Spirit. 

Whoever is desirous of being in harmony 
with God and is endeavoring to become so, even though 
he be not justified, is looking forward to full justification. 
If he continue in this course, he will eventually become 
justified— if not at the present time, then during Messiah's 
reign. But in this Age, none can attain to full justification 
except by faith in the blood of Christ, which leads its 
possessor to make a complete consecration of himself to 
God, by the intervention of our Lord Jesus as Advocate, 
who imputes to him a sufficiency of His merit to make up 
for his deficiency. 

Since our Lord imputes His merit only to those who 
make a full consecration of themselves, one who merely 
believes in the Savior and wishes to do right, cannot at 
this time enter into full peace with God. He receives 
only a measure of peace and justification; for those alone 
who are fully absolved from sin and presented by the 
Advocate can be accepted by the Father— these alone are 
fully justified in the Father's sight. 

Some speak of the sanctified as if these were no longer 
justified. The fact is that only the sanctified can be said 
to be fully justified; and they must maintain their justification 
with God, else they could never make their calling 
and election sure. 

It is very important to observe the sharp outlines and 
distinctions which the Scriptures establish. According to 
these outlines, the Holy Spirit is given only in a very 
special manner, during a very special Age, for a very 
special purpose. The distinction is absolute and positive 
in every sense of the word. Only those begotten of the 
Father have His Spirit, which is the Spirit of the Son; 
and those alone who have that Spirit are begotten to the 
new nature. 

GOOD TRAITS OF CHARACTER NOT A PROOF OF CONSECRATION 

In times past we did not clearly distinguish the Lord's 
people from the world. Whenever we met a man with 
kind, gentle manners, whether an infidel, a Brahman, a 



Mohammedan, a Presbyterian, a Methodist or merely one 
of the world, we said to ourself, "Here is a man who has 
the Spirit of the Lord." Then, we did not know what we 
were talking about; now, we can recognize the difference. 
We are certainly glad to acknowledge good traits of character 
in heathen as well as Christians, but we are not to 
accept gentleness and kindness of manner as evidence 
that their possessor has the Holy Spirit. 

We have all seen people who have very proper sentiments 
of justice on some subjects, who are yet manifestly 
not God's people, begotten of the Holy Spirit. Such 
persons are usually fine characters. Nevertheless, their 
conscientiousness causes them to admit that they are sinners 
and have need of Divine forgiveness. We are glad 
that there are such people, and we should encourage 
rather than discourage them. 

The explanation of this condition of affairs is that 
these fine characters are not so fallen as some others. 
God made man in His own image and likeness. With the 
fall of man came the impairment of that godlike disposition, 
but the image of God is not altogether lost. For our 
part, we wish to show that our Redeemer is the only channel 
for that forgiveness, the need of which they recognize, 
and that the only condition of their full acceptance with 
God is the entire consecration of all that they possess to 
the service of the Lord. 

On one occasion our Lord said, "No man can come 
unto Me, except the Father which sent Me draw him." 
(John 6:44.) No one will receive the Holy Spirit 
without having been drawn to Christ, but some may 
be drawn without receiving the Holy Spirit. Possibly 
in these persons that endowment which God gave 
to Adam and pronounced "very good" has been less impaired 
by the fall than it has been in others. Such naturally 
desire to have God's approval and the blessings 
which He is willing to give to those who seek Him. 

Having this disposition, such persons are said to be 
drawn of God. But the Father points them to the Son, 
through the knowledge of simple truths. For instance, 
they may be influenced through hearing a hymn sung; 
such as, 

"There is a fountain filled with blood, 

Drawn from Immanuel's veins; 
And sinners plunged beneath that flood 
Lose all their guilty stains." 

These words contain the truth of God to any one who 
is in a right condition of heart, and are a very valuable 
hint as to the way to approach God. If those who are 
seeking to know God desire to inquire further on the subject, 
they will probably be led to consult with some of the 
children of God. 

Upon the inquiry of those under the conviction of sin 
as to what must be done to be saved, we tell them, "Believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved." 
(Acts 16:31.) Make a full consecration of your life unto 
God, and thus you may become a son of God. If any one 



is obedient to the drawing, the next step for him to take 
is to say, "I give myself to the Lord and trust Him fully, 
for I realize how unworthy I am." 

The course which we are describing is that which one 
must follow in order to be acceptable to God. But first 
of all, he must desire to approach the Lord. If we should 
find any one who is totally depraved, there would be no 
use to attempt to draw such a one toward righteousness, 

R5134: page 358 

Truth and God. Even those who have the right attitude 
of mind may not be equally impressed at all times. It may 
be that some circumstance must awaken them to the need 
of consecration before they will take the step which will 
enable them to become sons of God.— Rom. 12:1,2. 

THE HIGH CALLING NOT FOR ALL 

No man, however, takes this step of consecration unless 
he is called of God. There must be the call, or invitation, 
as there was with Aaron and with our Lord Jesus 
Christ. (Heb. 5:4,5.) This call comes through the 
proclamation of the Gospel. Each must hear for himself 
before he can accept. "And how shall they hear without 
a preacher?" (Rom. 10:14.) So then, it is for God to 
begin the work with the unjustified by drawing them to 
Christ for justification; and it is for our Lord Jesus Christ 
to continue this work with the consecrated. Furthermore, 
it is the privilege of all who come into God's family to 
proclaim these truths to others, to set forth the terms by 
which those who receive the call may accept it, while still 
"it is called today," before this Age of sacrifice ends.— 
Heb. 4:7; 2 Cor. 6:2. 

None come to God in this Gospel Age except those who 
make a sacrifice. Others may turn toward God; they may 
look toward God; they may be converted from a wicked 
life to a better one. But none except the class who are 
adopted into God's family are begotten of the Holy Spirit. 
The invitation of this Age is NOT an invitation to do the 
best one can; we are all called in the one hope of our calling. 
(Eph. 4:4.) "Gather My saints together unto Me, 
saith the Lord, those who have made a Covenant with Me 
by sacrifice."— Psa. 50:5. 

It is good not to do wrong. But more than a righteous 
life is required of those who would be sons of God. Consecration 
has always been proper; it is the normal attitude 
for all of God's intelligent creatures. The Creator is the 
One to whom all are properly under obligations for every 
blessing which they enjoy; and heart, mind, tongue and 
hand should be ready for consecration to do the Father's 
will. Whether angels or men or New Creatures in Christ 
—all should be in this attitude. 

Since consecration is the only reasonable attitude, then, 
when the one hundred and forty-four thousand of the 
Elect Church shall have passed their testing it will still 



be appropriate for God to permit people to consecrate, 
and to be pleased with their consecration. Therefore, we 
may expect that, in the end of the reign of Christ, all the 
worthy ones shall have made consecration to God. It 
was thus in the Jewish Age, although there was no "high 
calling" then, nor privilege to understand the deep things 
of God. 

The privilege of becoming joint-heirs with Christ will 
end as soon as the Elect number is completed. During 
the thousand years of Christ's reign, those who consecrate 
will come to understand all human things; but not being 
begotten of the Holy Spirit, they cannot understand the 
things of the Spirit. 

KNOWLEDGE OF DEEP THINGS A GRADUAL DEVELOPMENT 

We believe that there are some now living, perhaps a 
good many, who are consecrated to God and whose consecration 
has been accepted, but who are not in the light 
of Present Truth. This number may include some who 
are what the Scriptures term "babes" in Christ, and others 
to whom the Scriptures refer as the "great multitude." 
(Heb. 5:12-14; I Pet. 2:2; Rev. 7:9.) The "foolish 
virgin" class are probably in very large number all around 
us. The fact that there are some of these in Babylon 
seems to be indicated by the command, "Come out of her, 
My people." (Rev. 18:4.) If they are in Babylon, their 
presence there shows that they are not yet well developed; 
and if they are God's people, they are not enjoying the 
full strength of Present Truth, although Spirit-begotten. 

This fact does not signify that they may not receive 
Present Truth. On the contrary, we think it quite likely 
that some may be helped out of Babylon and into a better 
understanding of the Divine Plan; for some of the babes 
may be strengthened, built up, to a full appreciation of 
the things of the Spirit. We are to have in mind the fact 
that God has so arranged that "the deep things of God" 
cannot be known instantaneously; this knowledge comes 
gradually as an evidence of faithfulness to God. 

Those who have not yet learned fully to reverence God 
and who have not yet made progress in the development 
of the graces and fruits of the Spirit cannot expect to 
understand the deep things of God. It is our duty and 
privilege, not only to assist these brethren, but to build 
one another up and to strengthen one another. Let us 
see that we do these things. 



R5134: page 358 

FORGIVE SEVENTY TIMES SEVEN 
-DECEMBER 15.-MATTHEW 18:15-35.- 
"Be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving each 



other, even as God, for Christ's sake, forgave you."— Eph. 4:32. 

TO LEARN TODAY'S lesson well means a 
blessing for life to every true Christian, 
and might be said to ensure him eternal 
life— so fully would he be in accord with 
the Divine requirements. The lesson relates 
specially to the consecrated, to the 
members of the Body of Christ, the Church, 
of which He is the Head, although application, 
of course, may be made by others with 
profit. 

The Master's rule for His followers is, If a brother 
injure you, go to him alone with the matter, striving to 
reach an agreement, an understanding. The probability 
is that misunderstanding is all that there is of it. But if 
this does not suffice and you consider the matter serious 
enough, ask two others to accompany you to the offender, 
without explaining to them the mission— leave their 
minds free to hear the case and to advise yourself and 
the person injuring. 

The agreement of these brethren and their advice 
should be followed by both. If they disagree with you, 
you should acknowledge that you have erred and that the 
matter is evidently susceptible of this construction. If 
they agree with you, and your opponent refuses to heed 
their counsel and persists in doing you injury, and you 
still think it of sufficient importance to trouble the 
Church with the matter, you are then at liberty so to do. 
The Church's decision of the question is to be final, binding 
upon both. The one refusing to hear the Church is to 
be treated as an outsider, not in the sense of doing him 
injury, but abstaining from appointing him to any position, 
or honor in the Church, until his course shall be 
changed. How simple the Divine direction; what a blessing 
would come from following it! 

FORGIVE "SEVENTY TIMES SEVEN" 

St. Peter put a hypothetical question, of how many 
times a brother might trespass and ask forgiveness and 

R5134: page 359 

yet be forgiven— would seven times be the limit? The 

Master practically declared that there could be no limit, 

that any brother confessing his fault and asking forgiveness 

must be forgiven, if it should recur four hundred 

and ninety times. There is no other position left; forgiveness 

is obligatory when asked for. We must not be 

too much afraid of the consequences of following the 

Master's direction; we must put the responsibility of the 

matter with Him, assured that His wisdom has not misdirected 

us. 

Then our Lord gave a parable, to illustrate this matter, 
in respect to the Kingdom of Heaven class— the 



Church in the present embryotic condition. A certain 
king had a reckoning with his servants, and squared up 
all accounts. Amongst the others, one owed him ten thousand 
talents. His master commanded him to be sold, and 
his wife and all that he had, until the payment should be 
made. But the servant fell down at his master's feet and 
besought him to have compassion on him and he would 
pay the debt. And the master had compassion on him and 
discontinued further prosecution on account of the debt. 

"OWED HIM A HUNDRED PENCE" 

The servant thus released went out and began to look 
up some of those who were indebted to him, and found a 
fellow-servant who owed him a hundred pence, a very 
insignificant sum in comparison to the one which he had 
owed the master. He took his fellow-servant by the 
throat, saying, "Pay me the hundred pence thou owest." 
His fellow-servant fell at his feet and besought mercy, 
saying, "Have patience with me, and I will pay thee 
all." But he would not delay, and cast him into prison 
till the debt should be paid. The matter finally reached 
the ears of the master, who called him and said, 
"Thou wicked servant! I released thee from the penalty 
of thy debt because thou didst entreat me! thou shouldst 
also have had mercy upon thy fellow-servant, even as I 
had pity upon thee." And he was angry, and delivered 
him to punishment till he should pay all that was due. 

AN IMPORTANT LESSON HERE 

What is the lesson? It is that we should have compassion 
upon one another, even as we desire that God for 
Christ's sake should have compassion upon us. The lesson 

R5135 : page 359 

is well expressed in our text. We should be kind one 

to another, tender-hearted— even as God also in Christ 

forgave us— and continues to forgive our trespasses day 

by day. The trespasses of others against us are trifling 

indeed in comparison to our obligations to the Lord. We 

should therefore be very willing to forgive all who ask 

us— "until seventy times seven." In thus exercising 

mercy we will be copying the Divine character. The influence 

upon our hearts and lives will be ennobling. Our 

Lord Jesus is the express image of the Father's person, 

and we in copying the qualities of generosity and Love 

become more Christlike, and therefore more Godlike. 

SO ALSO DID GOD DO UNTO YOU 

Our Lord Jesus explains that His parable teaches the 
principles along which the Heavenly Father deals with 
the members of the Body of Christ, which is the Church. 
If they are harsh and unsympathetic, if they hold their 



brethren to a strict account along lines of justice, then 
the Heavenly Father will so deal with them, and will 
hold them to account for all their shortcomings. It 
would seem that if God's people would realize the force 
of this lesson, the practice of forgiving the brethren of 
their trespasses and shortcomings would very generously 
and very generally be brought into play, for who of us 
could afford to have the Heavenly Father exact of us a 
full penalty for every imperfection, and refuse to remit 
any of the same? 

We show our appreciation of God's mercy toward us 
by schooling ourselves in His character and becoming 
more and more merciful and generous toward all the 
Household of Faith. And if merciful toward the 
brethren, naturally we would be generous also toward all 
men. In other words, as we remember and appreciate 
our own weaknesses and blemishes, it will make us sympathetic 
with the brethren and with all mankind. And 
mercy, generosity, sympathy, God delights in. Such as 
cultivate these graces of the Spirit will be pleasing in the 
Lord's sight, and they will thereby be fitted and prepared 
to have a share with Jesus in His Throne of Glory; 
for that great Messianic Kingdom will be established for 
the very purpose of showing mercy unto thousands of 
mankind who will return to Divine favor and blessing, 
under clearer knowledge and with the assistance that will 
then be afforded. 

ADAM'S SIN IS NOT MEANT 

We are not to understand this parable to refer to 
Divine forgiveness of original sin. The sin of Adam is 
not forgiven simply because we cry for mercy. Adam 
and the entire race might have called for mercy, and 
would have received none, except in the Divine way- 
through Jesus— through faith in His blood. Nor could 
this forgiveness be granted until Jesus had finished His 
sacrifice and ascended up on high, and there appeared in 
the presence of God on behalf of those coming to the 
Father through His merit. 

This parable refers entirely to subsequent sins— sins 
referred to in our Lord's prayer, "Forgive us our trespasses, 
as we forgive them that trespass against us." 
This is shown also by the fact that the parable speaks 
of these as servants, whereas the world, as sinners, are 
not God's servants, but aliens, strangers, foreigners. The 
only ones whom God will recognize as servants are such 
as have come back into relationship with Him through 
Jesus— through faith and consecration. It is these who 
are servants of God and who are required to have mercy 
upon their fellow-servants— upon other brethren. 

Each and every one of the New Creatures, sons of 
God, accepted through the merit of Jesus, is held 
responsible for his own weaknesses; but Divine Power 
has provided for the cancellation of these freely for 
Christ's sake, upon their acknowledgment and request for 



forgiveness. But the forgiving of these trespasses of 
God's children is made dependent upon their having a 
spirit of forgiveness toward the brethren, for "if ye do 
not from the heart forgive one another's trespasses, 
neither will your Heavenly Father forgive you." "With 
what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with 
what measure" of benevolence ye mete out to others, the 
same shall be meted out to you. How wonderful are the 
Divine arrangements! How blessed, how profitable to us, 
how helpful to us in our preparation for the Kingdom! 



R5138 : page 359 

TRULY BEAUTIFUL 

Beautiful hands are they that do 

The work of the noble, good and true, 

Busy for them the long day through; 

Beautiful faces— they that wear 

The light of a pleasing spirit there, 

It matters little if dark or fair; 

And truly beautiful in God's sight, 

Are the precious souls who love the right. 



R5135 : page 360 

"UNTO US A SON IS GIVEN" 

-DECEMBER 22. -ISAIAH 9:1-7.- 

"Unto us a Child is born; unto 
us a Son is given."— Verse 6. 

TODAY'S STUDY relates to a subject which 

has thrilled the civilized world for centuries 

—a subject which will never grow old— 

a subject which, on the contrary, shall to 

all eternity be a theme of angels and of 

men. The birth of Jesus, to be rightly 

understood and esteemed, must be considered 

from the standpoint of a Gift of Love 

Divine. Any other view of the matter is 

merely the casket without the jewel. The 

Scriptures give us the key to the thought: "God so loved 

the world that He gave His Only Begotten Son, that whosoever 

believeth on Him should not perish, but have everlasting 

life. "-John 3:16. 

The world was under sentence of death; mankind 
had been dying for more than four thousand years. God 
had pitied humanity from the first. Yea, before sin entered, 
Divine Wisdom saw the end, and would not have 
created man, or would not have permitted the condition 



which led to sin and the sentence of death, had Divine 
Wisdom not foreseen and arranged in advance for human 
Redemption. 

God had purposely arranged the matter so that it 
would require the death of a perfect man to redeem 
Adam and the race which lost life in and through him. 
God knew from the beginning that no such perfect man 
could be found, because all men were of Adamic stock 
and had a share in Adamic weakness, imperfection and 
condemnation. From the beginning God in the Divine 
Plan contemplated that the Only Begotten of the Father, 
the Logos, the active Agent of Divinity in the work of 
Creation, should be granted the great privilege of being 
man's Redeemer, and thereby securing a great reward— 
"Glory, honor and immortality," the Divine nature, 
through a resurrection from the dead. 

THE FIRST STEP OF REDEMPTION 

The primary step in man's recovery necessarily was 
that the Logos should be made flesh and dwell amongst us 
and taste death, by the grace of God, for every man. 
(John 1:14; Heb. 2:9.) It is this first step that we celebrate 
at this season of the year— the birth of Jesus. He 
who was rich, for our sakes became poor, that we through 
His poverty might be reclaimed. 

Today's study points out that the ministry of Jesus 
would be in Galilee; that those people of the Jews who at 
the time were supposed to be in greatest darkness would 
see the great Light of Divine Truth, as represented in 
Jesus and His ministry. This had a primary fulfilment 
in Galilee, where the major portion of the mighty works 
of Jesus were performed. But its real fulfilment lies in 
the future, when the great light of the Millennial Kingdom, 
"the Sun of Righteousness, shall arise with 
healing in its beams." Before that glorious Sun, sorrow 
and sighing will flee away; ignorance and superstition 
will vanish; sin and darkness will be no more; every 
knee will bow and every tongue will confess. Jesus is the 
great Center of that Sun of Righteousness, but, as He 
points out, the Bride class, in process of selection during 
this Age, is to be with Him in the Morning, shining 
forth His glory. They shall sit with Him in His Throne. 
After the "Wheat" of this Age is gathered into the 
"garner" by the power of the First Resurrection, the 
Bride of Christ will shine forth with the Bridegroom, to 
heal earth's sorrows and to scatter earth's night. (Matt. 13:43.) 
All this will come to us because "unto us a 

Child is born, unto us a Son is given;" because "the Government 
shall rest upon His shoulders"; because "His 
name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty, 
Mighty One, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." 

THE FALL OF BABYLON 

We are to understand verses 3 to 5 as referring, not 



to Natural Israel, but to Spiritual Israel— nominal. The 
holy nation has phenomenally increased without increasing 
the joy. There are many false children in the nominal 
family of God; there are many "tares" in the wheatfield. 
But in the Harvest time of this Age there will be 
a joy; the faithful "will rejoice as they that divide the 
spoil." The burdensome yoke of the creedal superstitions 
will be broken, and the rod of the oppressor, Satan, 
will be broken as in the day of Midian, when Gideon with 
his little band put to flight the army of the Midianites 
and set the people free. Verse 5 intimates that the fall 
of Babylon and the breaking of the yoke and the rod will 
be in the great "time of trouble." "For all the armor 
of the armed men and the turmoil and the garments 
rolled in blood shall even be for burning, for fuel of fire." 

R5136 : page 360 

MESSIAH'S MANY TITLES 

Our great Redeemer, highly exalted, is eventually to 
bear many titles in commemoration of the many wonderful 
Offices He will fill and services He will accomplish. 
But these are yet future. His great work in the past, the 
Redemption work, was the foundation of all His future 
work. On account of His faithfulness He will have a 
right to assume these various Offices and use these various 
powers; and as each comes into exercise it will 
be used by Jesus. The right to govern the world is His 
since He died on our behalf, but He awaits the Father's 
time for taking to Himself His glorious power to reign; 
and the Government must come to Him before He can 
begin to fulfil the various titles. 

First of all, His revelation to the world will be as the 
Wonderful One, the embodiment, the Expression, of 
Divine Justice, Divine Love, Divine Wisdom and Divine 
Power. As yet the world knoweth Him not. He will be 
revealed to mankind "in flaming fire" in the time of 
trouble, and subsequently, in the rescue work of His 
Millennial Kingdom. 

He will be the world's Counselor, to give assistance, 
guidance, direction, whereby they may return through 
Restitution into harmony with Jehovah and to the enjoyment 
of the blessings provided through Redemption. As 
the Head of the Church He has been her Counselor, but 
our text refers to Him as the Great King or Governor 
of the world, and as the world's Instructor, the Great 
Prophet, or Teacher, whom God promised through Moses. 

His title, The Mighty God, or Mighty, Mighty One, 
will be recognized then, on earth, as well as in Heaven— 
"that Him hath God set forth to be a Prince and a 
Savior, to grant repentance and remission of sins to 
Israel," and "to all that are afar off."— Acts 5:31; 2:39. 

The title, The Everlasting Father, will apply to Him 
as the Life-Giver of the world, during the thousand years 
of His reign. In all that time He will be giving "life 



more abundant" to mankind— everlasting life to all who 
will obey Him— therefore His title, The Everlasting 
Father, or the Father who will give everlasting life to 
humanity. All the world of mankind, regenerated on 
the human plane, will obtain their right to everlasting life 
as human beings in an earthly Paradise from their Redeemer, 
who will then be their King. Not so the Church, 
for Jesus is not the Church's Everlasting Father. On 
the contrary, St. Peter declares "The God and Father of 
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ hath begotten us again 
to a hope of life." 

R5136 : page 361 

His title, The Prince of Peace, will not apply to Him 
at the beginning of His reign, when He will be breaking 
in pieces as a potter's vessel every human system out of 
accord with the Divine standards (Rev. 2:27; Psa. 2:9), 
but true peace shall speedily be established, and He shall 
be known as The Prince of Peace, and One whose reign 
will be undisputed and unmolested. "Of the increase of 
His Government and of peace there shall be no end"; 
there will be no rebellion; His Kingdom will not pass 
away. When His reign shall terminate finally, at the 
close of the thousand years, it will be because "He will 
deliver the Kingdom over to God, even the Father," that 
He may be the Great All in All. 

"UPON THE THRONE OF DAVID" 

Messiah's Kingdom is styled "the Throne of David" 
for two reasons: first, the name David signifies Beloved, 
and the Messiah, as the Beloved of God, of the Father, is 
the Antitype of David, even as Messiah's Kingdom will 
be the Antitype of David's kingdom. David merely "sat 
upon the throne of the Kingdom of the Lord"; it was not 
his. So the Greater than David will sit upon the 
Throne of the Kingdom of Jehovah, to order it and to 
establish it to completion, during the thousand years of 
His reign. Then He will deliver it up. "The zeal (love) 
of Jehovah of Hosts will perform this," operating through 
Messiah. 



R5136 : page 361 

KNOW OF THE DOCTRINE 

-DECEMBER 29. -JOHN 7:17.- 

"If any man willeth to do His will, he shall know of the doctrine, 
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of Myself."— John 7:17. 

WE are living in a day when the very word doctrine 
seems to be offensive to the majority 



of Christian people. Each denomination 

realizes that its own system of doctrines 

is imperfect, unsatisfactory, undefendable. 

And the same is believed in respect to all 

other doctrines. Hence by mutual consent 

Christian people seem disposed to henceforth 

and forever ignore doctrines; for they 

believe that, if after nineteen centuries 

they are thus confused, the matter never was clear and 

never will be clear to anybody. 

All this is a great mistake; the doctrines of Christ, 
as presented by the Great Teacher and His Apostles, was 
a great message, of which none of them were ashamed. 
The difficulty with the Lord's people today is that we 
gradually fell away from those doctrines— we gradually 
put darkness for light and light for darkness, and thus 
gradually got into the spirit of Babylon, and into the 
spirit of bondage to human traditions and creeds. Instead 
of shunning doctrines, we should realize that they 
are the very things needed to cause the scattering of our 
darkness and superstitions, and to draw all of God's people 
nearer together. 

The doctrines of Christ and the Apostles is what we 
need to inspire us to break down all our creed fences, 
which so long have separated us as God's people, the 
one from the other, in various denominational folds, all 
of which are contrary to the Divine arrangement; for 

R5137 : page 361 

God has but the one fold for all His "sheep" of this 
Age, as He will have another fold for the Restitution 
"sheep" of the next Age— the Messianic Kingdom Age. 

"ONE LORD, ONE FAITH, ONE BAPTISM" 

Can we doubt that if as God's people we put away 
sectarianism and the creed spectacles of our forefathers, 
and if we go with pure, sincere hearts to the Lord and His 
Word, we will there find again the "one Lord, one Faith, 
one Baptism, one God and Father over all, and one Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ," and "one Church of the First-Born, 
whose names are written in heaven"? (Eph. 4:5,6; 
Heb. 12:23.) Let us hearken to the words: "Cast not 
away therefore your confidence, which hath great recompense 
of reward," "But remember the former days, in 
which, ye endured a great fight of afflictions; partly 
whilst ye were made a gazing stock both by reproaches 
and by afflictions; and partly whilst ye became companions 
of them that were so used." "For ye have need of 
patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye 
might receive the promise." (Heb. 10:35,32,33,36.) 

The time seems long to all of us, even though we remember 
that "a day with the Lord is as a thousand years." 
When we think of the fact that it is thirty-nine hundred 
years since God's promise to Abraham, that his Seed 



should bless all the families of the earth— when we think 
of the fact that Israel did not receive that great privilege 
of being the spiritual Seed from which primarily that 
blessing should go forth, and that the "elect" are receiving 
it; when we think of the fact that God has been 
nearly nineteen centuries in selecting the "elect" from 
Israel and from all nations, it is enough to stagger our 
faith unless we hold firmly to the Divine promise and 
remember that God confirmed it with an Oath. By these 
two immutable, unchangeable things, the Divine Word 
and the Divine Oath, we know that the Seed of Abraham 
is to be developed, and that eventually it is to bless all the 
families of the earth. It is the Divine will that we allow 
our faith in this great promise of God to be "an anchor 
to our souls, sure and steadfast, entering into that within 
the veil. "-Heb. 6:19. 

THE DOCTRINES OF CHRIST 

What we all need as God's people is to put away 
human theories and other gospels and take hold afresh 
on the Gospel of Christ. These other gospels are other 
messages of hope, aside from the one which the Bible 
presents. For instance, Theosophy is one of these; Evolution 
is another; New Theology is another. These all 
hold out a different gospel from that which Jesus and the 
Apostles presented; the one that was given to us for our 
sanctification, and through the holding fast of which, 
and the obedience to The Faith, we are to be saved and 
given a share with Messiah in His glorious Empire of 
the world. 

The doctrines of Christ mean those doctrines presented 
in the Bible by Jesus and His mouthpieces, the 
Apostles. These doctrines relate to the Church and to 
the world, and God's blessing for each; these doctrines 
relate to sin and its forgiveness; the terms of that forgiveness, 
the basis of that forgiveness— the death of 
Jesus— and the hope of that forgiveness, release from 
Divine condemnation, fellowship with God, and everlasting 
life obtained through resurrection of the dead. 

A PREREQUISITE TO KNOWLEDGE 

But some one will inquire, Why is it so difficult to 
understand the doctrines of Christ? Why are there six 
hundred different denominations of Christians? Why do 
they all so misunderstand the matter— that these different 
denominations have resulted from the differences of 

R5137 : page 362 

theory respecting the teachings of the Bible? The simple 
explanation is that, shortly after the death of the 
Apostles when the Church began to be in a measure of 
prosperity, the Adversary came in and sowed the seeds 
of false doctrines, using human lips and human pens in 



his service, through pride and ambition. The darkness 
became so great that, looking back today, we speak of 
the period as the "Dark Ages." 

The various denominations of Christendom are evidences 
of honesty, perseverance and love of the Truth, 
because our forefathers, who made these creeds, were 
each trying to get more and more out of the dark and 
back to the "True Light." They all made the mistake, 
however, of holding too much to the creeds and theories 
of the past. Let us not make the same mistake; let us 
cut loose entirely from every authority outside the Word 
of God. Whoever can help us understand God's Word 
—we should be glad to have his assistance; but we cannot 
acknowledge as inspired or authoritative the teachings 
of the "Fathers" of the early times, however conscientious 
they may have been, because we cannot recognize 
that there were any such authorized successors to 
the Apostles. 

God, who foretold through the Prophets this long 
period of darkness, and who has blessed and guided His 
saintly children throughout it, without removing all of 
their blindness, has promised that with the end of this 
Age will come a great blessing and enlightenment upon 
His people, when the "wise virgins" will find their lamps 
burning brightly, and be able to understand and appreciate 
the deep things of God: "The wise shall understand, 
but none of the wicked shall understand." In the 
end of this Age the curtain was to be drawn, and the 
"true light" was to shine forth, scattering all the darkness. 
We are in the dawning of this New Age today, 
and therefore may see much more clearly than did our 
forefathers, the Divine character and Plan for human 
salvation. 

WILLETH TO DO HIS WILL 

Today's study is a message from the Master's own 
lips. He gives us the key to a clear knowledge of His 
doctrines, namely, that the student must be fully consecrated 
to God and fully desirous of knowing His Will 
and His Plan. In order to see light in God's light— to 
see the Truth, from the Divine standpoint of the Divine 
revelation, we must draw near to God in the spirit of our 
minds, consecrated in our heart. We must will to do His 
will. 

But what does this mean? What is it to will to do 
His will? God's will represents actual perfection of 
thought and word and deed, toward God, toward our 
fellows in the Body of Christ, and toward all mankind. 
This is the Divine Standard set up, but we are no more 
able to fulfil its demands than were the Jews. As St. 
Paul declares, "We cannot do the things that we would." 
Weakness of the flesh, frailty and imperfection, we all 
have with the world; the best that we can do is to will to 
do right, and to the best of our ability carry out that 
covenant with the Lord to do His will. At the very best 



all will come short of perfection. 

But for those who have come into harmony with God, 
through Christ— for those who have made a covenant 
with Him by sacrifice— for those who have Jesus for 
their Advocate, a provision has been made, whereby the 
willing, all desiring to do the Divine will, and manifesting 
endeavors so to do, are counted as righteous— as 
though they did the Divine will perfectly. This class, in 
the Scriptures, is known as the "saints"; they are the 
prospective members of the Body of Christ. It is to these 
that the promises of our text apply, that they shall know 
to do the Divine will, shall know whether Jesus merely 
made up these teachings of Himself, or whether He was 
the active agent of Jehovah in what He did and in what 
He taught. 

At the close of the year, and on the threshhold of 
another, shall we not determine to give our hearts, our 
wills, fully to the Lord— determine in our wills to do 
God's will? If so, following the instructions of the Word 
of God during the coming year, we shall doubtless be 
blessed and enabled fully to know, to appreciate, to understand, 
the doctrines of Christ— the deep things of God, 
which are revealed to this class by the Spirit of God. 



R5136 : page 362 

TWO YEARS MORE 

Two years more, and I shall see Him, whom not having 

seen I love, 
This grand prospect, daily, hourly, holds my heart on things 

above; 
Now by faith, I'm pressing onward in the footsteps of my 

Lord, 
Rough the pathway, steep and narrow, 'tis the path my Master 

trod. 

Oh, the rapture of that meeting, Oh, what ecstasy 'twill 

bring, 
When with open, perfect vision I shall gaze upon my King ! 
I shall feast upon the beauty of the One I love so well, 
And with tongue no longer stammering, all my love for Him 

I'll tell. 

Two years, and I'll see the Father, when the Son with loving 

pride, 
Shall conduct me to His presence, with the rest of His dear 

Bride. 
What a sense of awe will fill me, as with unveiled face I 

gaze 
On that grand and mighty Being, whom all Heaven unites to 

praise! 

Shall I know myself, I wonder, when He takes me to His 



heart, 
And of all that heavenly glory I shall find myself a part? 
Heaven not complete without me, mine, eternities of bliss? 
Oh, my soul, thou must not stagger, for thy God hath 

promised this! 

Oft a secret fear assails me, that I may be left behind; 
Then I bid my soul take courage, 'tis that Enemy of mine! 
He would use to cause my downfall censure sharp, or 

flattering breath, 
For he hates God's holy children with a hatred strong as 

death. 

But my Father will not leave me to his mercy, but prepare 
Heavenly armor to protect me, which, if I will always wear, 
Every fight will prove me victor, as I wield the two-edged 

Sword, 
World and flesh and powers of evil, all must fall before His 

Word! 

Oh, my soul, thy life dependeth on thy faithfulness alone; 
While the days and hours are passing, art thou holding fast 

thy crown? 
Keep this thought before thee always, let it daily strengthen 

thee, 
"Two years more decides forever thine eternal destiny!" 

Then the thought, Oh! how it thrills me, any day He may 

send word— 
"Child, thy work on earth is finished, enter into thy reward." 
But, if I need further testings, crosses heavy, trial sore, 
I can wait, for at the longest, it is only two years more! 

—Unknown. 



R5138 : page 363 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

CAN ANY OF THE GREAT COMPANY BE OF THE 
RESTITUTION CLASS? 

Question.— Can any of the Great Company become 
members of the Restitution class? 

Answer.— We understand that the terms under which 
any are begotten of the Holy Spirit are that they renounce, 
give up, the human nature. When God accepts 
their consecration and takes such into Covenant relationship 
with Himself, He indicates that relationship by 
begetting them of the Holy Spirit. The only class into 
which these can come for future life is that of spirit or 
heavenly beings. If they live up to all the terms and 
conditions of their sacrifice, then they will have the very 
fullest blessing which God has provided for the loyal 
and to which He has called them. But for those who 



fail to live up to the highest standard— that of walking 
in the footsteps of Jesus— the arrangement seems to be 
that they shall at least prove themselves loyal, even if not 
to the same degree as their brethren. 

This loyalty will be tested in the great time of trouble 
through which the Great Company will go. Then if they 
fail to prove their loyalty, apparently they will lose that 
life in the Second Death. But if they give up the earthly 
life and manifest loyalty to the Lord, even though they 
may never give it up willingly, but merely when brought 
to straits, then they will have life on the spirit plane. 

The merit of Christ, which has been under embargo, 
as it were, must all be released before the Restitution 
work can begin. In other words, the Little Flock must 
have been "changed" and the Great Company must have 
suffered destruction of the flesh, before the merit can 
again be free in the hands of Justice, ready to be given to 
the world in Restitution. 

Therefore, our answer would be, We cannot expect 
the Spirit-begotten ones to pass through the time of 
trouble in the end of this Age and to live on during the 
Millennial Age; for they belong to the Church of the 
First-borns, all of whom must be born before the after-borns 
can be brought forth. The after-borns will be the 
world in the Restitution. 



FIFTH SUNDAY CONVENTIONS 

Question.— Are Fifth Sunday Conventions advantageous? 

Answer.— We are perplexed how to answer this question, 
and must leave the answering of it to each 
Class for itself, without any particular advice even. 
From some we have heard good reports with blessings 
secured. From others we have had reports to the contrary. 
Those who have had practical experience with 
these Conventions should decide for themselves. We 
have had no experience in this direction. 



HOW TREAT "THE MENACE" 

Question. -How should the WATCH TOWER readers 
treat "The Menace?" 

Answer.— This is a free country and everyone has a 
right to follow that course which he believes will be most 
to the Lord's glory and most to the advancement and the 
good of his fellow-men. The Editor of "The Menace" 
is merely exercising his rights. As for the WATCH 
TOWER, it pursues a different course without criticizing 
others. Perhaps the Lord may have a work for "The 
Menace" for all we know. Our judgment is that His 
work for us is in a different direction and we exhort all 
the WATCH TOWER readers to reserve all their might and 



physical strength for the promulgation of the Truth as the 
Lord has been granting us to see it within the last forty 
years in the WATCH TOWER. It is our mission to preach 
the Word— the Gospel of the Kingdom. We cannot do 
all that we would in this direction, and hence have no 
time to devote to other matters, political, social, etc. 



page 363 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

I have read for the second time the article in the October 
1, 1912, TOWER, "Fight the Good Fight," and how it thrills my 
heart to renewed zeal and determination to fight the good 
fight, realizing more than ever that I fight for myself, 
through the power of Jesus. I shall keep the TOWER in my 
desk ready for re-reading at spare moments. 

My heart goes out in gratitude to our dear Father, and 
to our Savior and Advocate for these wonderful helps that 
come as refreshing and energizing dew drops upon our 
thirsting souls. The Truth is new and fresh every morning 
and evening. It is even more precious to me now than when 
I first saw it, nineteen years ago. 

How sweet the words of the poet sound in my heart: 
"There's no place where earthly sorrows are more felt than 
up in heaven; There's no place where earthly failings have 
such kindly judgment given. Search the Scriptures, search 
and see, God in mercy judgeth thee." 

I had occasion to speak to a vessel captain today, who 
to a certain extent is interested in the harvest work, telling 
him about the many blessings we received at the Washington 
Convention, and the profitable and pleasant visit to the Tabernacle 
and Bethel. He said: "You certainly are at peace with 
all mankind, if I can judge by your face." 

Our earnest prayers go up for you daily, that the God 
of all grace may be your strength till the work is finished, 
come what may. 

Sweetest Christian greetings and remembrances from the 
writer and family, in which, I am sure, every member of 
our dear Ecclesia joins. 

Yours, by His grace, N. A. LINDERBERG.-Minn. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I am enclosing two clippings from prominent church papers 
which will be self-explanatory. I wish to say that I think 
one of the best features about the WATCH TOWER is its 
indifference to the ranting of other publications. I feel 
almost to rejoice in this fact every time I receive the TOWER; 
I can sit down and really read the explanation of the Holy 
Scriptures and the discussion of topics without having to 
read every few lines some one's personal slashing of another 



person's belief; or by turning a page run on to a $3.00 watch 
advertisement guaranteeing a watch for twenty years; or a 
minister's boosting of the last Holiness meeting at which 
he and John Doe were the prominent speakers, and Mr. 

the singer, that so many "prayed through, many 

were gloriously blessed, and that he, the writer, had a few 
open dates, and if any of the dear brethren wanted him, to 
write at once." 

Yet I do believe that some of these articles should be 
answered, not by retorting, but by telling your readers some 
of the things accomplished: for instance, in one article which 
you will find underscored, the writer says, "But Russell's 
teachings have not produced even reformations." Why would 
it not be well to reprint both these articles with such comment 
as is your custom to make in a religious way, with only 
the one thought in view, that of shedding light on these 
benighted souls, that their vision may be gloriously enlarged, 
so they may be able to see beyond the confines of the small 
circle in which their thoughts have been accustomed to move, 
and realize the truth of the fact that they are servants of a 
dogma, the charms of which have so veiled their vision, that 
nothing but an almost divine interference can accomplish 
the feat of awakening their soul to the more lovable nature 
of the God of Love, who could not possibly be a God of 
Love were He a God of the Hell Fire punishment which they 
have been standing for. 

May God add His blessing. 

S. R. G .--Dakota. 



Brother Russell's replies to Mr. Ellis he thinks best to incorporate 
in his discourses, which appear in many newspapers and reach many 
people. 



page 365 
