1997 “Faith in God’s Word” District Convention
1 The apostle Paul reminded Timothy that “all Scripture is inspired of God.” (2 Tim. 3:16) Since God’s Word is inspired, we have every reason to exercise faith in it. The theme of this year’s district convention is “Faith in God’s Word.” The program will strengthen our faith in the Bible, whether we have known the truth for many years or have just recently come into contact with Jehovah’s organization. All of us should arrange to be in attendance for the entire program. How upbuilding it will be if newly interested persons, particularly those with whom we study the Bible, attend with us!
2 Three-Day Convention: This year a three-day district convention program has been arranged for our benefit. The February 15, 1997, Watchtower lists 193 conventions to be held in the contiguous United States. By now you have been informed of the convention to which your congregation is assigned, and you should have made definite plans to attend all three days of the program. Have you approached your employer to get the needed time off? If you have school-age children and your convention falls during the school term, have you kindly informed their teachers that your children will be absent on Friday for this important part of their religious training?​—Deut. 31:12.
3 In addition to English, there will be conventions in American Sign Language, Chinese, French, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish, Tagalog, and Vietnamese.
4 The program will begin each day at 9:30 a.m. Doors will open at 8:00 a.m. The only ones permitted to enter before that time will be those with work assignments, but they will not be allowed to save seats until the building opens for everyone.​—Phil. 2:4.
5 Do Well by Paying Attention: The apostle Peter reminded first-century Christians that they would do well to pay attention to the prophetic word as to a lamp shining in a dark place. (2 Pet. 1:19) The same is true of us. Living in this old world that is under Satan’s control is like being in a dark place. We are grateful to have been called out of spiritual darkness. (Col. 1:13; 1 Pet. 2:9; 1 John 5:19) To remain in the light, we need to keep our faith strong by paying attention to the inspired Word of Jehovah. Our district convention this summer will encourage us to do just that.
6 Effort may be required on our part if we are to concentrate on the program, but we certainly will be blessed for doing so. We should endeavor to come to the convention site well rested so that we will be alert during the sessions. Allow ample time to get to the convention site each day in order to be in your seat before the program begins. Then join in the opening song and prayer at the start of each day’s program. Adults should set the example, and parents should train their children.​—Eph. 6:4.
7 If we look over the titles of the parts before the day’s program begins, we can try to anticipate what points might be brought out during that session. This will enhance our interest in the material when it is presented. We may look for points that will help us express to others why we believe in God and in his sure promise to reward those earnestly seeking him. (Heb. 11:1, 6) It has been recommended that we take brief notes to help us remember the main points of the program. If we take too many notes, we may miss some key points because we are too busy writing.
8 Last year many adults and youths were again observed walking aimlessly through the corridors, milling around outside, and visiting with others while the program was in progress, rather than listening to what “the faithful and discreet slave” had provided for our benefit. Jesus promised to give us spiritual food at the proper time. (Matt. 24:45-47) Therefore, we ought to be present to benefit from that food and not show a lack of appreciation. (2 Cor. 6:1) It also seems that when some children get restless, they often ask to use the rest room as an excuse to get up and walk around. Proper training at home will usually make frequent trips to the rest room unnecessary. At times, older youths sit together in remote places, talking, whispering, and passing notes to each other. Our young people, who face many pressures today, need to concentrate on the material being presented, not to be doing other things during the program. Youthful desires that do not harmonize with Bible principles should be avoided. (Compare 2 Timothy 2:22.) The attentiveness of all, adults and youths, will honor Jehovah and make him rejoice.
9 If it becomes necessary for one of the attendants to give anyone counsel in these matters, it should be accepted as a loving provision from Jehovah. (Gal. 6:1) All need to remember that the reason we put forth effort to attend the convention is so that we may ‘listen and learn.’ (Deut. 31:12) Also, “a wise person will listen and take in more instruction.” (Prov. 1:5) In the time remaining before you attend the convention, discuss as a family the need to sit together in the audience, remain seated during the program, and be keenly attentive, in order to gain the full benefit of the program.
10 Adornment That Pleases Jehovah: Jehovah’s people are on display for all the world to see. (1 Cor. 4:9) We are generally noted for our fine standard of dress and grooming. Applying the Scriptural principles found at 1 Timothy 2:9, 10 and at 1 Peter 3:3, 4 has resulted in great changes in the appearance of many compared with how they looked when they began associating with the Christian congregation. This is in sharp contrast to the steadily deteriorating standards of dress and grooming that we see in the world. We want to be on guard that we do not become like the world in our appearance​—wearing outlandish clothing, promoting worldly fads in hairstyles, or being immodestly dressed. Our exemplary dress and grooming should help new ones who attend the convention to see how Christians ought to adorn themselves.
11 While the general impression left as a result of last year’s conventions was very favorable, worldly dress and grooming continue to be a problem with some of the brothers and sisters, especially during leisure time. While making our plans to attend the convention, we should analyze ourselves as to our dress and grooming. Parents, wisely monitor what your young children and teenagers are going to wear. Make sure we are not letting worldly styles and fads have a bad effect on our Christian appearance.
12 Maintain Fine Conduct: Fine conduct is a mark of true Christians. (1 Pet. 2:12) Our behavior wherever we may be​—at the convention, at restaurants, and in hotels, as well as when traveling—​can give a fine witness and help others to see what faith in God and in his Word can do for people. This may move some to come to know Jehovah. (Compare 1 Peter 3:1, 2.) We have the privilege of glorifying God by our conduct. The management of one hotel in Alabama said that our delegates are “the nicest and best behaved group they host.” They added: “It will be a privilege to have you back in the future.” A convention and visitors bureau in the northwestern United States wrote: “Each year, the Watchtower Society conference is eagerly awaited by our entire community. Your members are a true delight; conducting themselves with the utmost courtesy and respect. Our businesses recognize this and treasure the return of their ‘family’ of guests each year.” Reports like these are a pleasure to read, are they not? There is a need to remain vigilant, however, so that we may preserve the good reputation of Jehovah’s people.
13 Many reminders have been given about controlling our children, not letting them run around hotels unattended, disturbing other guests. Each year, the Society receives reports that some of our children are unsupervised in and around the swimming pool or are seen running in hallways and public areas of hotels. One manager who stayed overnight at his hotel was awakened twice after 11:00 p.m. by groups of our children knocking on each room door looking for other Witnesses. Although the conventions provide us the opportunity to visit and associate with our brotherhood, parents must still keep in mind their obligation to provide supervision for their children at all times. This is a responsibility that Jehovah places on every parent. (Prov. 1:8; Eph. 6:4) The unsupervised actions of children can undermine the good reputation that other Witnesses of Jehovah have worked hard to build.​—Prov. 29:15.
14 If a hotel provides a complimentary breakfast during your stay, you should not see this as an opportunity to stock up for the noon meal. Hotels have reported that some of our brothers and sisters have come down with plastic bags and filled them with fruit, Danish pastries, and bagels to be consumed later, leaving little for the other guests. Such hotel amenities are provided as a courtesy for guests while at the hotel and must not be abused. To take more than what you will eat during your breakfast meal would really demonstrate a greedy spirit, and it is also dishonest. If an improper attitude on the part of fellow Witnesses is observed, it would be a kindness to remind them of how they should be acting. Also remember, no cooking is to be done in hotel rooms unless they are equipped with a kitchen for that purpose. If you bring an ice chest to your room, please be sure it does not leak or sweat and damage the carpet, furniture, or walls of the room.
15 Keep in mind that tipping is appropriate when you receive a personal service, especially since many who serve the public, such as waiters, waitresses, maids, and bellmen, are dependent to a large extent on tips to make a living. As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we want to show good manners in this regard too.​—See Awake! of June 22, 1986, pages 24-7.
16 Covering Convention Expenses: All of us will have expenses in connection with attending the conventions. There is another expense that we do well to consider. Facilities that are used for conventions are expensive. There are also other expenses that must be cared for. Our generous voluntary contributions at the conventions are greatly appreciated.​—Acts 20:35; 2 Cor. 9:7, 11, 13.
17 Seating: The directions that have been given for a number of years will continue to apply, namely, SEATS MAY BE SAVED ONLY FOR YOUR IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBERS AND ANY WHO MAY BE TRAVELING WITH YOU IN YOUR CAR. It has been good to see that more are complying with these directions in recent years, and this has heightened the loving atmosphere displayed at the conventions. At most sites some seats are more easily accessible than others. Please show consideration, and leave the more convenient seats for those whose circumstances require them.
18 Cameras, Camcorders, and Audiocassette Recorders: Cameras and recording equipment may be used at conventions. However, our use of them must not be distracting to others in attendance. We should not walk around during the sessions taking pictures, as that would disturb others who are trying to concentrate on the program. No recording devices of any sort are to be connected to the electrical or sound systems, nor should this equipment block aisles, walkways, or the view of others.
19 First Aid: The First Aid Department is for emergencies only. It is not able to care for the chronically ill. That is why you should consider the health needs of yourself and your family in advance. Please bring your own aspirin, digestive aids, bandages, safety pins, and similar items, as such things will not be available at the convention. Any known to be at risk of seizures, insulin shock, heart problems, and so forth, should anticipate their needs to the extent possible. They should have the necessary medication, and a member of the family or the congregation who understands their situation should be present with them at all times to provide any needed assistance. Problems have arisen at conventions when individuals with chronic health problems were left alone and became ill. The convention administration has had to contact emergency medical services to take them to a hospital. If some with special health needs do not have family members who can assist them, their congregation elders will need to be apprised of the situation and make necessary arrangements to help. No provision will be made at the conventions for special rooms to accommodate those who have allergies.
20 Food at the Convention: Having no food service at conventions has resulted in many more being free during all the sessions to concentrate on the spiritual food. A number of expressions of appreciation for this simplification have been received since the arrangement was instituted. All should plan to bring their own practical, nourishing food items for the noon break, such as those suggested in the May 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraph 26. No glass containers and no alcoholic beverages are to be brought into the convention facility. Food coolers must be small enough to fit under your seat. Some in the audience have been observed eating and drinking during the program. Doing this is disrespectful. Where there is a food court within the convention facility or there are vendors on the outside, some brothers have been observed patronizing these during the program. Such a practice is inappropriate.
21 We truly appreciate our spiritual feast and the relaxed, peaceful atmosphere of fellowship during our short noon breaks. In keeping with the purpose of this arrangement, instead of leaving the facility at the noon break to purchase food, please bring something with you. Thus, you will have more time to enjoy the fellowship of your brothers and sisters.
22 How glad we are that the “Faith in God’s Word” District Conventions will be starting soon! All of us want to be sure that our preparations have been made to attend the whole program, so that we can enjoy to the full the fine spiritual banquet Jehovah has prepared for us through his organization. In that way we will become “completely equipped for every good work” in the days ahead.​—2 Tim. 3:17.
[Box on page 6]
District Convention Reminders
  Baptism: Baptismal candidates should be seated in the designated section before the program begins on Saturday morning. A modest bathing suit and a towel should be brought by each one who plans to be baptized. In the past some have worn attire that was not appropriate and that detracted from the occasion. Elders reviewing with baptismal candidates the questions in the Our Ministry book should make sure that each one understands these points. After the baptism talk and prayer by the speaker, the session chairman will call for a song. After the last stanza, the attendants will direct the candidates to the immersion site. Baptism in symbol of one’s dedication is an intimate and personal matter between the individual and Jehovah. Thus, it is inappropriate for candidates to embrace each other or to hold hands while being baptized.
  Badge Cards: Please wear the 1997 badge card at all times while in the convention city and while traveling to and from it. This often creates opportunities for us to give a fine witness. Badge cards and holders should be obtained through your congregation, as they will not be available at the convention. Do not wait until a few days before the convention to ask for cards for you and your family. Remember to carry your current Advance Medical Directive/​Release card.
  Rooming: We are asking for the cooperation of everyone in using ONLY the listing of accommodations provided by the convention. If we bypass the Society’s arrangement and secure accommodations at a hotel not on the approved list or pay more than the agreed-upon rate at one of the listed hotels, we undermine much of the hard work of our brothers who negotiate with the hotels for better rates. Have in mind that the convention room rates also apply on Thursday and Sunday nights. IF YOU EXPERIENCE A PROBLEM WITH A HOTEL, please do not hesitate to notify the Rooming Department while you are still at the convention so that they can assist you in resolving the matter right away. Please realize that it may not be possible for everyone to get a nonsmoking room at a hotel, even if the request was made when the reservation was booked. The same applies to your preference for king, queen, or double beds. Congregation secretaries should be sure that Special Needs Room Request forms are promptly forwarded to the appropriate convention address. If you must cancel an accommodation made through the special needs arrangement, you should immediately notify both the landlord or hotel and the convention Rooming Department so that the room can be reassigned.
  Baby Strollers and Lawn Chairs: In most locations, baby strollers cannot be used in places of public assembly. Fire regulations prohibit placing them in corridors and aisles or between rows of seats. Since large crowds may cause congested conditions, strollers are potentially dangerous both to the baby and to any who could stumble over them. So please do not bring strollers to the convention site. Infant or child car seats are permissible, since these can be secured in seats next to the parents. Please do not bring lawn chairs. They are dangerous and are not allowed at large public facilities. Your cooperation is important and appreciated.
  Volunteer Service: Can you set aside some time at the convention to assist in one of the departments? Serving our brothers, if only for a few hours, will be very helpful and brings much personal satisfaction. If you can assist, please report to the Volunteer Service Department at the convention. Children under 16 years of age can also make a fine contribution by working under the direction of a parent or other responsible adult.
  Words of Caution: Keep alert to potential problems so as to avoid unnecessary difficulty. Often thieves and other unscrupulous individuals prey on people who are away from their home environment. Be sure your vehicle is locked at all times, and never leave anything visible to tempt someone to break in. Thieves and pickpockets focus their attention on large gatherings. It would not be wise to leave any valuables at your seat. You cannot be sure that everyone around you is a Christian. Why offer any temptation? Reports have been received of attempts made by some outsiders to lure children away. KEEP YOUR CHILDREN IN SIGHT AT ALL TIMES.
  Television and video services available in many hotels often feature lewd, pornographic programs. Be alert to this snare, and do not permit children to have unsupervised access to the television in the room. Parents may wish to prevent their children from activating “pay TV” in their hotel room by requesting the hotel to lock out this feature during their stay.
  Please do not phone or write the management of the convention auditorium, seeking information about any convention matters. If the information is not available from the elders, you may write to the address of a specific convention, as found on the back of the Special Needs Room Request forms, one of which is posted on the congregation’s information board.

