Announcements
▪ Literature offer for May: Individual copies of The Watchtower and Awake! and the brochure What Does God Require of Us? June: Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. Concentrate on starting home Bible studies. July and August: Any of the following 32-page brochures: Does God Really Care About Us?, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, Should You Believe in the Trinity?, The Government That Will Bring Paradise, What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It?, and When Someone You Love Dies.
▪ New Publications Available:
“All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial”​—Hungarian
Elementary Bible Teachings​—Persian
Hellfire​—Is It Part of Divine Justice? (Tract No. 74)​—Persian
How to Start and Continue Bible Discussions​—Persian
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—What Do They Believe? (For Jews) (Tract No. 18)​—Italian
Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life​—Hebrew, Persian
Lasting Peace and Happiness​—How Can You Find Them?​—Chinese (Simplified)
Life in a Peaceful New World (Tract No. 15)​—Indonesian
My Book of Bible Stories (Small size)​—Amharic
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Albanian
Sing Praises to Jehovah (29 songs)​—Samoan
Sing Praises to Jehovah (100 songs)​—Amharic
Sing Praises to Jehovah​—Large Print (Lyrics only)—​Romanian
Spirits of the Dead​—Can They Help You or Harm You? Do They Really Exist?​—Persian
What Does God Require of Us?​—Turkish
What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe? (Tract No. 14)​—Sinhalese
What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? (Tract No. 16)​—Sinhalese
Who Are Jehovah’s Witnesses? (Tract No. 73)​—Croatian
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Tigrinya
▪ New Audiocassettes Available:
A Revelation to John (single cassette)​—Danish
Awake! on cassette​—Danish
Deuteronomy (set of two cassettes)​—Danish
Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life (five cassettes in an album)​—Italian
Leviticus (set of two cassettes)​—Danish
Numbers (set of three cassettes)​—Danish
Preserving Life in Time of Famine (Drama, single cassette)​—Italian
The First of Peter through The Letter of Jude (single cassette)​—Danish
The Secret of Family Happiness (four cassettes in an album)​—English
To the Hebrews, The Letter of James (single cassette)​—Danish
What Does God Require of Us? (single cassette)​—German, Spanish
▪ New Videocassettes Available:
Jehovah’s Witnesses Stand Firm Against Nazi Assault​—German
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name—​Serbian
Purple Triangles​—French,  Greek, Spanish

