Show Genuine Concern for All the Interest Found
1 The worldwide Kingdom proclamation will soon come to a close, after which all those “who do not know God” will suffer destruction. (2 Thess. 1:7-9) Thus, genuine concern for the lives of others is moving Jehovah’s people to reach as many as possible with the Kingdom message.​—Zeph. 2:3.
2 Every month, millions of hours are spent in searching out those who want to hear “good news of something better.” (Isa. 52:7) In response to the current literature offer, many have accepted copies of The Watchtower and Awake! or the brochure What Does God Require of Us? Genuine concern for these people should prompt us to follow through on all the interest found.​—Prov. 3:27.
3 Keep Accurate Records: More will be accomplished if you keep a complete and accurate record of the interest and placements. Information such as the householder’s name and address, day and time you called, literature placed, and the subject discussed will help you to be more effective when returning. Also, if you write down some comments made by the householder in your initial conversation, you may be able to refer to them effectively as you resume the discussion on the return call.
4 Be Prompt in Making Return Visits: How many of those who accepted literature from you last month have you tried to visit again? Have weeks passed by without any further contact? Genuine concern for their everlasting welfare should move you to return as soon as possible, preferably within a few days, so that the conversation will still be fresh in mind. By returning promptly to further their interest, you may be able to forestall Satan’s efforts before he “comes and takes away the word that was sown in them.”​—Mark 4:15.
5 Preparation Is Essential: Your effectiveness in making return visits is directly related to how well you prepare. Plan your approach before going. The back page of the April 1997 Our Kingdom Ministry provides several presentations that may be used with good success when you offer the magazines or the Require brochure. The next thing is to have some thoughts in mind to share when you return. What can be said when you follow up interest? How can a Bible study be started?
6 When following up a discussion on what it will take to clean up the earth and make it a better place in which to live, you might say:
▪ “On my previous visit, we agreed that drastic steps need to be taken before the earth can be made into a peaceful paradise. Do you think humans have what is needed to accomplish this task? [Allow for response.] Please note why it will be necessary for God to intervene in man’s affairs.” Read Psalm 37:38. Then turn to lesson 5 in the Require brochure, and use selected portions of paragraphs 4-5 to show how God will fulfill this prophecy. Follow through by offering a Bible study using the brochure.
7 If you discussed God’s Kingdom and placed the “Require” brochure on the initial call, when returning you could say something like this:
▪ “When we last spoke, we identified God’s Kingdom as being a real government that will rule the entire earth. The Bible shows that Christ Jesus will be its ruler. Can you see any benefits in having this kind of government and leader?” Allow for response. Open the Require brochure to lesson 6. Using selected points in paragraphs 6-7 and the illustration on page 13, show what God’s Kingdom will do for mankind in the future. Read Daniel 2:44, and if appropriate, introduce the Knowledge book and offer a Bible study.
8 If you found someone who acknowledged that the world’s religions have created problems for humanity, you might ask this on the return visit:
▪ “Have you ever wondered how we can know which religion has God’s approval? [Allow for response.] This brochure What Does God Require of Us? gives the identifying marks of true religion.” Turn to lesson 13, and highlight the five italicized points in paragraphs 3-7. You may continue by saying: “In addition to finding the true religion, we must find out what God requires of us individually.” Read John 4:23, 24. Offer to discuss this further. Turn to lesson 1 in the brochure, and demonstrate how we study.
9 When you return to continue a discussion about family happiness, you could say something similar to the following:
▪ “When we first met, I shared with you the secret of family happiness, which is to apply the counsel found in God’s Word, the Bible. When it comes to addressing the needs of a modern family, do you believe that the Bible is out-of-date or up-to-date?” Allow for response. Present the Knowledge book. Turn to chapter 2, and read the quotation in paragraph 13. Using the points in paragraph 3, offer a family Bible study.
10 By keeping accurate records, making essential preparation, and returning promptly to further their interest, we can demonstrate the kind of neighbor love that will attract them to the way of salvation.​—Matt. 22:39; Gal. 6:10.

