Why Do We Keep Going Back?
1 Have you ever asked yourself that question, perhaps as you were preparing for a day in service? In some areas where our territory is worked repeatedly, householders may recognize who we are and quickly turn us away. Only a few may respond in a favorable way. Yet, there are many powerful reasons why we keep going back.
2 First of all, we are commanded to continue preaching the Kingdom message until the end comes. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) The prophet Isaiah wondered how long he would have to continue his preaching work. The answer he received is recorded at Isaiah 6:11. There is no question about it​—he was told to keep going back to the people with God’s message. Likewise today, though they may turn us away, Jehovah expects us to continue calling on the people living in our territory. (Ezek. 3:10, 11) This is a sacred responsibility that has been entrusted to us.​—1 Cor. 9:17.
3 Another reason for us to keep going back is that this gives us an opportunity to show the depth of our devotion to Jehovah. (1 John 5:3) Besides, when we contemplate what the near future holds for mankind, how can we hold ourselves back from lovingly trying to warn our neighbors? (2 Tim. 4:2; Jas. 2:8) Our being faithful in carrying out our assignment provides repeated opportunities for them to respond to God’s message of salvation, so that they will not be able to say they were not warned.​—Ezek. 5:13.
4 Additionally, we never know when some people will have a change of heart. It can be prompted by a change in their personal circumstances, a tragedy in their family, or world conditions that cause them to think seriously about their future. Then again, something we say at their door may trigger a favorable response. (Eccl. 9:11; 1 Cor. 7:31) Also, people move. We may find new residents in our territory who will respond to the good news​—perhaps young adults who are now living on their own and are thinking seriously about their purpose in life.
5 Will we keep going back? Yes! The Scriptures give us ample motivation to return to the people again and again. In the end, when the preaching work is finished, Jehovah will bless us for our continued effort in the ministry, and he will bless those who have responded appreciatively to the Kingdom good news.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

