Announcements
● Literature offer for February and March: The book Making Your Family Life Happy for 35c. For April: Watchtower subscription for one year for $2.00, with 384- or 416-page book free to new subscribers. (Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand! and “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”—How? may be ordered from the Society. We have ample supplies.)
● Reminder: Subscriptions along with the Weekly Subscriptions form (M-203) should be sent to Watchtower, Wallkill, N.Y. 12589. However, subscription money should be included with magazine money remitted each month to the Society’s Brooklyn office.
● Please note the following price change for the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century: Pioneer, 2c; congregation, 8c; public, 10c. This is for a revised edition, with updated figures and a fresh set of questions answered on pages 26-31, and printed on quality paper.
● Pioneer rates for literature, magazines and subscriptions may be obtained only through the congregation.
● When new secretary appointments need to be made in between circuit overseer visits (as for example, when a secretary moves to another congregation or needs to be removed for one reason or another), this matter should be considered by the entire body of elders. The recommendation should be made to the Society and the service committee should sign the letter on behalf of the entire body of elders. In this way, things will be done uniformly and appropriate appointments can then be made. (Elders should re-read the letter of April 12, 1978.)
● The April 15 Watchtower and April 8 and 22 Awake! will have articles specially suitable for placing with the public and for obtaining subscriptions. Be sure to place your order early for extra copies, including those that will be needed by auxiliary pioneers.
● New Publications Available:
Making Your Family Life Happy—Portuguese
My Book of Bible Stories—Portuguese
Your Youth—Getting the Best out of It—Greek, Thai
“Look! I Am Making All Things New”—Korean
Unseen Spirits—Do They Help Us? Or Do They Harm Us?—Danish, Dutch, German, Portuguese, Swahili
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts”—Greek
● The Thai edition of Awake! is now available as a monthly magazine. Subscriptions may be obtained.
● Please be reminded that both new and renewal subscriptions obtained from unbaptized persons should be reported on your monthly field service report. This adjustment made July 1, 1977, was to help all to appreciate that renewal subscriptions are just as important as new ones. Of course, subscriptions for baptized persons would not be reported.

