Do You Prepare as a Family?
1 What are the benefits of a family’s reading the Bible together, or preparing together for meetings and for field service? As one young brother from Delaware put it: “We learned self-discipline, to sit still, and to study for a period of time. More important, we learned the value of personal study. We kept up with the weekly meetings, getting more out of the information than we ever would have on our own.”
2 This young man later went into full-time service. His zeal and devotion in the field service, as well as that of many other young people like him, reflect favorably upon the parents for their efforts to prepare their children for a life of service to God.
FINDING THE TIME
3 What comes to your mind as a parent when family preparation is mentioned? Do you think: “As valuable as it is, when will I find time for it?” Have you tried to make some time for it? How persistent have your efforts been? Each person’s situation is different. But it would be helpful to see what some are doing.
4 One family in New York takes advantage of the evening meal together to discuss spiritual matters. On different evenings, they discuss the day’s text together and talk about points from the weekly Bible reading. At times they prepare for the service meeting or Theocratic School while at the supper table. In addition, they regularly schedule part of an evening each week for a systematic study of The Watchtower or some other publication. Of course, something has to go, so they limit their TV viewing. The mother, having more time with their son, works with him to prepare for field service. Then he goes out with his father or mother, putting into application the things he has learned. Such family cooperation makes the best use of their limited time.
5 Another suggestion is to take a half hour after a meal, before the table is cleared, to cover at least a portion of the Bible reading for the week. All family members can take part, making it interesting and instructive.
WHAT SHOULD BE STUDIED
6 Obviously the needs of the family must be considered. Some may do their Bible reading, others prepare for the Watchtower study; still others make it a practice to study things that fit the particular needs of their families. One brother in his early twenties commented on the help his father gave him to prepare for field service, saying: “I can remember having a little black notebook with scriptures listed under certain subjects, like ‘Trinity.’ Dad would pretend to be a householder whose objections I would have to overcome. I also had to memorize the names of the books of the Bible, five at a time, between each Monday night study.”
7 Another brother who has been at Bethel for 10 years, and whose brother also served at Bethel, recalls that in his family his father always pointed them toward the prospect of full-time service. “So it was natural that we should want to come to Bethel,” he noted. The family study is still consistently held for the benefit of a younger brother remaining at home.
8 A 26-year-old brother from Minnesota recalls that his mother would study with him, and together they prepared for the meetings and field service. They hid their publications in the dried cereal boxes, knowing that the opposed father never ate dried cereal. Those secret study periods proved their worth as they prepared the son for full-time service both as a regular pioneer and at Bethel.
9 It is good to be flexible in these family study sessions. Also, it is beneficial to have a relaxed atmosphere, rather than a strict disciplined procedure. As one brother put it: “On our family study night our mother would prepare in advance some ‘treat’ and after we finished our study period we would enjoy this. Some time in the evening would also be used for a family game or for the family to sing together. We looked forward to our family study nights.”
INCLUDE OTHERS
10 Many brothers and sisters have no family members in the truth. It would be a kindness to invite such ones, where possible, to share with you in family Bible reading or in family preparation for meetings and field service. (Deut. 15:7-11; Luke 6:38) Perhaps sometimes the family study can be held at the home of some older publisher who lives alone.
11 Do not minimize the value of reading the Bible together and of preparation for meetings and field service within the family. When parents set a good example, not letting such periods of family Bible discussion be easily infringed upon by other interests, this impresses upon their children the vital importance of deep respect and appreciation for God’s Word. All of this works to Jehovah’s praise and to the blessings of those who prepare as a family.

