Presenting the Good News—To Families
1 Families that apply Bible principles and that build their lives around God’s kingdom have found that their problems are reduced, if not solved, and happiness is achieved. Isn’t this a grand message to bring to the families in your territory during the month of February, using the book Making Your Family Life Happy?
2 How are we going to do this? By directing their attention to God’s Word, which sets out the principles for happy family life. Family life is on the minds of people. Be willing to talk about it. Show them how the new book can help them. But also point out that the problems of family life will never be completely solved until God’s kingdom removes all wickedness from the earth. That is what people are praying for when they say the Lord’s Prayer, but most of them don’t realize it. (Matt. 6:9, 10) The final chapter of the book on family life can help them to appreciate this truth.
3 Of course, when you talk to people about the problems of family life, you will want to be tactful. Avoid giving the impression that you think the householder is having problems in his family. It would be better to refer to the problem as one that society in general is having.
4 You might start off in this manner: “I’m calling to share with you some information about a problem that affects much of the world today. It involves family life. All of us want our family to be happy, but we know that many families are not really happy. What do you feel would help people to find greater happiness in their family life? [Let them answer.] Don’t you agree that it would be beneficial to listen to what the Creator of the family says? He sets out the needed guidelines in the Bible. These principles are discussed in this new book Making Your Family Life Happy. Notice the aspects of the subject that are discussed. [Show the table of contents.] The book also points to the lasting solution to mankind’s problems. No doubt you pray for it. You are acquainted with the Lord’s Prayer, aren’t you? [Quote Matthew 6:9, 10.] It is God’s will that his kingdom remove all wickedness from this earth. The final chapter of this book shows how the family life of all persons who now put their faith in God’s kingdom will be benefited. We are leaving this book for only 35 cents.”
5 Wouldn’t it be good if we could make it our goal to speak with as many family groups as possible during the month of February? Have this in mind as you lay the groundwork for your return visit. When the discussion is concluding on your first call, you might say: “Since we are interested in discussing the Bible with families, I would like to return at a time when the rest of your family is at home to continue our discussion. [Ask what time is convenient to call.] In the meantime, you may want to look over the book, and when I return we can discuss the chapter that most appeals to you and your family.”
6 We are sure you agree that this new book will be very helpful to the families in your territory. Already we have received numerous letters of appreciation for the fine counsel contained in the book. One man exclaimed: “As my wife and I progress through its pages, our family life continues to improve.” Very likely you had similar feelings as you read the book.
7 So, as you endeavor to make disciples, think in terms of aiding entire families. Help them to see the value of the Kingdom message so that they can share together in the blessings of the future.—Rev. 21:4.

