Does God Care About Me?
Common answers:
▪ “God is too important to be worried about my problems.”
▪ “I don’t think that he is concerned about me.”
What did Jesus say?
▪ “Five sparrows sell for two coins of small value, do they not? Yet not one of them goes forgotten before God. But even the hairs of your heads are all numbered. Have no fear; you are worth more than many sparrows.” (Luke 12:6, 7) Undoubtedly, Jesus taught that God cares about us.
▪ “Never be anxious and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to put on?’ For all these are the things the nations are eagerly pursuing. For your heavenly Father knows you need all these things.” (Matthew 6:31, 32) Jesus believed that God knows our personal needs.
THE Bible definitely states that God cares about us. (Psalm 55:22; 1 Peter 5:7) If he does, then why do we experience so much suffering today? If God is loving and all-powerful, why does he not do something to end suffering?
The answer involves a little-known fact—Satan the Devil is the ruler of this wicked world. When tempting Jesus, Satan offered him all the kingdoms of the world, saying: “I will give you all this authority and the glory of them, because it has been delivered to me, and to whomever I wish I give it.”—Luke 4:5-7.
Who made Satan the ruler of the world? When our first parents, Adam and Eve, obeyed Satan and turned their backs on God, they, in effect, chose Satan as their ruler. Since that rebellion, Jehovah God has patiently allowed time to show that Satan’s rulership is a miserable failure. Jehovah has not forced people to serve him, but he has opened the way for us to return to him.—Romans 5:10.
Because God cares for us, he has made arrangements for Jesus to deliver us from Satan’s rule. In the near future, Jesus will “bring to nothing the one having the means to cause death, that is, the Devil.” (Hebrews 2:14) In doing so, he will “break up the works of the Devil.”—1 John 3:8.
Paradise will be restored to this earth. At that time, God “will wipe out every tear from [people’s] eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things [will] have passed away.”—Revelation 21:4, 5.a
[Footnote]
For more information as to why God permits suffering, see chapter 11 in the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Blurb on page 8]
Paradise will be restored to this earth

