Who Is God?
HOW would you answer that question? Some feel that they know God well—that he is a close friend. Others view God more as a distant relative. They believe that he exists but know little about him. If you believe in God, how would you answer the questions listed below?
1. Is God a real person?
2. Does God have a name?
3. Is Jesus Almighty God?
4. Does God care about me?
5. Does God accept all forms of worship?
If you ask others to answer these questions, you will likely receive an astonishing array of responses. Little wonder, then, that myths and wrong perceptions have developed concerning God.
Why the Answers Matter
While speaking with a religious woman he met at a well, Jesus Christ emphasized the need to know the truth about God. This woman, a Samaritan, acknowledged that Jesus was a prophet. But something bothered her. Jesus’ religion was different from hers. When she expressed this concern, Jesus plainly said to her: “You worship what you do not know.” (John 4:19-22) Obviously, Jesus felt that not all religious people truly know God.
Does Jesus’ statement mean that no one can really know God? No. Jesus went on to say to this woman: “True worshipers will worship the Father with spirit and truth, for, indeed, the Father is looking for suchlike ones to worship him.” (John 4:23) Are you among those who worship God “with spirit and truth”?
It is of utmost importance for you to make sure of the answer to that question. Why? Jesus highlighted the need for accurate knowledge when he prayed: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Yes, your very prospects for future life are closely connected with your knowing the truth about God!
Is it really possible to know the truth about God? Yes, it is! How, then, can you find it? Jesus said this about himself: “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.” (John 14:6) He also stated: “Who the Father is, no one knows but the Son, and he to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.”—Luke 10:22.
So the key to knowing God is found in the teachings of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. In fact, Jesus promises us: “If you hold to my teaching, you are really my disciples. Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”—John 8:31, 32, The Holy Bible—New International Version.
How, then, would Jesus answer the five questions raised earlier?
[Picture on page 4]
Do you worship a God you do not really know?

