VOL. XXXVI DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

W.T.B. &T. Society Annual Report 371 

The Colporteur Work 371 

Creation Photo-Drama 371 

Eureka Drama Successful 372 

The Newspaper Work 372 

Free Literature in Many Languages 373 

Financial Sinews of War 373 

The Carol of the "Bride" (Poem) 373 

Upheld in the "Evil Day" 374 

Subtle Testings 374 

The Glorious Proclamation 376 

Logic of the Message 377 

From Glory to a Manger 379 

God's Mercy to Israel and to Others 379 

God's New Nation 380 

Labor of Love to Be Rewarded 380 

Perseverance in This Ministry 381 

Some Interesting Letters 382 



Harvest Workers Successful 382 

Index to "The Watch Tower"-1915 384 

page 370 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5819 : page 370 

OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE BY COMPETENTS 



By competents we mean Brethren and Sisters who have 
the proper qualifications, namely, good address, clear knowledge 
of the Truth, and ability to present it wisely and interestingly. 

We have lists from all over the country of people who 
have sent in their cards requesting literature, thus manifesting 
more or less interest in Present Truth. Our suggestion 
is that these all be called upon by the competents of the 



Brethren and Sisters, with a view to seeing whether they have 
been side-tracked, or whether their interest continues and 
grows— and to help them. If they have not the STUDIES in 
the Scriptures they can be supplied them at the very low 
prices at which they are sold in any language. If they have 
no money the books can be loaned to them. Those who have 
purchased often need merely a wise call and an invitation 
to attend the Class of Bible Students. Thus their interest in 
Present Truth is fanned into a flame— a zeal for God and for 
the Truth. 

We are carrying on such a work here in New York with 
excellent results. We suggest it to all the dear friends who 
have the necessary qualifications. It is better, in our judgment, 
than too frequent Volunteering. The Volunteering 
four times a year we believe enough. 

Classes willing to undertake this campaign of visitings will 
be supplied with cards showing the addresses of their fellow-citizens 
who have written or who have purchased books 
within a year or two. Drop a postal card to THE WATCH 
TOWER Office, Brooklyn, requesting the addresses in your 
town or city and giving us the names of those who will participate, 
with assurances that they will be discreet and not 
seek to bore the people to buy the books if they do not wish 
them when brought to their attention. 



R5820 : page 370 

VOLUNTEER LITERATURE READY 

Our first Volunteer literature for 1916 is now ready, B.S.M. 
No. 7-7. The principal articles are "A Great Prophecy Nearing 
Fulfilment"— "The First Resurrection"— "Consumption 
and the Good Tidings"— "Fatal Ambition vs. Noble Ambition" 
—"The Outward and the Inward Man." 

We believe that this will be a very acceptable number for 
general circulation. Classes and individuals where there are 
no Classes are invited to place their orders immediately— for 
not more than they will be sure to distribute promptly, faithfully. 
In estimating the quantity do not exceed one paper to 
each family; that is, a total of one-fifth of the English-speaking 
population. 

Volunteer numbers are supplied free of charge and sent by 
freight, collect. After receiving it in good order send us the 
receipt and we will promptly reimburse you. We find that 
sometimes we have had difficulty when we prepaid. Sometimes 
deliveries were less prompt and sometimes freight charges 
were collected at both ends. 

We remind the dear friends everywhere that we pay the 
freight on Volunteer matter only. These alone are supplied 
in large quantities. Other numbers, for use amongst your 
friends and neighbors, but not in general Volunteering, we 
supply free, but you are expected to pay the postage or expressage. 
We do not keep these outside numbers in large 
quantities. Where not more than eight copies are ordered by 



mail we pay the postage, making no charge. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF JANUARY 
Questions from Manual on Series Third of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES II.-III. 

Week of January 2..Q. 51 to 57 Week of January 16... Q. 1 to 7 
Week of January 9..Q. 58 to 64 Week of January 23. ..Q. 8 to 14 
Week of January 30. .Q. 15 to 20. 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5813 : page 371 

WATCH TOWER, BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
ANNUAL REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR-- 19 15 

ALTHOUGH the year 1915 falls considerably 

short of previous years in respect to 

the Society's activities in the promulgation 

of Truth; nevertheless, this is one of the 

best reports the Society has ever been privileged 

to render. It so impresses us because 

many of the dear friends who have been 

active supporters of the work in the past 

have been so generous, so fervent, so 

zealous, that they left themselves with 

merely enough of this world's goods to properly maintain 

themselves and those for whom they had responsibility. 

Our expectations that the Lord's consecrated people might 

be taken beyond the veil by October, 1914, had much to 

do with these previous activities; leading the friends to 

spend and be spent in the most marvelous way in the interest 

of the King and the brethren, heirs of the Kingdom. 

True, for two years preceding the date mentioned, 
THE WATCH TOWER pointed out that the grand climax 
of our hopes seemed not likely to be fulfilled at that time. 
Nevertheless, the fervent zeal of the brethren led many 
of them to serve to their limit. And during the year 
preceding, the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION so greatly 
appealed to the brethren as a providential arrangement 
of the Lord for the scattering of the Truth that it quite 
made up for any loss of expectancy in regard to the time. 
We therefore consider it very remarkable that in the face 
of these circumstances the work has gone on, practically 
uninterrupted— some features of it even increasing, notwithstanding 
the financial depression of the earlier half 
of the fiscal year. 

First of all, we note the beautiful spirit manifested 



by the Lord's people in every part of the Harvest field. 
A deep work of grace in the hearts and minds of the 
brethren is everywhere manifest. Their possession of 
the Holy Spirit in increasing measure is manifested, as 
the Apostle declared it should be, in the fruits of the 
Spirit; i.e., meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love. We know of these prevailing 
conditions, not merely through the dear brethren who 
represent the Pilgrim work and by whom reports are 
continually sent in in respect to every Class visited; but 
we have information of the same thing from every part 
of the world, through the Correspondence Department. 

As an illustration of how the work goes grandly on, 
we note the fact that in the New York City Congregation 
the number immersed during the year— 208— exceeded 
those of the preceding years. We have similar 
reports from all over the world, witnessing to an increasing 
number, coming under the influence of the Truth, 
and "presenting their bodies, living sacrifices," in consecration 
to the Lord and His service. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK 

The financial strain of the early part of the year 
discouraged many of the Colporteurs, and led them to 
leave the Harvest work temporarily and enter business 
pursuits— it being impossible for them, for a time, to 
meet their expenses. Now, however, the great improvement 
in business everywhere, resulting from the manufacture 
of munitions of war for Europe, is encouraging 
many of these brethren to return to the Harvest work. 
There surely never was a more encouraging time for 
engaging in this blessed service. 

Not only are the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES supplemented 
by the CREATION SCENARIO; but additionally and 
especially, the minds of the people are open as never 
before, to know something about the meaning of the war, 
and to consider the relationship of God and the Divine 
Plan to the terrible war now in progress. We have the 
thing they need, the thing they crave; and no one else 
has it. We are hoping that many of the dear friends who 
became temporarily discouraged will perceive the hand 
of the Lord beckoning forward for a further gleaning in 
the Harvest field before "the night cometh when no man 
can work." The circumstances mentioned will account for 
the decrease in the output of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
as shown in this report. 

THE PILGRIM WORK 

While various circumstances and conditions have 
seemed to make it advisable that some of the Pilgrim 
brethren be dropped from the active service, others have 
been brought into the work, and still others are expected 
to enter it in the near future. The results of the year, as 
shown in the tabulation, certainly compare very favorably 



with the year 1914. We consider this one of the 
most important branches of the service, and continue to 
commend to the love and special consideration of all the 
Lord's people the Pilgrims whom the Society sends forth. 
A special blessing seems to be going with this feature of 
the work at the present time. The public have an ear to 
hear, and the Lord seems to be giving His faithful ones 
more and more of wisdom and grace in the presentation 
of the Message. The results are gratifying. 

CREATION PHOTO-DRAMA 

This branch of the work, having been pushed for a 
year most persistently at great expense, yielded such 

R5813 : page 372 

bountiful results that we were loth to see the great activity 
in this direction curtailed. Nevertheless, it was the only 
wise and possible thing under the circumstances— the 
financial stringency. For a time, all but three of the 
DRAMAS in the United States were discontinued; and 
these were not run as continuously as before. Various 
endeavors were made to put the DRAMA on a financial 
footing to yield its own expenses. It was found, however, 
that in order to make it attractive to the Theater people, 
the DRAMA was so shortened that the main object was 
largely frustrated. The Society, on the contrary, had the 
special interest in the slides and records, because by these 
the great Gospel Message was delivered— the moving pictures 
merely being introduced to draw the audience and to 
hold their attention. All such exhibitions of the DRAMA 
have been discontinued. Hereafter it is to be shown only 
in its full four parts, without any curtailment. And the 
Lord's blessing seems to be returning to the DRAMA on 
the free basis. 

We have now, practically, all of our DRAMA sets in 
operation, though not showing usually, except Sundays, 
in the Theaters. And the friends can usually obtain the 
Theaters at a very low price. In cities where ordinary 
Photo-Drama entertainments are not permitted by law, 

R5814: page 372 

CREATION is welcomed by the Theater managers at 
about the cost of janitor service and lights; and we are 
finding that in cities where moving pictures are permitted, 
the Theater people are willing to give Sunday forenoon, 
10:30 to 12:30, to the DRAMA, at practically no cost, except 
that of janitor service and light. This does not 
indicate the interest of the managers in the DRAMA, but 
merely their desire to have something which will help to 
give moral tone to the Theaters. 

THE EUREKA DRAMA SUCCESSFUL 



We have been very pleasantly surprised to note the 
splendid results secured by the EUREKA DRAMA outfit- 
tinted slides, phonograph, records, scenarios, etc. These 
of course meet with their greatest success in suburban 
places, where the people are not so satiated with moving 
picture exhibits. Although the pictures are not so fine 
as in the PHOTO-DRAMA, they are nevertheless good, and 
highly appreciated. It is freely recognized that we have 
the largest variety of religious pictures ever exhibited; 
and these are introduced in a chronological and historical 
arrangement, which adds to their value. 

To our surprise, it is found that the people really 
seem to give closer attention to the EUREKA DRAMA than 
to the PHOTO-DRAMA. Our wonderful records, so clear, 
so distinct, are a special attraction. Never before, we believe, 
have such records been put forth, giving the human 
voice in its full power, and so distinctly that many people 
have inquired why the speaker did not come forward on 
the platform to be seen and receive applause, some even 
refusing to believe that the records were those of the 
phonograph, insisting that no phonograph ever produced 
such a result. 

There are 86 of these EUREKA DRAMA outfits in the 
hands of the Brethren in various parts, and we trust that 
they are all being used at least every Sunday. Many of 
them, we note, are used almost constantly, every night in 
the week. We regret that we do not have an accurate 
report on these. We are deeply interested in knowing 
that they are all actively engaged and noting the results. 
Only fourteen Classes are giving regular reports; seventy-two 
we know nothing about. And yet we do know, that 
thus far we have had 5,560 exhibitions reported, with a 
total of 1,012,268 in attendance. The interest aroused by 
these may be indicated to some extent by requests for 
literature other than that which was freely distributed— 
the number of card requests for literature being 30,645. 

Surely with such amount of interest manifested, with 
the people sitting listening to every word of the Message, 
while viewing the pictures illustrating the same, we would 
hardly ask for better opportunities for presenting the 
Truth— the Gospel Message. We trust that each of the 
DRAMAS is being kept busy; and we again express the hope 
that we may be informed of the activities and results. 

THE WATCH TOWER 

We continue to consider THE WATCH TOWER lists 
our best criterion in respect to the general progress of the 
Harvest work. The brethren will all be gratified to know 
that we are now printing an average of 55,000 copies of 
each issue. This indicates a deeper and larger interest 
in the Truth than ever before. Besides this, there are 
issues of the journal in the German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian 
and Polish languages. 

While we have reached and passed the mark that we 
some time ago set for the list— fifty thousand— we are 



not yet content. We have every reason to believe that 
our list should be double what it now is, if all the interested 
knew fully about THE WATCH TOWER and realized 
their need of its regular visits. We are dependent 
upon the zeal and loyalty of the brethren everywhere to 
make known to the interested ones, just what THE 
WATCH TOWER is, and to recommend to them that they 
send in their subscription. We believe that many are 
missing the blessing, and would therefore stir up into 
active cooperation the pure minds of all the dear brethren 
to this Department of activity in the Master's Cause- 
to the intent that the brethren may be "built up in the 
most Holy Faith"— into Christ, their living Head. 

THE NEWSPAPER WORK 

The financial stringency has interfered more with 
the newspaper work than with any other branch of the 
service. Had we the money, we would have representatives 
traveling continuously, visiting the newspapers, 
showing the publishers the difference between the Sermon 
reports furnished by the Pastor Russell Lecture Bureau 
and all other Sermon reports. Editors and publishers believe 
that very little interest is taken in the Sermons by 
the majority of their readers. They need to be made 
aware of the fact that these Sermons are different, and 
that they appeal to the public where others do not. But 
financial conditions have not permitted activities along 
this line. Hence, there has been quite a falling off in 
the list of papers publishing the Sermons regularly. 
Nevertheless, there is still a goodly number of these. 

Anybody desiring to obtain the Sermons weekly can 
be accommodated by addressing the Society's Office. Not 
many now are publishing the three-column service. 
Nevertheless, we can supply these to those who desire 
them at any price they may choose to pay. Some publishers 
give to the Society as low a rate as 15c per year; 
others 25c; others 50c; others $1. Such subscriptions 
sent in to us are distributed between the different papers, 
according to your desires, and according to the reasonable 
proportions that would go to each paper. 

VOLUNTEERING ACTIVITIES INCREASED 

The term Volunteering we apply to the voluntary 
distribution, by the friends, of special issues of THE 
BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY-systematically distributed 
by Classes cooperating or sometimes by individuals. 
Where there is a Class, a Volunteer Captain is chosen, 
by whom the home town is districted, a portion of service 
being given to each one of the Class able, and desirous 
of participating, the shipments being made to said Captains. 
These activities are usually extended gradually to 
the suburbs of the town or city, and in some instances to 

R5814: page 373 



neighboring towns or cities where there may be no 
Classes. The Society provides this volunteer literature 
without charge, and with the promise of repayment of 
the freight charges. 

In the past, the charges were sometimes prepaid and 
afterwards demanded upon delivery. Now, all are to be 
paid on delivery and the receipt to be sent to THE WATCH 
TOWER Office, that the amount of the freight charges may 
be reimbursed to the Captain of the volunteers. In addition 
to this regular volunteering, we supply in limited 
quantities, any number of the "B.S.M."— not for promiscuous 
circulation, but rather that the Class may have 
these on hand to be given to visitors, or to those who 
make inquiry for answers to certain questions. We do 
not keep these in very large quantities. While we desire 
to supply them freely, we do not consider them the volunteer 
matter for general distribution. They are sent free, 
but with charges collect. 

We are sure that it will surprise many of you, as it 
did us, to find that the zeal of the dear brethren was unabated; 
that the demand for this free literature for 1915 
exceeded that of any previous year. In the report, this 
might not seem to be true, because the figures are less 
than those of last year. We call attention, however, to 
the fact that the figures include the free SCENARIOS of the 
PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION and that this free literature 
practically stopped with the stopping of the DRAMA. So 
far as the BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY is concerned, the 
year 1915 stands at the very top of the list. The total 
amount, including distributions in Great Britain and in 
foreign lands, reaches to about 50,000,000 copies. 

FREE LITERATURE IN MANY LANGUAGES 

Have in mind, dear friends, that the Society is publishing 
free literature in nearly every language, and that 
the SCRIPTURE STUDIES are now to be had in twenty different 
languages. We cannot undertake to enumerate all 
of these, nor is it necessary. Whatever you have use for, 
write to us, explaining your needs. 

Under this heading we mention the work for the 
blind. We have the first Volume of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, and many Sermons and WATCH TOWER articles 
prepared for the blind in raised characters— the 
American Braille— the English Braille— the New York 
Point. If you know of any blind people who desire to 
read, they can be supplied without charge— books being 
loaned, subject to return, postage free. Such orders may 
be sent direct to this Office, or addressed to "Gould Free 
Library," South Boston, Mass. 

FINANCIAL SINEWS OF WAR 

To a certain extent, the Christian soldiers are engaged 
in a great warfare against sin, against error, 



against superstition— against the Adversary of men who 
is specially the Adversary of the light and of the Lord 
and the faithful followers of Jesus. All of the Society's 
activities are opposed by the Adversary, and are necessarily 
in opposition to him and his course, and in favor 
of the Lord and His Message. 

The Lord has very wonderfully, through His people, 
supplied the sinews of war— money— and that without 
solicitation on our part. Those who receive the Truth 
into good and honest hearts seem to be so impressed by 
it that many of them are in danger of giving more than 
they might reasonably afford to give, to send the Good 
Tidings to others. We believe that the Lord is very appreciative 
of such loving zeal; and that in due time those 
who are supporting the work financially, as well as those 
who are supporting the cause with their other talents, 
will all meet with a share in the great reward: "Well 
done, good and faithful servant, enter into the joys of 
your Lord." 

R5815 : page 373 

We are sure the financial conditions, all being taken 
into consideration, our readers will agree that the report 
shown in this issue is an excellent one— even though being 
far short of last year's. A summary of the work follows: 

SUMMARY OF SOCIETY'S ACTIVITIES IN UNITED STATES 
AND CANADA 

Letters received 181,834 

Letters sent out 332,773 

LITERATURE SUPPLIED AT COST 

Output of SCRIPTURE STUDIES-Vols 362,344 

" " Bibles and other books 53,355 

" " Booklets 88,447 

" " DRAMA SCENARIOS (bound) 55,630 

" " WATCH TOWERS 1,406,000 

LITERATURE SUPPLIED FREE 

Free SCENARIOS-output 1,528,000 

Free BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY 39,289,000 

Sermons in newspapers 214,777,060 

PILGRIM SERVICE FREE 

Number of Pilgrims 65 

Miles traveled 505,957 

Towns visited 6,233 

Public meetings held 1,843 

Semi-public meetings held 2,735 

Parlor meetings held 8,971 

Total attendance 833,522 



FINANCIAL REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR 

Pilgrims' Expenses $22,675.58 

Free Literature, Sermons, etc 180,823.69 

Assistance to Foreign Branches and helpers 30,841.85 

DRAMA Expense in forepart of year 53,788.65 



Total Expenditure $288,129.77 

Cash balance from 1914 $1,677.12 

Good Hopes, Tract Fund, etc 185,739.56 

Special donation to balance 100,713.09 

3,129.77 



THE CAROL OF THE "BRIDE" 

Cant. 4:12-16. 

The North Wind blows cold o'er my Garden today- 
Its fierce blasts rush mad on their pitiless path; 

The trees bend and sway in their giant grasp, 

And cower and shrink from their furious wrath. 

They plant their roots deep, and still deeper; their arms 
Take on sinews of strength as they writhe in the blast. 

O bitter North Wind, thy fury is vain! 

For strength born of need brings the victory at last! 



Today o'er my Garden the South Wind plays, 
And gently it kisses the blossoms fair; 

Their soft petals tremble in glad response, 

And their perfume flows out on the quivering air. 

The soft breeze caresses each glistening leaf, 
It whispers a message to each blushing rose; 

And sweet, timid violets look up at its touch— 
The touch that only the South Wind knows. 

It sings to the trees a low, murm'ring refrain, 

And steals thro' the branches with tremulous sigh; 

They clap their soft hands as they dance in their glee, 
For old Winter has fled and the Summer is nigh. 



O South Wind, O North Wind, ye both brought rich gifts ! 

My fair flowers are sheltered, my trees great and strong ! 
And sweeter my blossoms, and richer my fruits; 

To North Wind and South Wind I carol my song! 

My Beloved has come to His Garden— and lo, 

Sweet spices and perfumes and blossoms most fair, 



And ripe, golden fruitage I lay at His feet! 

What joy could be greater! What priv'lege so rare! 
October 21,1915. ALICE G . JAMES . 



R5815 : page 374 

UPHELD IN THE "EVIL DAY" 

"He shall give His angels [messengers] charge concerning thee, 
to guard thee in all thy ways; they shall bear thee up in 
their hands, lest thou dash thy foot 
against a stone."— Psalm 91:11,12. 

THE introduction of this Psalm seems clearly 

to indicate that it applies exclusively to the 

consecrated people of God during the Gospel 

Age, the spirit-begotten ones— those who 

abide under the shadow of the Almighty, in 

the secret place of Jehovah. This same 

thought is represented symbolically in the 

typical Tabernacle. The secret place where 

the saints abide is the Holy. None were 

allowed to enter the typical Holy and Most 

Holy except the high priest and the under priests. All of 

the people of Israel, so far as they were living in close 

harmony with this arrangement, were blessed. But the 

secret place, the Holy, is the one referred to in this Psalm. 

Coming down to Jesus' day, we see that He was the 
first to enter the antitypical Holy and the Most Holy. He 
entered the first of the Holies when He offered up Himself 
at Jordan. When He made His consecration at 
baptism, instantly He was in the Holy, instead of being 
outside in the Court. If He would abide in the Holy and 
continue under the Shadow of the Almighty, all of God's 
providences would be favorable to Him and all things 
would work together for His good. So when Jesus had 
finished His course victoriously, He passed beyond the 
Second Veil, and entered into Heaven itself— the Most 
Holy. (Hebrews 6:19,20; 9:24.) While in the flesh He 
was kept in all His ways; He was guarded of God, and 
not suffered to be tempted above that which He was able 
to bear. In the Garden of Gethsemane, the Father revealed 
Himself in some manner not specifically stated, 
except that we are told that angels came and ministered 
unto the Master. God "maketh His angels spirits; His 
ministers a flaming fire."— Psalm 104:4. 

God can use anything or anybody as His agency, His 
messenger. But there were very few of the human family 
in Jesus' day capable of being used as God's comforting 
angels to our Lord. Mary of Bethany was one of these, 
who, just prior to the Master's crucifixion, anointed His 
feet with a fragrant, costly perfume, and wiped them with 
her hair. She was one who gave Him consolation when 
His mind was agitated with the thought that five days 



thence He would be crucified. He realized that none of 
the people understood, that none of them were able to 
enter into His feelings. But Mary's service was very 
precious to the Lord— very encouraging to Him. 

SUBTLE TESTINGS PECULIAR TO OUR DAY 

So the Lord has also used spirits— angels— and at times 
various other agencies, human beings and even the powers 
of nature, as His ministers. If the Father were wishing 
to send some message to us, His children, He could use 
the electric power that we are learning to use in wireless 
telegraphy and telephony. But He has not chosen to use 
this power as His messenger to speak to us directly. Our 
text gives us the thought, however, that the Lord's special 
supervision is over all His saints, the class which He has 
been selecting since Pentecost, with a view to their preparation 
for the Heavenly Kingdom through growth in the 
graces of the Spirit. But we see that this Psalm as a 
whole has a special application to our day, when "a thousand 
shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right 
hand," and when the pestilence shall be abroad. When 
pestilence is in the air, it inoculates a person without his 
being conscious of the fact, and it is thus that we, "the 
feet" members of the Body of Christ, are exposed to special 
trials and dangers— spiritual pestilence. 

This is the time to which all the prophets pointed as a 
time of special persecution. In the past there have been 
times of persecution to the professed people of God; but 
they were times when the right was more manifest, when 
a sharp line was drawn between the right and the wrong. 
When the question was raised, "Will you serve the Lord, 
or will you serve Baal?" it was not difficult to see the 
right and decide, "I will be on the Lord's side." In the 
days of the early Church, the question was, "Will you 
curry favor with the Roman power, or will you suffer 
persecution by following Christ?" It was Christ or the 
Emperor. Still later down, when the question was as to 
one's choice between one denomination or another, the 
issue was clearly drawn: "Am I on God's side, or am I 
on the side of the Adversary?" But during the past forty 
years the differences between the denominations have 
been practically ignored. 

Sometimes those who were being persecuted were 
somewhat to blame for their persecution; for they held 
errors that were more or less atrocious. But all the way 
down, the trials and temptations were, it would appear, 
less subtle than they are at the present time. Today these 

R5816 : page 374 

great denominations that formerly fought one another are 
trying to be one body. It would seem on the surface as 
though the Millennium had come, and that the lion and 
the lamb were lying down together. In general there 
seems to be among Christian people a feeling of amity and 



a desire to do good rather than evil. The cases in which 
violent persecution is indulged are far between, and 
not appreciated by the masses. 

For the past forty years, then, there has been a condition 
that is constituting a crucial test to all Christian 
people. The subtle doctrines of Spiritism, of Christian 
Science, of Theosophy, and of New Thought of different 
kinds, are prevalent. Likewise the theory of Evolution is 
widely proclaimed. Learned men formulated the theory 
of Evolution, and then the Higher Critics began to pull 
the Bible to pieces, because of "the oppositions of science, 
falsely so-called." (1 Timothy 6:20.) These false 
theories have constituted a miasma that has spread in 
every direction. There are four hundred millions of 
Christians, according to some; seven or eight hundred 
millions, according to other authorities. These include 
all the infants, the feeble-minded and the insane. Whether 
they are one minute old or fifty years old, they are reckoned 
members of the Church, if they have had certain 
drops of water sprinkled on their heads and certain words 
said over them. 

But amongst the most intelligent of those who name 
the name of Jesus there has been a great falling away 
from the Word of God. This testing has been the most insidious, 
the more injurious, because it has come from the 
theological seminaries. Thousands have fallen. They are 
not about to fall, they have fallen. They have lost all 
anchorage to the Word of the Lord. Out of the two hundred 
thousand professed ministers of Christ, probably not 
more than ten per cent, believe in the Bible as the inspired 
Word of God. Ten per cent, would be twenty thousand, 
leaving one hundred and eighty thousand who have fallen 
from faith. If they have fallen from faith in the inspiration 
of the Bible, we may be sure that they have in a 
measure fallen from relationship to God. Some probably 
never were in relationship with the Lord in any sense. 

UNFOUNDED HOPES OF THE MANY TODAY 

What revelation has God made except that given in the 
Bible? "Having no hope and without God in the world," 
represents the condition of the many. They have hopes of 
their own, but not a Bible hope. The Theosophists have 

R5816 : page 375 

a hope, the Spiritualists have a hope, the Christian 
Scientists have a hope, and so have the Evolutionists; but 
the hope of all these is without foundation and will surely 
fail them in this testing time. 

The hope of the Evolutionist is not that he can himself 
survive everlastingly; but that, as he learns more day 
by day, he may be able to beget better children, who will 
be more noble of character and more wise of head than he 
has been. In turn, these children may be able to live 
longer and have children yet more wise and strong. These 



Evolutionists believe the time will come in the distant 
future when their children will be so wise as to be able 
to take advantage of all the circumstances of life, and may 
continue to live forever. From our viewpoint these people 
are without God, without hope. 

It is true that these ministers speak of Jesus, but the 
message that they give is not the Bible Message. They 
say, indeed, that there was a great deal of good in the life 
of Jesus worthy to be copied, that He was a good Example, 
etc. We think that they speak after this manner 
simply for its moral effect upon the people. If these men 
lived such a life as Jesus lived, they would reprove the 
people and tell them that they are living very foolishly, 
that they are living for self and neglecting the Word of 
God. These same ministers who hold Jesus up as an Example 
know very well that it is because of the way that 
He lived that He died at thirty-three years of age— died 
instead of living everlastingly. They admit that He was 
a very fine character, but the majority of them have no 
place in their scheme for His Ransom-sacrifice. And in 
urging their people in respect to following the example 
of Jesus, this class apparently do not urge them to lay 
down their lives for the Truth and in the service of God. 

They tell their people not to go to war, unless their 
country calls them, and not until the ministers preach it; 
but that if it ever becomes popular to go to war, then go 
to war and make all the cannon possible. Meantime the 
preachers will train the little boys, and form of them Boys' 
Brigades and Boy Scouts. When war comes, then let the 
boys be noble Boy Scouts, shoulder their rifles and do 
their best to kill. Let them help uphold the war, and fight 
on their own side. Let their people care for and help to 
heal the wounded— all who have not been killed outright. 
Let them bind up their wounds, and get them ready as 
quickly as possible to go out to the trenches and fight 
again, and perhaps be killed. 

SKEPTICISM NOW RIFE EVERYWHERE 

All this is a confusion of religious instruction. It 
comes because these people are fallen from faith in the 
Bible. Some of them, seeking to hedge when inquired of 
on the subject of their faith, will say, "Well, we believe 
all the words of Jesus." And some publishers, following 
along the line of this growing sentiment, have published 
New Testaments with the words of Jesus printed in red 
text, so that those who wish to read His words alone have 
there before them these words lettered in red. But if 
asked whether they believe in the words of Jesus in regard 
to Jonah and the great fish, and in His words about 
the Flood in Noah's day, they will retrench and answer, 
"No; we believe as much as our minds tell us is reasonable, 
and we think the rest is all nonsense." The truth is 
that they have no real faith in Jesus, nor in what He declared 
His life in the flesh was for. They do not believe 
that He was a sacrifice for sin, and say so freely. They 



have fallen from the position of faith. 

Now if the teachers of the people have fallen, what 
shall we say for the people themselves, the four hundred 
millions or the eight hundred millions? Some have been 
in one denomination and some in another, but in general 
the whole procedure has been to keep them in ignorance. 
That may not seem to be strictly true when we think of 
how many schools and colleges there are. But the fact is 
that only a small portion of the people ever get as far as 
a collegiate course, or even a high school course. Before 
that time they are supposed to be on the side of the deceived 
ones. Many of our great universities today are 
hotbeds of infidelity. Bible Truth is being kept from the 
people. With the colleges endowed with millions of 
money and with learned professors, and the whole Christian 
world, so called, under the tutelage of the two hundred 
thousand ministers of the nominal church, the wonder 
is that the people are not all infidels. 

With this view, then, of the past forty years, we see a 
fulfilment of this Psalm. We see that thousands and tens 
of thousands have fallen. We see where they have fallen. 
We see why they have fallen. We see that the few are 
standing— "the feet" of Christ. As we look out over the 
world and see these thousands, we perceive that the few 
who have come into covenant relationship with the Lord 
are the only ones who are standing. But many even of 
these, because of having been overcharged with the cares 
of this life and the deceitfulness of riches, and false teachings, 
are in a trembling condition and are quite unable to 
stand firmly. These need our immediate help. 

URGENT NEED OF THE WHOLE ARMOR 

The Apostle Paul urges all the Lord's people to "put on 
the whole armor of God." Some of them have not had on 
much of the armor of God, but that of the creeds of the 
Dark Ages. Some of them, under the false teachings of 
modern Higher Criticism, Evolution, etc., have only a 
wavering faith. They are weak, instead of being "strong 
in the Lord and in the power of His might," as they 
should be. Now is the time for all these to be strong, in 
order that they may "be able to stand in the evil day," 
now upon us. They need to have on "the breastplate of 
righteousness," to be "shod with the preparation of the 
Gospel of Peace," to have "the shield of faith," and "the 
Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God."— 
Ephesians 6:10-17. 

We who have put on "the whole armor of God," who 
have become measurably skilful in the handling of the 
Sword of the Spirit— the truths now due from God's 
Word— need to use this now in the interest of all who 
may be succored. They need to be assisted to put on the 
whole armor quickly, that they may be protected from 
the darts of the Adversary now flying thick and fast, that 
they may be saved from the errors now abounding on 
every hand, that they may be uplifted from their temporary 



fall and made strong in the Lord. 

MINISTERING ANGELS 

This 91st Psalm, then, seems to be a picture of the 
present time; and we are to strive to be the angels mentioned 
in our text. These angels, or ministers, are preeminently 
the children of God. They are to minister to 
the brethren. This is the high honor God has given to 
His people throughout the Gospel Age. In our Lord's 
case angels, spirit beings, ministered to Him; and in 
the cases of some of the Apostles the angels appeared 
and ministered to them at certain times. The Scriptures 
declare, indeed, that the angels are "all ministering spirits, 
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of 
salvation." But we have very little reason to expect that 
God will use any of the spirit beings to do a service that 
may be done by His people. 

According to this Psalm we see that now is the time 
when the "feet" members are in special danger of 

R5817 : page 376 

stumbling, and hence require special assistance. After 

the various snares of this day have been described with 

particularity, we read, in the words of our text, "He shall 

give His angels charge concerning thee,. ..lest thou 

dash thy foot against a stone." Our Lord spoke of Himself 

at the First Advent as the Stone of Stumbling to the 

House of Israel, foretold by the Prophet Isaiah. (Matthew 21:42-45.) 

The Apostle Paul refers to this prophecy that 

Jesus would be a Stone of Stumbling to both the Houses 

of Israel.— Isaiah 8:14; Romans 9:32,33. 

Our Lord was a Stone of Stumbling to the Natural 
House of Israel in their forty years of Harvest. Similarly, 
we see that He has been, as foretold, the Stone of 
Stumbling in this Harvest, during these past forty years. 
His presence and His work were neither understood nor 
appreciated in the Jewish Harvest; and so here, the fact 
of our Lord's parousia, presence, is disbelieved and His 
Ransom-sacrifice repudiated. The events of today are 
manifestations of His presence. These things and the 
vital truths of Scripture, now more clear and luminous 
than ever, are stumbling-stones to the world, but are 
blessings to the faithful, watching ones. The true people 
of God, mounting on this Stepping-Stone, are lifted up to 
a higher view -point and kept from stumbling. The doctrine 
of the Ransom and the evidences of the Master's 
Second Presence at this time are unspeakable advantages 
to the saints of the Lord. 

PRESENT FULFILMENT OF OUR TEXT 

We see that the "stone" of our text is a symbolic stone. 
Satan tried to apply it literally in His temptation of Jesus, 
when he urged Him to cast Himself down from the 



pinnacle of the Temple. But Jesus said, "Get thee hence, 
Satan," and refused to make any such application of the 
Scripture. But we see the fulfilment of it in this our day. 
We believe that the Lord has raised up messengers, 
agencies, which have been very helpful to all of the "feet" 
class. These agencies have been various. The printed 
page with its Message of Present Truth has gone in many 
languages to all parts of the earth, to seek out and to sustain 
the members of "the feet" of Christ. Thousands are 
writing us continually that they have been recovered when 
they have been in great danger. Some of these had already 
gone into infidelity; many had lost all faith in the 
Bible as the Word of God. But they are strong in the 
Lord and in the power of His might today. 

God has used these agencies, then; and these have been 
His ministering spirits, which have ministered to His 
people. We do not say that there have not been invisible 
agencies also, but we know the agencies that we have 
seen. So our text has a good message for us all. "He 
shall give His angels charge over thee, to guard thee in 
all thy ways." Whatever may be the difficulties of the 
Lord's children in the near future, there will be a special 
comfort in remembering that the Lord is able to make 
full provision for all His true-hearted ones, and that He 
will do so. He will continue to use these agencies, and 
there will be the strengthening of His people to the end of 
the way. If there are any who will not be thus led, it 
must be because there is something wrong in themselves. 
We should each see to it that we are of the "thee" class. 
"No evil shall come nigh thee." (Psalm 91:10.) That 
will mean Divine protection to the very end of our course. 



R5819 : page 376 

THE GLORIOUS PROCLAMATION 

--DECEMBER 19. -LUKE 2:1-20.- 

THE ANGELIC MESSAGE OF THE FIRST CHRISTMAS DAY-"GOOD 
TIDINGS OF GREAT JOY"-TO BE ACCOMPLISHED DURING 

THE MILLENNIUM-THE BLESSING TO COME FIRST TO 
THE CHURCH AND THEN TO THE WORLD-THEN "PEACE ON 
EARTH, GOOD WILL TO MEN" FOREVERMORE-'GLORY TO 
GOD IN THE HIGHEST!" 

"For unto you is born this day in the City of David 
a Savior, who is Christ the Lord."— Verse 11. 

THE Message of the angels to the shepherds 
on the plains of Bethlehem becomes more 
and more precious to each child of God in 
proportion as he grows in grace and knowledge. 
As his ears and eyes of understanding 
open more widely to the lengths and 



breadths of God's great Plan of the Ages, 

that prophetic Message is the more highly 

esteemed as an epitome of the entire Gospel. 

Nor can our attention be called too 

frequently to the great event which lies at the foundation 

of that Message— the Savior's birth. 

It matters not that December 25th is not the real 
anniversary of the Savior's birth, but probably the anniversary 
of the annunciation by the angel Gabriel, the 
anniversary of the Virgin Mary's conception, our Lord 
being born nine months later on the calendar, or about 
October 1. One so great, whose birth, death and resurrection 
from the dead mean so much to the human 
family, may be remembered and celebrated any day, every 
day, by all who appreciate what He has done for our race. 
Since, then, the majority of Christian people have become 
habituated to the celebration of December 25th as 
our Lord's birthday, we need make no protest, but join 
with all in celebrating that day with rejoicing of heart, 
giving gifts and remembrances one to another, thus 
copying Divine favor, which gave to mankind the Son 
of God as a gift of mercy and love for our redemption. 

For more than four thousand years the promises of 
God, clothed in more or less obscurity, had been given to 
mankind, intimating that ultimately the great curse of 
sin and death that had come upon the world through 
Father Adam's disobedience in Eden would be rolled 
away, and instead of a curse, a blight, would come a 
blessing of the Lord with life-giving refreshment. In 
various types, figures and shadowy promises this lesson 
had come down through the ages to the time of our 
Lord's birth, especially amongst the Jews, who were the 
Divinely favored and covenanted people. 

Since the Jews were a people of commercial spirit, 
many of them were to be found in all parts of the 
civilized world. Thus amongst every people the faith 
in the one God and the hope of Israel through a Messiah 
were more or less made known, so that at the time of 
our Savior's birth, we read, "all men were in expectation" 
of a coming Messiah. Doubtless this expectation 
was based upon the interpretation of Daniel's prophecy, 
which we now see clearly marked the year of our Lord's 
majority, when He was thirty years of age and made 
His consecration to His work and received the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, His anointing as the great antitypical 
Priest and as the great antitypical King over Israel and 
the world. -Daniel 9:24-27. 

FROM BETHLEHEM TO NAZARETH 

In olden times there were honorable cities and mean 
cities. Nazareth was generally recognized as one of the 
latter, while Bethlehem was distinctly one of the former 
—the City of David, Israel's beloved king. The Scriptures 
explain that Mary, our Lord's mother, and her 
husband Joseph were both of the lineage of David, and 



R5819 : page 377 

that in a seemingly accidental manner the prophecy was 
fulfilled which foretold that Messiah would be born in 
Bethlehem. -Micah 5:2. 

At that time the Roman Empire bore rule over the 
whole world, the Jews being subject to it, but waiting 
expectantly, restlessly, for the coming Messiah, who 
would deliver them from being a subject people and 
make of them the ruling caste in His Kingdom, which 
would have dominion over the whole world. The great 
Roman Emperor Caesar Augustus was in power at this 
time, and had sent forth his decree for a polling or 
census, of the whole world for the purpose of taxation, etc. 

St. Luke informs us that it was in response to this 
royal decree that Joseph and Mary went up to their 
native city to be enrolled; that thus it was that Jesus 
was born in Bethlehem; that on account of the great 
concourse of people at the same time and for the same 
purpose, accommodations were scarce and the stable of 
the khan or inn, was used by some as a lodging; and 
that Joseph and Mary, being late comers, were forced 
to occupy these humble quarters. Thus it was that the 
King of Glory, whose Kingdom is by and by to rule the 
world, was in the time of His flesh born in a stable and 
cradled in a manger. 

THE ANGELS AND THE SHEPHERDS 

Noble shepherds those must have been to whom the 
Almighty sent the angelic Message respecting the birth 
of Jesus, the Messiah— the Message which has rung 
down the ages and reached our ears, the Message which 
thrills us the more in proportion as we are able to grasp 
its meaning. First, an angel appeared to the shepherds 
and allayed their fears, saying, "Fear not; behold, I 
bring you good tidings." It would appear that fear is 
one of the dominating impulses of the human mind, 
especially in conjunction with Divine revelations. 

Men realize— even the best of the race— that they are 
imperfect, and that the Almighty and His laws are perfect. 
Instinctively the world seems to realize that a 
curse, or condemnation of the Almighty, rests upon it; 
and instinctively it fears a further curse, a further condemnation, 
realizing its continual and increasing sinfulness. 
The same is true today with all except the comparatively 
few who are well informed respecting the 
Divine Plan. Thus the subject is generally obnoxious 
to the world— a subject which they prefer to avoid, because 
of a feeling of guilt and a dread of further knowledge 
and condemnation. 

It is for the true children of God today, as it was for 
the angels at that time, to assure the world that God is 
better than all their fears— that God so loved the world 
as to redeem mankind from the just sentence of death, 



the curse that came upon all as inheritors of Adam's 
imperfection and sentence. 

"Good tidings" is another translation of our word 
Gospel. How beautiful is the thought that the Gospel 
is really and truly good tidings! Alas, for the misrepresentations 
of God's Plan, because of which so many of 
His professed people misrepresent His character and His 
Word, and apply the term Gospel to their various messages 
from the Dark Ages, teaching purgatory and 
eternal torment as the portion of the race! 

Let us get away from this false thought and get the 
truth that the Gospel is good tidings. The angel elaborated, 
saying that his Message was "good tidings of great 
joy, which shall be to all people." Ah, thank God, His 
Plan is wider, deeper, higher and grander than anything 
which we had ever conceived! The Gospel Message is 
not merely to be good tidings to the comparatively few 
that now have ears to hear and eyes to see its beauties, 
but in God's due time it is to be good tidings of great joy 
to all people the world over. 

As every member of Adam's race shared in his fall 
and in the curse of death which came upon him as a 
result of his disobedience, so every member of the race 
was included in the great redemptive sacrifice which our 
Lord Jesus offered and which was finished at Calvary. 
God's Plan in Christ, as it is being worked out and shall 
ultimately be accomplished, will mean great joy for all 
people; and the tidings of this fact were given at the 
very moment of our Lord's birth, because He was the 
One through whom all the glorious things of the Divine 
Purpose and Plan shall ultimately be accomplished. 

THE LOGIC OF THE MESSAGE 

The Message took cognizance of the fact that it was 
to reasonable people, who would wish to know why the 
unchangeable God, who had once pronounced a curse 
upon the race, should at any time so amend and alter 
matters as to supplant the curse with a blessing. The 
messenger stated the philosophy of the Divine Plan— 
"Unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, 
who is Christ [Messiah] the Lord." There we have the 
key to the entire Gospel statement of how God could be 
just and yet be the Justifier of sinners who accept Jesus. 
—Romans 3:26. 

The word Savior here signifies Life-giver. How 
beautiful is the thought that as death is the wage of sin, 
the curse upon the race, this Messiah who was born is 
to be the One who will rescue the race from the sentence 
by giving them life again! The explanation of how He 
would give them life was not made, nor was it necessary 
at that time. But now, in the light of the developments 
and with the explanations furnished through the Holy 
Spirit in the New Testament, we see that our Lord's 
voluntary sacrifice of His life, dying "the Just for the 
unjust," settles the claims of Divine Justice against 



Adam, and thus incidentally against all who share his 
death sentence, namely, all mankind. 

Truly, the more we see of the Divine Plan for our 
salvation, which began to take shape in the birth of Jesus, 
the more we feel like shouting with the angelic choir 
praises to the God of Heaven, thankfulness for His 
mercy to the children of men! It mattered not that the 
babe born in Bethlehem was the Savior only in prospect, 
that He could not even be anointed to do His work until 
He reached manhood's estate thirty years later. It mattered 
not that even then it would be necessary for Him 
to lay down His life gradually during the three and a 
half years of His earthly ministry, to be finished at Calvary. 
Nor did it matter that His resurrection was still 
three days after His death, and His ascension forty days 
later; and that the blessing in general would be deferred 
for nearly nineteen centuries thereafter. As the angels 
could sing and rejoice at the first budding of the Divine 
Plan of Salvation, so also can all who have faith in the 
ultimate outcome rejoice with joy unspeakable and give 
praise to God in the highest and to His Son our Lord. 

"SAVED BY HOPE" 

Although nearly nineteen centuries have rolled away 
since that angelic Message was delivered, it has not yet 
been fulfilled except in a limited measure by faith to 
those who have the eye and the ear of faith— in all, a 
"little flock." But the bad tidings of great misery for 
nearly all people have been spread abroad in the name 
of Christ, much to the discredit of the Divine Plan and 
to the dishonor of the Divine character. Instead of 

R5819 : page 378 

carrying joy, the message has very generally carried 
grief and sorrow, especially to the kind-hearted and more 
generously disposed. Indeed we may say that no message 
of the Lord Jesus has ever reached all people. 
Even today, after nineteen centuries of propaganda, only 
a comparatively small portion of the human family have 
ever heard of the only name given under Heaven and 
amongst men whereby we must be saved— "nor is there 
salvation in any other."— Acts 4:12. 

What, then, shall we say of the salvation which has 
come to those who have truly accepted Christ as their 
Savior, who are today rejoicing in Him as such, and who 
by faith are seeing the salvation of God begun in their 
own hearts and yet to be fully accomplished under the 
whole heavens? This the Apostle calls the salvation by 
hope. His words are, "We are saved by hope."— 
Romans 8:24. 

We are not saved actually; we are still surrounded by 
sin, pain, sighing, crying and dying; the curse is not yet 
rolled away. All that the best of the Lord's people have 
yet received is salvation by hope, by faith. Yet this 



anticipation of the future salvation, of the resurrection 
from the dead, of a participation in the glory, honor and 
immortality of the Divine nature promised to the faithful, 
is so strong, so clear, that those who possess it are 
enabled to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 
even in the midst of trials, difficulties, weaknesses and 
unfavorable conditions incident to the curse which still 
rests upon the world of mankind. 

A PROPHECY OF GOOD THINGS 

The angelic Message was a prophecy of good things 
to be accomplished for the Church and the world during 
the Millennial Age. The Church is to have the first 
blessing. The First Resurrection is to be composed only of 
the blessed and holy who shall live and reign with Christ 
during the thousand years. Then Satan shall be bound, 
and the good influences of truth and righteousness shall 
enlighten the whole earth. (Revelation 20:1-6.) The 
declaration of the Scriptures is that the deliverance of 
the Church will come early in the morning of the Millennial 
Day. As the prophet declares, "God will help 
her early in the morning."— Psalm 46:5, margin. 

But much as we rejoice in the glorious hopes of the 
Gospel set before us who now see, who now rejoice with 
joy unspeakable, we are glad that the Divine mercy and 
love are of such lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths as to encompass the whole world of mankind, and 
to provide a blessing for every member of Adam's race 
through Him who loved us and bought us with His 
own precious blood. 

During the Millennium this prophecy will have fulfilment. 
The great Savior who has already redeemed 
us by His sacrifice will stand forth as the King, the glorified 
Messiah, and establish His dominion of righteousness 
in the world for the blessing and uplifting of every 
member of the race. In harmony with the words of the 
Apostle, those will be Times of Refreshing, "Times of 
Restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the 
holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) 
If the Lord had based the hope of the world upon some 
works of merit or righteousness of the world's doing, 
then indeed we might have feared— indeed, the more we 
know of the world, the less hope we would have. But, 
on the contrary, the Lord has based the entire proposition 
for the future blessing, not upon our worthiness, 
but upon the worthiness and sacrifice of His Son. To 
you is born a Life-giver, which is Messiah the Lord. 

How it adds to our enjoyment of the blessings of the 
coming Age to know that the trials and difficulties of 
the present Gospel Age are subject to the Divine supervision 
in the interest of the Little Flock that is now being 
gathered in advance from amongst men— the Elect, 
the Church! We see how the present trials and difficulties 
are the chiselings and polishings necessary to our 
development in the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit 



in character-likeness of God's dear Son, our Lord, our 
Hope, our Bridegroom. How joyful the thought that 
soon the elect number called from the world to be "the 
Bride, the Lamb's Wife," will be completed and enter 
into her glory! How precious the thought that then 
they shall be privileged with their Lord and Master to 
extend the Divine favor of blessing and uplift to the 
world! What higher honor or privilege or blessing 
could possibly come to any one? 

THE ANGELS' SONG 

It was after the giving of the Message of good tidings 
of great joy by the Heavenly one that a host of 
angels appeared to the shepherds, saying, "Glory to God 
in the highest, and on earth peace, good will to men." 
This, too, is a prophecy. It is not yet true, but will be 
fulfilled in every particular in God's due time, which we 
believe is now nigh, even at the door. Not yet does God 
receive glory in the highest. Not yet is there peace 
amongst men. Quite to the contrary. God's name is 
blasphemed, not only by those who vulgarly and in ribald 
jest take the Divine name in vain, not merely by the 
heathen who worship devils and think that these are 
gods, but even by Christian people. Every day God's 
name is blasphemed by those who profess to be His 
people, who profess to uphold the Holy Name. 

For be it known that blasphemy is any dishonorable 
misrepresentation of another. God be merciful to us ! for 
at some time or other doubtless every one of us has 
blasphemed His holy name in this manner— by misrepresenting 
the Divine character and the Divine Plan, by 
picturing the God of Love, of Mercy, of Justice and of 
Truth as the originator, the planner, the perpetrator of 
the eternal torment of the great mass of His human 
creatures, born in sin, misshapen in iniquity, prone to sin 
as the sparks to fly upward! 

But the Lord had mercy upon us because we did it 
ignorantly. Therefore we should have compassion upon 
others who still ignorantly misrepresent our God; and 
our energies should be continually bent to their assistance, 
that the eyes of their understanding might open 
more widely to perceive the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths, and to know the love of God, which 
passeth understanding. 

Noting that peace on earth and good will to men have 
not followed the Savior's birth thus far, and not discerning 
that this is a prophecy of what is to be accomplished 
during the Millennium, many have been inclined to 
change the translation of this verse so as to have it read, 
"On earth peace amongst men in whom He is well 
pleased." However, by this change the statement would 
not be true; for even the Lord's people have no peace 
upon earth. Whatever peace they have is in their hearts, 
and is based upon their faith in God and in the glorious 
things which He has promised. Our Lord Himself and 



the Apostles testified to this, assuring us that whosoever 
in this present time would live godly should suffer persecution, 
and that a man's foes should be they of his own 
household.-2 Timothy 3:12; Matthew 10:36. 

Let us not confuse ourselves nor abridge the testimony 
of the Word, but with the eye of faith look forward 
to the Day of Christ, in which all these glorious 

R5819 : page 379 

prophecies will have their fulfilment, in which peace shall 
indeed fill the whole earth with the knowledge of the 
glory of the Lord, bringing Divine favor and rolling 
away the curse from the entire groaning creation, as 
pointed out by the Apostle.— Romans 8:22. 

FULFILLED IN GOD'S DUE TIME 

Not even with the inauguration of the Millennium 
will this prophecy be fulfilled. Not until its close, when 
the human family shall have been lifted by the Kingdom 
regulations out of sin, sickness, pain, sorrow and death, 
up, up to all that was lost in Adam— not until then will 
there indeed be glory to God in the highest, not until 
then will there be peace amongst men. Nor are we to 
understand that the entire race will be appreciative of 
the Divine love and favor even after they have fully 
seen the righteousness of God in Christ manifested. On 
the contrary, the Scriptures seem to teach clearly that 
there will be a class who will then prove unfit for life 
eternal, unappreciative of the Divine favor. And it is 
with satisfaction that we learn that all such shall be 
destroyed from amongst the people in the Second Death. 

Thus eventually, by the close of the Millennium, 
Satan and all wilful wrongdoers having been destroyed, 
the time will come, as declared in the Scriptures, when 
all voices in Heaven and in earth and under the earth 
shall be heard praising God and the Lamb forever. 
Hosanna! Glory to God in the highest! Peace and 
good will to men! This will be the final shout of a 
redeemed race when the great Plan of Salvation shall 
have been fully outworked according to the Divine Purpose 
from the beginning, as set forth in the Scriptures. 

FROM GLORY TO A MANGER 

The time of our Lord's birth is quite clearly fixed. 
In STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II., we have gone 
into the subject in detail, and will not here repeat our 
deductions. The notable census made by order of Caesar 
Augustus included the civilized world of that day; and 
according to Jewish custom each family and tribe had 
their names enrolled therein. 

Both Joseph and Mary, being of the Davidic line, 
went to the City of David— Bethlehem— to be enrolled. 
The city is a small one, located on a hillside. The inns 



or hotels of that land are very different from ours. They 
are neither hotels nor drinking saloons, but are entered 
from a court-yard. Various large, unfurnished rooms 
are at the service of the traveler, who carries with him 
his wraps, in which he sleeps, and also his food and 
utensils for such light housekeeping as he may choose 
to do. Stalls for horses, camels, etc., are provided on 
the ground floor; and in the event of a crowd, as on 
such an occasion, it is no uncommon thing for people, 
finding the upper rooms crowded full, to make themselves 
nearly as comfortable in the stabling department. 

Thus it came that our Savior was ushered in a most 
humble manner into the world which, as the Logos, He 
had made. (John 1:10.) It was there in the stable of 
the overcrowded inn that the shepherds found the babe, 
as predicted by the angels, and went forth proclaiming 
the fact. Mary made no boasts, however, but waited 
for God's due time. 



R5817 : page 379 

GOD'S MERCY TO ISRAEL AND TO OTHERS 
--DECEMBER 26.-QUARTERLY REVIEW- 
IS RAEL A FAVORED NATION-GOD'S MERCY IN THE LAW COVENANT 

-SPIRITUAL ISRAEL A NEW NATION-THE ROYAL 
PRIESTHOOD-OTHER NATIONS UNRECOGNIZED BY GOD-HOW 
DIVINE MERCY WILL EVENTUALLY REACH ALL PEOPLE. 

"Jehovah is merciful and gracious, slow to anger and 
abundant in loving-kindness."— Psalm 103:8.— R.V. 

ONE difficulty with us as Bible students has 

been that in the past we took too narrow a 

view of the Divine character and of the 

Bible. For more than twelve centuries the 

Bible was not studied. Instead, certain 

Bishops, thinking themselves to be Apostles 

of equal authority with The Twelve whom 

our Lord Jesus appointed (St. Paul taking 

the place of Judas), thought that they had 

full right, as Apostles, to make up a substitute 

for the Bible. These substitutes were styled creeds 

—Confessions of Faith. These were studied, and the 

Bible was neglected. 

Under these circumstances it is not surprising that 
God's people got far away from the true teaching of His 
Word. Even when the Bible began to come back to the 
people in Reformation times, their poor heads were so 
badly clogged and confused with the false doctrines of 
twelve centuries of human theorizing that they were not 
prepared to see the Bible in its own light, but rather in 
the light of these creeds. Besides, they had been long 



taught that to doubt the creeds would constitute them 
heretics, and that the punishment for heresy is eternal 
torment. Hence the endeavor to keep in line with the 
creeds in all subsequent Bible study. 

Now Bible students see that this was all a mistake- 
that the Bible should have been studied in its own light. 
They see that the creeds are full of confusing errors, 
which really make the Word of God of none effect where 
they are recognized. Now our Bible studies are different, 
because of our clearer knowledge of these matters, 
as well as because we are living in the dawning of the 
New Age— at the time when God promised that His people 
should understand His Word— "The wise shall understand." 
-Daniel 12:10. 

GOD'S DEALINGS WITH ISRAEL 

Our Text was addressed, primarily, to the nation of 
Israel. On account of disobedience, God cut off Father 
Adam, Mother Eve and all their children from special 
fellowship with Him, sentencing them to death— as not 
worthy of everlasting life— "Dying, thou shaltdie." 
(Genesis 2: 17, margin.) But even this sentence God did 
not hasten. The sinners might live as they could. 

God's Mercy was manifested toward the posterity of 
Abraham— Isaac, Jacob, and then all of Jacob's children. 
God made the twelve tribes into one nation, cementing 
them together by His promises to them in connection with 
the Law Covenant instituted by Moses at Mount Sinai. 
If they would keep God's Law, they would live forever— 
not die at all. Moreover, they were to be blessed in all 
of their affairs— their health, their flocks, their herds, their 
cattle. Everything would be blessed. 

But they could not keep this Law Covenant, because 
of having been born in sin, like the remainder of the race. 
Nevertheless God purposed that through endeavoring to 
keep the Law that nation should be greatly blessed. And 
it was so. True, He chastened them for their wrongdoings 
and shortcomings, but always with loving interest 
and care, never wholly casting them off. Their national 
distresses and captivities were in the nature of chastisements, 

R5817 : page 380 

with a view to teaching them necessary lessons. 

Thus God's favor continued with that one nation— and 
with no other nation— from the death of Jacob down to 
the death of Jesus, a period of 1845 years. Even then, in 
casting off the nation when they rejected Jesus and 
crucified Him, the Lord made provision for all of the Jews 
who were spiritually inclined, that they might not only be 
retained in His favor, but might come into still greater 
favor at Pentecost and onward, being there begotten of 
the Holy Spirit— no longer to be a House of Servants, 
under Moses, but the House of Sons, under Jesus. 
(Hebrews 3:5,6.) Even when rejecting the nation, God 



intimated clearly that the time would come when His 
favor would return to them— after the establishment of 
Messiah's Kingdom-Amos 9:11,12; Acts 15:13-17. 

GOD'S NEW NATION 

Meantime, the saintly Jews who were "Israelites indeed" 
became the nucleus, or start, of Spiritual Israel. Of 
this Spiritual Israel St. Peter says, "Ye are a Royal Priesthood, 
a holy nation, a people for a peculiar purpose— that 
ye might show forth the praises of Him who hath called 
you out of darkness into His marvelous light." 

We see, then, that the Church is God's New Creation, 
the new nation with which He has been dealing exclusively 
during the Gospel Age. He is dealing with these with a 
view to their education and development, that they may be 
associated with our Lord Jesus in His great Millennial 
Kingdom. Then for a thousand years He and His saintly 
company, gathered from every nation under heaven, will 
bless Natural Israel and all the nations of the world with 
light, with knowledge, with assistance and uplifting, for 
the purpose of delivering them from the bondage of sin 
and death, back to the likeness of God, lost by Adam and 
redeemed on Calvary. 

It is because of this special work that God has for the 
Church that He has made her trials fiery ones, declaring, 
"Through much tribulation ye must enter into the Kingdom 
of God." (Acts 14:22.) This class of fully consecrated 
ones, regardless of sectarian lines, have all been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit. None others are recognized 
of God. This Church have their names written in the 
Lamb's Book of Life— in Heaven— and are in the present 
life demonstrating their faithfulness, their loyalty to God. 
When the foreordained number shall have taken the step 

R5818 : page 380 

and shall have demonstrated their loyalty even unto death, 
then this holy nation will be complete. 

It is the Spiritual Seed of Abraham to whom belong 
the great promises of God. Of this class St. Paul says, 
"If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs 
according to the Promise." (Galatians 3:8,16,29.) The 
Promise was made to Abraham, and declares, "In thy 
Seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." 
(Genesis 22:18.) We have St. Paul's word for it that 
Christ and His Church are this Spiritual Seed, whose 
mission it will be, in God's due time, to bless all mankind 
—"all the families of the earth"— not only those who are 
alive and remaining at the time of the establishment of 
the Kingdom, but all who have ever lived. God's mercy 
referred to in our Text is especially toward this Spiritual 
Israel— even more so than toward Natural Israel. 

THE BREADTH OF DIVINE MERCY 



Now we come to the grand climax of God's mercy and 
grace. The Jewish nation was small. The Church, the 
Spiritual Israel, is small. But God's grace and mercy are 
to extend to the whole world of mankind— every creature 
for whom Christ died. The time for dealing with the 
world and giving them their opportunity of sharing in 
God's grace and mercy has already been appointed by the 
Father. It will be during the Millennium— the thousand 
years of Christ's Reign. He will be the great spiritual 
King of the earth; and His Church will be associated 
with Him as His joint-heirs and assistant rulers, teachers, 
healers, uplifters, rewarders and punishers of mankind 
during the Millennium. All this service of the world will 
be with a view to bestowing upon them, if they will, the 
grace of God, the mercy of God, which He purposed from 
the beginning, and which is to be brought to mankind 
through Messiah's Kingdom of Glory. 

For a thousand years the rising Sun of Righteousness 
will bless the world, flooding the earth with the light of 
the knowledge of God. For the same thousand years 
Satan shall be bound, that he may deceive the people no 
more. For the same thousand years the work of blessing 
and restitution will progress— Times (or years) of Restitution 
the entire Millennium will be. Every creature will 
have his eyes of understanding opened to see, to know 
and to understand the Love of God, His tender Mercy 
and His Wisdom, all centered in and manifested through 
our Lord Jesus Christ. God's Mercy will be exercised 
toward the world with a view to its release from the 
bondage of sin and death to the full liberty of the sons of 
God— the same that Adam enjoyed before he sinned.— 
Romans 8:19-23. 

Thus we see "a wideness in God's Mercy, like the 
wideness of the sea." Thus we see that His grace, while 
limited first to one earthly nation, then later to an elect 
company from all nations, is finally to be extended to 
every human being the world around, bringing all to the 
fullest privileges and opportunities of knowledge, love, 
obedience and blessing. 



R5818 : page 380 

THE LABOR OF LOVE TO BE REWARDED 

"God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love 
which ye have showed toward His name, in that ye have 
ministered to the saints, and do minister."— Hebrews 6:10. 

DISCOURAGEMENT is a hindrance to growth 

in grace; St. Paul was seeking to encourage 

his readers. The context implies that they 

had experienced some setback, some discouragement. 

He intimates that while they 

had begun well, their zeal had cooled to 



some extent. In this chapter and on to the 

tenth inclusive, he points out the danger of 

falling back and away after we have become 

Christians. And to those who are likely to 

become discouraged he gives the exhortation of our text, 

"God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of 

love." We might inquire, What great work, or labor of 

love, could they do that would constitute it unrighteous 

for God to forget to reward it? Are not good works the 

proper course for all mankind? How would it be unrighteous 

for God to forget these good works? 

The answer of Scripture would seem to be that the 
world cannot do any good works that God could acknowledge— 
"There is none righteous, no, not one." But "God 
is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love," 
writes the Apostle. What does he mean? We reply, He 
is addressing Christians, those who have become God's 
children by entering into a covenant with Him. They 
were children of wrath, even as others; and still, according 
to the flesh, they are imperfect. But God is not dealing 

R5818 : page 381 

with these according to the flesh. He has received 
them into His family under a special arrangement, a 
Covenant of Sacrifice. In that Covenant He agreed that 
through Christ He would make allowance for their weaknesses, 
and deal with them according to the intentions of 
their hearts and minds, according as they would seek to 
please Him as His children. God has thus bound Himself 
of His own free will by entering into a Covenant with His 
people. He is bound to them, on the one side, and they 
are bound to Him, on the other side. Neither can escape 
the conditions of that Covenant. 

DANGER OF LOSING THE REWARD 

These Covenanters were members of Adam's fallen 
race, condemned to death. Ah, yes! but this is the race 
for whom Christ died, and who will be recovered from 
death and from the condemnation of sin that came through 
Adam's disobedience. And this merit of Christ's death 
was applied first for a choice class who during the Gospel 
Age should long after God and gladly accept His arrangement 
through Christ. This being so, when these heard of 
Christ as the Redeemer, they believed on Him, they sacrificed 
their earthly hopes, aims, ambitions— all— in order 
that they might enter into this Covenant with the Lord. 
The thought which inspired them to take this step was the 
hope that they might attain to the spiritual inheritance, to 
be joint-inheritors with Christ in the Kingdom to be set 
up on the earth. This was something to which God had 
opened up the way, through His provision in Christ. They 
gave up the earthly things for the grander, the Heavenly. 
They voluntarily sacrificed all earthly rights and interests. 
They bound themselves irrevocably to the Lord. 



Now if they should make a failure in this matter, they 
would lose absolutely everything. The Apostle is pointing 
out this fact. They have acknowledged God's arrangement, 
and there is a great reward coming to them 
under their Covenant with Him. Do not, he urges, forfeit 
this reward by turning away from the Lord and 
becoming cold or lukewarm, which condition might lead 
on to entire rejection of God. Rather go on, and be of 
good courage; and the Lord, Jehovah Himself, shall 
strengthen your hearts; wait expectantly on Him. 

In the 10th Chapter, the Apostle tells them of how 
some of them had in the past endured a great fight of 
afflictions, and of how others had suffered with those in 
affliction in that they had been sympathizers and companions 
of those who had been so persecuted. All this 
was endured for the Lord's sake, for love of the brethren, 
and in harmony with God's arrangement. Therefore they 
should have confidence in God, that He loved them and 
appreciated all they had borne for Him. The Apostle exhorts 
them again not to turn back, not to be discouraged, 
but to be encouraged; and again he assures them of his 
confidence that they would persevere to the end. 

THE BLESSEDNESS OF MINISTERING TO THE SAINTS 

St. Paul declares that their labors of love were shown 
toward God's name. This honor toward God's name consisted 
in their ministering to the saints. This was a proof 
of their love for the Lord. This ministry, too, had been 
kept up. The saints represent God in the world. Whatever 
is done for the saints is, therefore, done for God. 
There is a distinction to be noted in the Bible as respects 
those who are in covenant relationship with God and those 
who are not in covenant relationship with Him. We have 
certain duties toward the world. We have responsibilities 
toward them. The Golden Rule is to operate always 
and toward all men. But we have not the same obligation 
toward the world that we have toward the saints. Whoever 
honors the saints and serves them, honors and serves 
God. This seems to be the Apostle's thought in the matter. 

We are not to understand that the Lord would be displeased 
that we should do good to all men. Rather the 
Apostle urges, "Let us do good unto all men as we have 
opportunity." Be generous, be kind to everybody, but 
especially to the saints. (Galatians 6:10.) This is what 
is particularly pleasing to God. Every service lovingly 
and gladly rendered to the saints is rendered unto His 
glory. This is true in a very special sense; for there are 
people in the world who might be naturally more admirable 
in character, and it might be more pleasing to 
serve them than to serve many of the saints, who might 
be ruder, cruder, in some respects. But in the service to 
the saints there is a special blessing from the Lord. We 
are to have this in mind when meeting and fellowshiping 
with those who have become children of God, and when 
we have opportunities to assist or comfort them. They 



must have our love, our cooperation, our sympathy, our 
aid. There may be more or less option in respect to 
others, but not in respect to our brethren in Christ. 
This same principle, to some extent, holds good 
amongst worldly people. For instance, an Odd Fellow 
would show favors toward an Odd Fellow, whether rich 
or poor, learned or unlearned, that he would not show to 

R5819 : page 381 

others. And the same with Masons. A Mason would 
show favor to a Mason the world over, whether he be 
rich or poor, black or white. If these are the human 
standards, much more so should it be thus with those who 
have become children of the Lord. The fact that they 
are disciples of Christ makes it incumbent on whoever is 
a follower of the same Master to do a brother's or a 
sister's part. "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of 
the least of these, ye have done it unto Me." This does 
not apply now to the world, but it does apply to the 
Church, the Lord's faithful followers. 

PERSEVERANCE IN THIS MINISTRY 

The Apostle says, "In that ye have ministered unto the 
saints, and do minister." This signifies that they were 
still in this proper attitude. Although somewhat discouraged 
in the good way, they were still helpful to one another. 
Another thought— it was not merely the amount 
of good works that they did that counted; for many good 
works are done by many people which would not in any 
sense be recognized by God or be bound to be rewarded. 
The works of the world are works of sinners. The world 
are not in covenant relationship with God. If any one 
does a good work, he by an unwritten law gets more or 
less blessing out of it. Whoever does a good work with 
a worthy motive will receive some reward, some blessing. 
It will ennoble his character and help to fit him for the 
blessings of the next Age, when all the world will be on 
trial for life before the Judgment Seat of God. The 
nobler the character in that Day, the fewer corrective 
stripes will be necessary. But in order to get the present 
blessing of the Lord, His special blessing, he must be in 
covenant relationship with Him. 

The work now being done by those in such relationship 
with God will be worthy of His notice and reward. In 
the 13th Chapter of 1st Corinthians, the Apostle points 
out that, with the Body of Christ good works alone are 
not sufficient to indicate God's favor. He declared that 
if he should give his body to be burned, and should give 
all his goods to feed the poor, there would be no real 
merit in it unless it was done from the motive of love. 
"Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, 
and have not love, I am become as sounding brass and a 
tinkling cymbal," was his further declaration. One might 



R5819 : page 382 

do these good works to have the honor of men. If they 
were done for any such reason, God would not consider 
them good works to be rewarded. The works that God 
recognizes as good works and worthy of His approval and 
reward are those done by His faithful people, who are 
justified and sanctified, and who serve from love to Him, 
to His people and to His cause. 

And so St. Paul says here to these, "God is not unrighteous 
to forget your work and labor of love." This is 
important to have in mind. It is important for us to see 
to it that our motives are those of love toward the Lord 
and His Cause and His brethren. Such good works, if 
persevered in according to our ability and opportunity, 
will not fail of a blessed reward. 



R5819 : page 382 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
HARVEST WORKERS SUCCESSFUL 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We want to thank you very much for fixing the price of 
the cloth-bound SCENARIO at 68c. It is really wonderful what 
a difference the increased price makes in our sales. It was 
very hard to sell them for 50c, but the people bite quite 
readily at 68c. How they love a bargain, even if it does 
cost them 18c more to secure it! The very fish that would 
probably be scared at the mere sight of a hook baited with a 
half dollar, now gather around waiting their turn to bite at 
the 68c morsel. We want to please the people. We are convinced 
that Mr. Barnum was right when he said "The public 
should be pleased." So if it pleases them to pay 18c more, 
we are glad to work in harmony with their wishes! Yesterday 
we tried the SCENARIOS exclusively in the afternoon for about 
3-1/4 hours, and sold 21 copies— 7 for cash (we fill our pockets 
with them), and 14 for later delivery. It is very easy to sell 
them; and the Colporteurs and friends should be able to put 
them out in enormous quantities, especially with the whole 
world open territory. It seems as if all the Colporteurs could 
handle them as a side-line, at least. 

Have just received reports from several others who are 
trying the SCENARIOS at the increased price. One brother who 
was having a hard struggle to make ends meet for himself 
and wife and child (at 50c) is now averaging 14 per day, and 
is catching up fine. Another reports 20 to 25 copies in a 
morning's work. This is the average of a married sister, 
working in territory where work is booming— war materials. 
Another reports 100 orders in four days. 

Apart from the fact that the increased price is enabling 
some to make out so well financially, we might mention that 
we are seeing some results from the SCENARIOS. One sister 



immersed during our recent Convention had her interest 
aroused chiefly through reading a SCENARIO some months ago. 
Yesterday we found a lady who said her husband was very 
much interested in the three books they got from us three 
years ago, and she ordered the last three as well as the 
SCENARIO. A man told us his wife had three books she was 
enjoying very much. But we must not tire you. Evidently 
there is work for all in the Harvest field yet. 

We continue to have many opportunities for service here 
in connection with the local and neighboring classes, and 
appreciate our privileges in this connection. But we always 
feel that the Colporteur work is our work, and that the holding 
of meetings is incidental. Still, the latter sometimes help 
to get out the books. It is our delight to have the books up 
on the stand, and tell the people where we get all these 
things which so refresh and cheer our hearts even in the 
midst of the present troublous conditions. Have put out 
quite a few in this way, and in some instances, we trust, into 
the hands of those who have appreciated them. 

In joyful service, J. & L. HUTCHINSON. 



TWO GOOD TRUTH TESTIMONIES 

MOST DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER IN THE ANOINTED:- 

I am constrained to inform you that in God's hand you 
have been the means of blessing me and my late beloved wife. 
I have been intending to write you several times to let you 
know that the Lord has led me step by step, and also of the 
love and blessings He has bestowed upon me. 

I was brought up in the doctrine of Swedenborgianism 
and was not satisfied with the life I was leading. Having no 
time for the creeds, I kept away from them and was at a 
loss to know what to do. Asking the Lord for guidance in 
the matter, I started to read my Bible as an ordinary book 
although believing that no man could understand the same 
on this side of the Veil. 

In the Lord's providence, I saw an advertisement announcing 
an address by Brother R. R. Hollister— "Where Are the 
Dead?"— which I went to hear, but did not understand much 
about it. When he mentioned the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
as being "Keys" to the Bible, I straightway ordered the six 
volumes; and when I had read the first of these, did not my 
heart burn? Yes it did, and with great joy. So happy was I 
that I ordered several copies of Volume I., to let all my friends 
have one, and told them of the blessings and joy received. 
But they told me that I had gone mad and that I had an evil 
spirit about me. I did not then believe in such a being as 
Satan; so this troubled me a great deal, and I really thought 
I was going mad. Every one turned against me; but still 
asking the Lord to help me, I fully made up my mind to read 
all the STUDIES through. When I had about finished the fifth 
volume, my dear wife, seeing the change it had made in me 
and in all my affairs of life, got inquisitive and also desired 
to read the volumes. The reading had the same effect upon 



her as it had had upon me, and we both grew in grace and in 
knowledge, and our home soon became a new home. 

We desired to consecrate ourselves to the Lord, and were 
both immersed and took the Vow, etc. I feel sure such testimony 
will gladden your dear heart. 

About a year later my dear wife became ill, and was 
ordered to undergo an operation, from the effects of which 
she never recovered. All through her illness the dear Lord 
gave her all the necessary grace as promised, and so wonderfully 
did she keep up that it was a big blessing to me and to 
all of our friends. On Sunday, July 4th, she realized that 
the Lord had decided to call her Home. Yes; she said that 
the Lord had done most of His healing on the Sabbath day, 
and that being "Testimony Sunday," she said: "This is my 
testimony to the Lord, 'All the way my Savior leads me.'"— 
Hymn 12. After singing this hymn through, she said: "I am 
dying, and oh, I feel so happy; oh, it is so glorious to die! 
Oh, I feel so happy! 'Perfect peace to me is promised in my 
Father's House above!'" Then she called each one of us by 
name and said, "Give me the last kiss. Good bye!" and 
passed beyond the Veil. 

To witness such a death as this, dear Brother, has so 
increased my faith that it is almost impossible to express my 
love and feeling to my Heavenly Father for the strength He 
gave me. My praise went up to the Lord then and ever 
since, thanking Him from the bottom of my heart for the 
light and grace He gave me at such a time. 

My wife's relations, and even the nurse in attendance, not 
seeing as I do, could not understand it. It was such a blessing 
to them all; and I had so many inquiries as to what faith I 
believed in, and was asked for copies of "that beautiful 
hymn" she sang at her death. 

Your brother in Christ, 

FRANK O'C. FITZGERALD.-West Australia. 



WOULD REVOLUTIONIZE THE WORLD-IF 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We had a grand meeting here on the occasion of Brother 
Russell's recent visit, and are so thankful for having had the 
privilege of hearing our dear Pastor again. 

The newspapers announced, after Brother Russell was here, 
that Dr. J. Wilbur Chapman, the great Evangelist, would tell 
his audience, at his Monday evening meeting, some things 
about Pastor Russell. 

There were about 5,000 present to hear what Dr. Chapman 
had to say. This was in substance as follows: 

"I wish that every minister in Atlanta had as much zeal as 
Pastor Russell. I wish that every minister was as untiring in 
his efforts as Pastor Russell. I wish that every member was 
as loyal to his church as the followers of Pastor Russell are 
to the teachings he proclaims. If all the ministers were as 
zealous as Pastor Russell, and if all the church members were 
as liberal in the support of the church as Pastor Russell's followers 



are of the support of his teachings, we would revolutionize 
the world within a year's time." 

Thus we can see from the above remarks that even our 
enemies are taking note of the wonderful work that is being 
accomplished. 

Yours in fellowship and service, W. E. HOPKINS.— Ga. 



page 383 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CLASSES 

STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 384 



INDEX TO "WATCH TOWER" 
VOLUME XXXVI., 1915 


