Announcements
SHOWING A WEALTH OF GOOD WORKS—1 Tim. 6:18, NW.
“Work at good, . . . be rich in right works,” says the inspired apostle Paul. He himself set an example of activity in God’s service following his own advice “to be liberal, ready to share.” What better service can one perform than to aid others to an understanding of God’s wonderful purposes? None, absolutely none, and therefore throughout the Bible we are encouraged to share our treasures of understanding Bible truths, which opens the way to life for all persons rightly disposed toward God. To be sure, all of Jehovah’s witnesses and their good-will companions will be active this month presenting from house to house a year’s subscription for The Watchtower for only $1. Three Bible booklets will be given free to each new subscriber. Be rich in right works throughout the month by being liberal, ready to share in Kingdom service at every possible opportunity.
READ THE BIBLE DAILY
Reading God’s Word the Holy Bible daily is admonished from the Scriptures themselves. To make that reading more enjoyable and profitable, why not read it in the best modern English translation available, the New World Translation? Volume I of the Hebrew Scriptures contains the books Genesis to Ruth inclusive and recounts the creation of man, his rebellion and the prophetic beginnings of deliverance. Volume II (First Samuel to Esther inclusive) contains the fascinating account of the typical kingdom of Israel, its rise to power and wealth, its decline and downfall through apostasy and rebellion and the restoration of pure worship with the rebuilding of the temple. The other volume currently available is that of the Christian Greek Scriptures containing the books of the “New Testament.” Herein is found the redemption and salvation of man, brought to light through the preaching of the “good news of the kingdom” by the Chief Agent of life, Jesus Christ. Each volume is bound in green leatherette and is available for only $1.50. A deluxe edition bound in genuine morocco leather with gilt-edged leaves is only $5 for each volume.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
March 18: Cautious as Serpents Among Wolves, ¶1-24. Page 76.
March 25: Cautious as Serpents Among Wolves, ¶25-50. Page 82.

