From Gilead’s Twenty-sixth Class to the President
November 8, 1955
Dear Brother Knorr:
Sufficient time has now elapsed since receiving the abundance of fresh spiritual provisions at the “Triumphant Kingdom” assemblies to evaluate to some degree at least their immense worth to us. We have had the great joy of studying some of these new publications since coming to Gilead, and the unanimous reaction of the Twenty-sixth Class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead is that hearty thanks be expressed to Jehovah for these expressions of His great love.
Adequate words fail us to express the real depth of our appreciation for the increased light and understanding we have received from these instruments. The booklet What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? is a most dynamic exposé of the demon-supported fallacy of life after death. With its references to incidents from all parts of the earth, this booklet will have world-wide appeal. It honestly constructs the arguments of the spiritualists and then batters them to rubble with logic, science and, most powerfully, the Word of the Living God, Jehovah. It will be a masterful weapon in the hands of Jehovah’s servants in identifying and exposing the source and channels of these devilish utterances.
In the field of practical ministerial instruction we now have Qualified to Be Ministers. This compact and diversified handbook covers all phases of the ministry of Jehovah’s witnesses. The information on the history of worship, both clean and unclean, dramatically contrasts the integrity and devotion of Jehovah’s organization in ancient and modern times with the corrupt and anti-God thinking of the pagans and the more reprehensible apostates. All who will diligently apply this wealth of God-given instruction will be ‘adequately qualified to be ministers.’
You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World: certainly this inviting prospect will have a most urgent appeal to all hungering and thirsting for righteousness now. As they watch the unfolding of the “42 Types and Prophecies of the Earthly Heirs of the New World” they cannot but see how they can be included in the complete fulfillment of the prophecies at the present time. In this day when the explosion of the “human bomb” seems imminent they will be able to identify the only “death-proof shelter” within Jehovah’s new system of things, their presence in that “ark” assuring their preservation even through the universal conflict of Armageddon. What an optimistic outlook!
Recognizing that Adonayʹ is at his temple and is now directing his attention to this earth through the remaining ones of his temple stones on earth, we are most happy to ally ourselves with these courageous fighters for pure worship. Since our class is a cross section of a typical congregation today, being made up of a few of the Lord’s anointed and a majority of the “other sheep,” we have been delighted to see Jehovah’s loving-kindness and purposes for these last days as respects both groups. Those of us of the “great crowd” are happy to publicly express our heart agreement with the anointed remnant and then joyfully join them to see and imitate their zeal for Jehovah just as Jehonadab joined himself with Jehu.
In answer to the book’s dedication letter, the Twenty-sixth Class of Gilead has enjoyed the book and now does want to proclaim its good news of Jehovah’s established kingdom more than ever before.
Be assured that our hearts and prayers are always with those at the headquarters and with you, Brother Knorr. As we pursue our studies here at Gilead we look forward to the time when we shall be resuming our full-time service in the field, then to spread abroad all the wealth of information made available to us now. We do most warmly thank you for all the loving-kindness of Jehovah’s organization.
Your brothers working for survival,
TWENTY-SIXTH CLASS OF GILEAD

