Showing a Wealth of Good Works
MORE than ever before do men of the world make material wealth their goal. However, the Bible shows that all such striving is a twofold folly: “Those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and hurtful desires which plunge men into destruction and ruin.” Yes, such striving brings neither peace and happiness now nor life in the future.—1 Tim. 6:9, NW.a
The wise course is to do just the opposite, strive to be rich or wealthy in giving, to be “rich in right works,” for by these we can ‘safely treasure up for ourselves a right foundation for the future so that we can get a firm hold on the real life.’ And not only does wealth of good works give us a firm hold on the real life but it also gives us many blessings now, for “the generous man will be enriched; and he who waters will himself be watered.”—1 Tim. 6:18, NW; Prov. 11:25, AT.
What kind of works are here referred to? Not just any good words, for Jesus said that in the judgment day certain ones would claim to ‘have done great works in his name but he would not recognize them.’ The kind of works that count with God are those that Jesus primarily did, namely, bringing honor to his Father by making known his name and bringing comfort to men of good will by preaching the good news of the Kingdom. Jesus himself showed that his miracles were incidental to his preaching the truth.—Matt. 7:23; 24:14; John 6:26, 27, NW.
Of course, before we can be showing wealth in this kind of right works we must take in knowledge of Jehovah and his Son, knowledge of his purposes and his kingdom. And then we must avail ourselves of the training program so that we can become skilled preachers, for only those who are skillful in their work will be permitted to stand before the Kings Jehovah and Christ. Our goal must be the winning of God’s approval because of our handling his Word aright, because of being fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.—John 17:3; 2 Tim. 2:15; 3:16, 17, NW.
We should strive not only for quality in our work but also for quantity, because there is much work to be done, few to do it and little time in which to do it. So “preach the word, be at it urgently in favorable season, in troublesome season.” Once we obtain the right perspective of this work we shall find it very refreshing, so much so that we simply shall not be able to refrain from speaking out, even as Jeremiah and Elihu, Job’s real friend, both discovered.—2 Tim. 4:2, NW; Jer. 20:9; Job 32:20.
Since minding the flesh means death, whereas the minding of the things of the spirit means peace and life, how foolish to be ensnared by materialism! So let us keep on showing a wealth of good works and have peace and joy now and enjoy endless life in God’s new world.—Matt. 6:24; Rom. 8:6, NW.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, August 1, 1955.

