VOL. XXII. MAY 15, 1901. No. 10. 
CONTENTS. 



Fresh Attacks upon the Bible 163 

Review of three Books 165 

Judge Waite's Criticism of the 

New Testament 167 

The Foundation of God Standeth 

Sure 167 

Whence the Present General 

Blindness 169 

"He Ascended up on High" 171 

Pentecost— the Day of Jubilee 174 

Items:— Swedish Teachers' Bibles, 

Convention Notice, Etc 162 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WE HAVE plenty of the $1.00 packages of mottoes now. 

LEATHER BOUND DAWNS will not be ready for some weeks. 

OUR READERS SHOULD KNOW that we publish a number of 
German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian and French tracts; and 
that the WATCH TOWER in German is issued quarterly. Samples 
free. 

WE GIVE GENEROUS CREDITS on our own publications, but on 



no others. We must pay cash to secure the low rates we give 
you, and must ask that cash accompany your orders. 

YES! THE OFFER of four six-months WATCH TOWER subscriptions 
for $1.00 is still open. When you thus send to your 
friends, write them in explanation and commendation. 

WE HAVE the "Marked New Testament" in good supply 
again. Two copies for 25 cents, post-paid. 

SWEDISH TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

In response to inquiries would say that we can supply the 
Bible in Swedish, with Concordance and valuable helps. 
Divinity circuit, post-paid, $2.00, regular price, $5.00. 

ONE DAY CONVENTION. 

ON SUNDAY, MAY 12, the Editor (D.V.) will address the 
friends at Altoona, Pa., at 3 P.M., at Opera House and at 7:30 
P.M., as may then be announced. 

This is merely a local convention, and friends from great 
distances are not expected, tho all coming in the name and 
spirit of our Lord will be heartily welcomed. 



R2813 :page 163 

FRESH ATTACKS UPON THE BIBLE. 



"WOUNDED in the house of its friends," is 

certainly true of the Bible today; for it 

has no outside foes one-half so antagonistic, so injurious. 

But it is not the Bible's friends who thus 

attack it— but enemies, who under guise of being its 

friends have received honored positions in the household 

of faith,— who, from the vantage point of its pulpits 

and colleges and editorial chairs, insidiously stab 

the Bible, while professing to love and reverence it. 

Three volumes have just issued from the press, 
each one calculated to undermine, shake and overthrow 
the faith of many of God's people, who could 
not be reached or shaken by the same testimony if it 
reached them from disreputable or infidel sources. 
The first of these is volume III. of the series being 
published by the higher critics. The second is by 
Rev. Lyman Abbott, D.D., successor to Henry Ward 
Beecher in Plymouth pulpit, but now editor of the 
Outlook. The third is by Judge Charles B. Waite. It 
is not for us to judge that these essayists are dishonest; 
nor that they are seeking rewards of fame as 
leaders of thought, in a direction toward which all 
but the very few will shortly follow them, "as sheep 



having no shepherd." Rather, we will suppose these 
writers to be thoroughly honest— intent upon telling 
the truth as it appears to them. Indeed, we see in 
this movement a fulfilment of the Bible's predictions 
respecting our day, the ending of the present age. 

We may not state the matter too strongly, 
when we declare that God is back of the many present-day 
movements which are ensnaring many and making 
shipwreck of their faith, in the sense that he designedly 
does not hinder such erroneous presentations, 
but, on the contrary, permits circumstances to foster 
and prosper them. Thus the Lord declares through 
the Apostle, "God shall send them strong delusions 
that they may believe a lie: that they all might be 
damned [condemned, as unworthy a place in the Bride 
of Christ] who believed not the truth, but had pleasure 
in unrighteousness;— because they received not the 
love of the truth that they might be saved."— 
2 Thes. 2:10-12. 

The very men who are thus becoming blind leaders 
of the blind into the ditch of unbelief are men 
who have had first-class opportunities as respects 
education and opportunities for Bible study; men who, 
had they loved the truth and sought it, would have 
found it clear, convincing, precious; but who, rejecting 
the Lord's leading, and leaning to their own understandings, 
have become vain in their imaginations; 
have cut loose from their faith-anchorage, and are helplessly 
drifting— they know not whither. 

Does some one say,— It is strange that God should 
prosper rather than oppose these strong delusions! 
Yes, and the Lord himself calls it "his strange work," 
"his strange act." (Isa. 28:21.) Describing this 
"strange" prospering of error and unbelief the Lord 
says:— 

"Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this 
people draw near me with their mouth, and with their 
lip do honor me, but have removed their heart far 
from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the 
precept of men: therefore behold, I will proceed to do 
a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous 
work and a wonder [miracle]: for the wisdom 
of their wise men shall perish and the understanding 
of their prudent men shall be hid."— Isa. 29:13,14. 

This language was applicable to typical Israel at 
the first advent, and consequently is applicable to 
nominal, spiritual Israel in the present "harvest" 
time of this Gospel age. The above is merely a rehearsal 

R2813 :page 164 

of what the Prophet explains more in detail in 
the previous chapter. (Isa. 28.) In verses 9 to 12 the 
Lord explains the preaching of his message through 
imperfect human lips, and that this message, rightly 
received, should have brought rest and refreshment 



for the weary and heavy laden: yet to the majority 
its blessed influences were lost, so that as a whole 
Christendom or churchianity is about to go backward 
and fall and be broken and snared and taken in the 
general unbelief that is even now sweeping over the 
civilized world.— Verse 13. 

The secret strength of this delusion, which has 
made the Word of God of no effect through human 
tradition, and prepares the way for this great falling 
away, is mentioned in verses 15 and 18. It is the 
covenant made by the great teachers with death, and 
their agreement with hell (sheol— the grave, the state 
of death). Under this agreement or covenant, which 
all the creeds of Christendom endorse, death, which 
God's Word styles an "enemy," is accepted as a friend; 
while the grave, the Bible teaches us, is the great 
prison-house of mankind, from which in due time the 
glorified Christ will deliver all of the prisoners who 
will accept his righteous terms— by restitution processes. 
-Luke 4:18-21; John 5:28,29; Acts 3:19-21. 

"Hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men 
[disdaining teachers] that rule this people." You have 
thought it wise to teach the people that death and the 
tomb are not enemies— that the dead are more alive 
than ever they were, either in a place of bliss or of 
torment. You feared to tell the people the truth, 
that the dead are dead, lest this should decrease your 
superstitious hold over the minds of the people. You 
said: The people will prefer to think of their friends 
going at once to glory, without waiting for the second 
coming of Christ, and a resurrection of the dead, and 

R2814:page 164 

it will heighten our influence over sinners to tell them 
an untruth— to misrepresent to them the words sheol 
and hades and to make them believe that these words 
represent a flaming torture-chamber, presided over by 
legions of furious demons, and that at any moment 
they may by accident be dropped into that eternal 
torment if they are not members of some of the sectarian 
systems, which we have organized, but none 
of which were or will ever be recognized by Jesus or 
his apostles. You have thus practically in effect said, 
"We have made lies our refuge and under falsehood 
have we hid ourselves," and are safe— no matter how 
great a storm may arise;— even tho an overflowing 
scourge of infidelity come, we are safe in the ignorance 
of our people, and in their dependence upon our dictum 
for their faith and hopes of the future: as we 
have succeeded in "bamboozling" them in the past, 
we shall continue to do in the future.— Isa. 28:15. 

But the Lord's answer is No! This very error 
shall work your ruin, and the overthrow of your system, 
and all identified therewith shall suffer loss. (Vs. 18; 
1 Cor. 3:15.) I have laid the only sure foundation, 



Christ Jesus, and he that trusteth him, and he 
alone, shall not fall, but "be able to stand" in the 
great time of testing, near at hand. For "judgment 
also will I lay to the line and righteousness to the 
plummet: and the hail [hard, cutting truth] shall 
sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters [truth] 
shall overflow the hiding place," and force you to 
show your subterfuges. (Verse 17.) The falsehood 
respecting death and the death-condition will fall 
with all that you so carefully built with this hay, 
wood and stubble of falsehood. The fire of that day 
shall test it and destroy it; and when it goes down you 
will go down with it, and will no longer have influence 
and preferment with the people.— Verse 18. 

This falsehood has been at the bottom of the 
various errors which have confused you; and because 
you had wilfulness of heart and drew near me with 
lip-service, rather than a full consecration of heart, 
ye deluded and blinded yourselves (as teachers) as 
well as those whom you "rule," so that to all of you 
my Word has become as a sealed book— understood 
and appreciated neither by the learned nor by the unlearned. 
(Isa. 29: 10-12.) Hence the fall of both 
leaders and followers into the ditch of unbelief— infidelity. 
This calamity will pursue you continually 
until you come to "understand the report [doctrine, 
truth]. "-Isa. 28:19. 

Why so? Because the creed-beds you have made 
for yourselves are too short for men to rest upon. 
They would serve the purposes of infants in thought 
and reason; but as knowledge, growth, comes, the bed 
is found too short, too uncomfortable. The covering, 
too, is insufficient for the developed mind, tho sufficient 
for the infantile. No thinking person can 
wrap himself securely in the narrow hopes of any 
"orthodox" creed: if he gets under the covers of the 
Calvinistic creed-bed and endeavors to consider himself 
one of the elect, as therein taught, he is harassed 
by the chilling air of doubt, and cries:— 
"Tis a point I long to know, 
Am I his or am I not." 

If he removes to the trundle-bed creed of Arminianism, 
and seeks to cover himself with the hope that 
there is no election— that the door is open and that 
"whosoever will" surely includes himself, he cannot 
get warm because the chilly doubt comes to him again 
with the suggestion that the Scriptures certainly do 
mention a "little flock" and an "elect" class and a 
"narrow way." And he reasons that if God deliberately 
planned and prepared an eternity of torture for 

R2814:page 165 

the vast majority of his creatures, he must be a loveless 
if not a conscienceless being— on whose mercy no 
reliance is to be placed. The larger he grows mentally 



the more uncomfortable the short beds and narrow 
creeds, until he resolves to get out of them in disgust. 
The difficulty is that it is not merely respecting human 
creeds that he loses faith; but believing that they 
represent God's Word, the thinker becomes a general 
skeptic, and viewing the Bible from the outside only, 
and in the light of the traditions of the elders, he is 
deaf to every influence and appeal for the truth during 
the present age, and until in the new dispensation 
the voice of the Son of Man shall declare the truth 
with no uncertainty— when all the deaf and dead shall 
hear and, obeying, may have "life more abundant." 

The theory, that the dead are not dead, is the 
basis for the false doctrines of Hell and Purgatory, 
and these monstrous absurdities are the rocks upon 
which the entire system of Babylon is being wrecked; 
and only those who learn in time that these are unscriptural, 
and who learn the true gospel as illustrated 
in the divine plan of the ages, will be able to stand the 
shock of skepticism, higher criticism, evolution theory, 
etc., now sweeping down upon churchianity. 

Rev. Heber Newton, D.D., of New York City, 
a leading man in "Orthodoxy," more courageous than 
some of his associates, boldly states his agreement 
with death and sheol, over his own signature, as 
follows:— 

"Death is the true resurrection. No other resurrection 
is conceivable. 

"He who dies awakens into consciousness the 
same being as of old. 

"The threads of the old existence are not cut at 
the touch of death. 

"Death ushers us into no foreign world. All that 
is essential to human life here will be found there." 

REVIEWS OF THE BOOKS MENTIONED. 



The fact that the first named is gotten out by the 
higher critics, tells in a word of its antagonism to the 
Bible as a divine revelation, and it will probably circulate 
chiefly among theologians already well saturated 
with doubts, and too conservative to circulate such 
books among their people to arouse doubts and questions 
they could never hope to answer. But the other 
two books are of a different caste— intended for the 
people, and likely to be well advertised, and "pushed" 
upon public attention by their publishers, and will 
work havoc among those resting their faith upon sects 
and creeds. We must notice these, to guard our readers 
against them. Remember, however, that we do 
not expect to be able to help any to "stand" except 
"the very elect," and them not so much by outward as 
by inward evidences of the Bible's divine authorship. 
Remember that it is our understanding, as outlined in 



these pages for the past twenty-two years, that Babylon's 
sudden fall, as a great millstone, is to result from 
such influences. 

Dr. Abbott's work is styled, The Life and Literature 
of the Ancient Hebrews; and we have come across 
what we consider an excellent and very moderate 
review of it in The North American, from which we 
make extracts, which we believe will interest our 
readers, as follows:— 

BOOK SHOULD HAVE GREAT INFLUENCE. 

"Coming at this particular point of human mental 
history, when so many of us are religiously unsettled, 
unwilling either to accept materialism, or to believe 
what never can be proved, the book may be expected to 
exercise no little influence upon our decision. ...If 
Dr. Abbott's book be the last and authoritative word 
of the Higher Criticism, then its opponents at least 
know where they stand, and where issue should be 
joined. 

"The present reviewer is bound to mention his 
profound dissent from the position which Dr. Abbott 
has taken. If what the reverend essayist pronounces 
to be the final truth about religion be so indeed, 
then it seems to me that religion is not worth attending 
to. We have practically not advanced beyond 
the religious state of the ancient Egyptians, or of 
classic paganism. Religion is morality softened a 
little by an illogical suspension of judgment regarding 
some so-called religious mysteries. Dr. Abbott 
does not state his opinion in these words; but after 
examining his argument I cannot see what else to 
make of it. He does not believe that the Bible is the 
inspired Word of God; he does not believe that Christ 
is God made flesh. 

NO SUBLIME PASSION IN IT. 

"What he does believe on these points is common-sensible, 
plausible and ingeniously argued; but it is 
poignantly disappointing to those who look for the 
glow of supersensual faith; there is in it no lift, no 
sky, no sublime passion. I do not see how such a 
creed can hold and combine men; how it can do anything 
but loose and disperse them. It makes no 
demand upon us, except to be amiable and keep the 
commandments. It makes the straight and narrow 
path only too smooth and facile. It engenders no 
misgivings as to the competence of human intellect 
to solve all important religious problems. It ventures 
to call Herbert Spencer's Unknown Energy at the 
background of phenomena by the name of Deity; but 
it supplies us with no adequate reason for loving him, 
or for a conviction that he, in any comprehensible, 
vital way, loves us. It denies that he has ever 



vouchsafed us any first-hand, incontestable revelation 
of himself. 

"According to Dr. Abbott, he (God) always 
permits himself to be colored, modified, and arranged, 
as it were, according to the limitations and bias of 
his human prophets; and we have nothing for it but 
their own personal persuasion that they were not 
wofully deceived in their assumed function. In 

R2815 :page 166 

short, the Bible is a remarkable and superior kind of 
literature; and God is an august and lovely possibility. 
Christ is, or was, a man in whom the divine Spirit 
was powerfully and perhaps uniquely manifested. 
But nothing has really happened in religious history 
which could not be paralleled in kind, if not in degree, 
with what happens in the experience of any one of 
us. And yet Dr. Abbott states everything so softly 
and sweetly that we hardly feel, at the time we read 
him, that he is depriving us of religious essentials. It 
is only when we think him over afterwards that we 
perceive that we have nothing but husks to eat, and 
that the immortal springs have run dry. 

HERE IS THE KEYNOTE OF IT. 

"The keynote of his attitude is in a chance 
sentence in the preface: 'What will the New Criticism 
do with the Bible?' Why shall we not rather ask, 
What will the Bible do with the New Criticism? As 
a matter of fact, it turns out that the New Criticism 
does not and cannot touch the Bible, in its Divine 
essence, at all. It is occupied entirely with a minute 
and learned examination of the outside or shell of the 
Bible— with its letter, as we say. It makes certain 
discoveries, or arrives at certain theories, with regard 
to this letter; and then proceeds to judge of the Word 
of God upon the basis of these external discoveries 
and deductions. 

"The conclusion reached is that the Bible is not 
divinely— that is, directly— inspired; is not the authentic 
and eternal Word of God; and, since no other 
book claims to be that, it follows that there is no 
such thing extant as a full divine revelation. Now, 
obviously, God can never be found out by man, working 
with his finite human faculties; if he do not reveal 
himself, he will never be revealed, and must always 
remain a mere surmise or plausible deduction from 
facts which man is capable of discerning. There is 
nothing— absolutely nothing— divinely authoritative 
upon which we can take our stand. 

AUTHORSHIP OF THE BIBLE DISCUSSED. 

"The Bible is nothing more than an adventitious 



collocation of writings, composed by Hebrews of salient 
intellectual, moral and emotional gifts, who lived 
some thousands of years ago. We are to take it for 
what it seems to us to be worth, and for nothing more. 
It is full of errors, chronological, geographical, scientific; 
it is full of fairy tales, lyrics, imaginative stuff 
of all kinds, which, however, possess the common 
peculiarity that they do contain constant references 
to the Hebrew Jehovah. If there do not live among 
us today poets, story-writers and 'prophets' just as 
remarkable as these old Hebrew ones, that is only because 
it happens so; and on the other hand, our historians 
and scientific writers are far more trustworthy. 

"As regards the prophets, we are to understand 
that they were not prophets in the sense that they 
foretold things to come; if Isaiah or somebody else 
used a form of words which might be regarded as a 
foretelling of the coming of Christ, that is a mere coincidence, 
nothing of the kind was in the prophet's 
thoughts. Upon the whole, were a number of devout, 
pure-minded, highly gifted men to get together 
today, they might turn out a very respectable Bible of 
their own, entitled to just as much respect as this 
ancient volume or library, which has been so painfully 
handed down to us from antiquity. 

"I say, they might; no doubt, on the other hand, 
they might not; but at any rate, there is no apparent 
reason in the nature of things why they should not. 

WONDERS AT DR. ABBOTT'S CONCLUSIONS. 

"Now, I do not suppose there are many to question 
that the Bible has all the imperfections that Dr. Abbott 
finds in it. But many must be at a loss to discover 
why, admitting the imperfections, and conceding 
that the Bible is nothing else at most than an attempt 
to show that God is reckoned with in human 
history, Dr. Abbott should regard the Bible as in any 
sense a divine book. 

"If the Bible be not something infinitely deeper 
and more vital to mankind than this, it is practically 
nothing; and that it should have survived all these 
years, and have so powerfully influenced mankind, is 
extraordinary, to say the best of it. It leaves us destitute 
of any certain knowledge of God, and entirely 
free to deny that any Supreme Being exists. 

"In truth, unless we are prepared to make 
assumptions, at the outset, far outstripping any 
possible conclusions or discoveries of human knowledge 
or science, we cannot hope to have any God or 
Bible whatever. If we are to credit a divine Providence 
at all, we must credit it without any reservations 
whatever. 

"If I could prove my belief in God by any process 
of logical demonstration, I should cease to believe 
in him. It is a certainty miraculously implanted in 



the soul, or it is nothing. 

"I believe that the Bible is the inspired Word of 
God. I do so in virtue of reading the Bible, and 
being convinced by a spiritual and mystical process 
that it is the divine revelation. I then perceive that 
the trivial and often revolting historical details of a 
depraved and infidel people which it recounts; the 
songs which it sings, the apostrophes which it records, 
the allegories, the stories which it narrates, have not, 
in their literal significance, any divine or external 
meaning whatever. 

"But all these are a mask, cover or body, under 
or within which is a soul or spirit, answering part to 
part to its material envelope or instrument, and conveying 
the spiritual truths concerning the Creator 
and the human being which he has created, which 
are essential to that creature's integrity and salvation. 

"Though its compilation seems to have been 
governed by chance, it was not so, but it was divinely 
ordained from the beginning. And whether or not 
the writers thought they were inspired, every word 
which they set down had already existed in the divine 
mind, and their hands were divinely guided so to 
write it and not otherwise. 

"The true alternatives between which we must 
make our choice are the view stated by Dr. Abbott, 
which gives up religion; and this, which demands the 
surrender of the judgment of the human senses. His 
book may precipitate this choice, and thus do a good 
beyond what he had himself foreseen." 

R2815 :page 167 

JUDGE WAITE'S CRITICISM OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



This book is ably reviewed by the New York 
Tribune, from which we give the following extracts: 

"Of the numerous gospels in use in the 
church in the second century, the author says that 
only three were probably apostolic, namely, the gospel 
of St. Paul, the Gospel or Recollections of Peter, 
and the Oracles or Sayings of Christ, attributed to 
Matthew. These, as well as numerous other sacred 
writings now unknown, were reserved as sacred scriptures 
in the early church, until they were suppressed 
in the interest of the present four gospels. I found 
myself,' says Theodoret (A.D. 430), 'upward of two 
hundred such books held in honor among your 
churches, and, collecting them all together, I had 
them put aside and instead introduced the gospels of 
the four Evangelists.' Many of the early Fathers refer 
plainly to these suppressed writings, and some of 
these references indicate that writings now unknown 
to the church were regarded as authoritative. The 



three writings mentioned above probably did not teach 
the miraculous conception of Jesus or his physical 
resurrection. But it is the contention of the author 
that these and other beliefs gradually grew into shape 
in the church, and that then the present gospels were 
written, many of the materials in the older writings 
being used, the Gospel of Paul was thus the germ of 
the Gospel of Luke; the Gospel of Peter of the Gospel 
of Mark, and the Oracles of the Gospel of Matthew. 

"Holding thus as to their origin, the author naturally 
rejects the gospels as unhistorical. Undoubtedly, 
he says, there was a moral and religious teacher 
that came to be known as Christ. This teacher, who 
had devoted followers and disciples, was put to death 
in the reign of Tiberius, and after his death Paul, the 
chief of his disciples, founded a new religion on his 
doctrines and precepts and on the belief in his resurrection. 
Both Peter and Paul, in the opinion of the 
author, were responsible for much of the cruelty, 
bigotry and fanaticism which came later to characterize 
Christianity. The apostolic fathers emphasized 
most the supernatural elements in Christianity, and 
in a credulous age new supernatural additions could 
easily be made without exciting any protest." 

THE FOUNDATION OF GOD STANDETH SURE. 



Replying to the Judge's arguments, we notice 
first, that their weight depends greatly upon the attitude 
of the mind receiving them. If we will imagine 
a mind (and they are legion) already disgusted with 
the din of the jarring and contradictory creeds of 
Christendom's sects, numbering more than a hundred; 
and if, additionally, we will imagine that mind awakened, 
in part at least, to a realization of the injustice, 
unmercifulness, lovelessness, pitilessness, heartlessness, 
of the doctrine of eternal torment of all except 
a "little flock" of "saved" ones; and if we will remember 
that this awakened and disgusted mind has 
from infancy been taught that the Bible is the foundation 
for that slander upon the divine Creator, then we 
can easily see that to such a mind the weight of 
Judge Waite's book would be immense. Such an 
one is prepared and waiting for an excuse for utterly 
repudiating the Bible, and getting rid once and forever 
of harassing fears respecting the future of himself 
and millions of others, which as a nightmare had 
haunted his soul since infancy. 

To the mind thus prepared and fertilized with the 
rich compost of the errors of centuries, including the 
"dark ages," every argument of this book will doubtless 

R2816 :page 167 



bring conviction and seem utterly unanswerable. 

The seeds of doubt, once sprouted, will make reverence 

give place to contempt, and every item that is 

obscure is classed as an inconsistency and contradiction, 

and speedily faith's anchorage is wholly lost. 

And in the case of the majority there is no real faith, 

but merely credulity, which vanishes still more rapidly. 

But, on the other hand, note the position of those 
who approach these questions and suggestions of 
doubt from the opposite standpoint;— like those mentioned 
by the Prophet, saying, "The people that do 
know their God shall be strong and succeed." Suppose 
this one to have "tasted that the Lord is gracious," 
in realizing the forgiveness of his sins, and 
that being thus justified he has made a full consecration 
of himself to the Lord— even unto death; and 
that thus he was begotten of the holy spirit and realized 
the new life begun in his heart, and making 
progress in all the fruits of the spirit;— one in whom 
old things had passed away and all things become 
new. 

Suppose, additionally, that this one was living 
today, and consequently privileged to partake of the 
"meat in due season" provided for those of the household 
of faith who are Israelites indeed, and in a proper 
attitude of heart to receive it. Suppose that he had 
been a faithful student in the School of Christ and 
learned of him, being "taught of God." Suppose 
that now he saw clearly the divine plan of the ages; 
—the fall of our first parents, the promises through 
the patriarchs and the prophets of a great Redeemer 
out of Israel, who, dying, should thus redeem or 
purchase all men, not from torment, but from death, 
and who, since his resurrection, has waited with the 
work of restitution (resurrection) for the world until, 
as appointed by the Father, he shall have first selected 
his "elect" Church, his Bride and joint-heir in the 
Kingdom, which is to bless and restore all the willing 
of the purchased race. 

Suppose this one, who has seen with the eyes of 
his understanding, the Wisdom, Justice, Love and 
Power of God portrayed in God's Word in respect to 
the divine plan, as it shall ultimately shine forth as 
the sun,— would it be easy to convince such an one 

R2816 :page 168 

that he had followed cunningly devised fables? Nay, 
verily; he would say with one of old, "I know in 
whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is 
able to keep that which I have committed unto him." 
-2 Tim. 1:12. 

Ask such an one what he thinks of the fact that 
the New Testament was not handed down from heaven 
in book form, but grew, as one after another added 
his testimony, and he would answer, Why yes! How 



else could it come to us and yet have us "walk by 
faith and not by sight"? Inquire what he thinks of 
the fact cited above, that Theodoret declared that in 
the churches of one province he found over a hundred 
different manuscripts, by various authors, dealing with 
the events of our Lord's ministry; and that he, Theodoret, 
persuaded them to accept as authoritative the 
four gospels we now use,— relegating the remainder 
to less prominence, as unauthoritative. Ask if this 
would shake his faith in the narratives of the four 
gospels, accepted now as well as then? 

His answer would be, No; this does not shake 
my faith. I know very well that none of the Gospels 
were written until after Pentecost; and that later on 
there were numerous presentations of the matter by 
more and less competent writers. I know that of the 
four accounts so long canonically recognized by the 
Lord's people two (Mark and Luke) make no claim 
to having been written by apostles. I can well surmise 
that all accounts in that day of scarcity of books 
would be costly, as to time of preparation; and on this 
account, as well because of their sacred theme, all 
such would be kept in more or less honor, by the 
Lord's people. I can readily see the wisdom of deciding 
which of these versions were the more accurate 
in detail and desirable in style of diction: and I agree 
that a council of believers would be a desirable way 
of reaching a conclusion on this subject that would be 
beneficial to all. And I fully endorse the selection 
made, and conclude that in this, as in all of his people's 
affairs, our Lord supervised. Furthermore I am the 
more convinced of the honesty of the records, as well 
as of those who decided upon them, by the fact that 
two of them do not claim to have been made by eye 
witnesses, nor by apostolic writing, but were by St. 
Paul's contemporaries and assistants; and one of those 
says most modestly:— 

"Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set 
forth in order a declaration of those things which are 
most surely believed among us [primitive Christians], 
even as they [apostles, etc.] delivered them unto us 
—[they] who from the beginning were eye-witnesses 
and ministers of the Word; it seemed good to me also, 
having had perfect understanding of these things from 
the very first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent 
Theophilus."— Luke 1:1-3. 

Could there be anything less like deception than 
this? Would it not have been easy for dishonest 
men to have omitted the introductory words of 
Luke's Gospel, and to have given it the name of 
James, or Paul, or Andrew, or Peter, or Nathaniel? 
And could they not have done similarly with the 
Gospel by Mark? Moreover it is evident from the 
above words of Theodoret, as well as from other records, 
that the general recognition of the four Gospels we 
now recognize took place long before Theodoret's 



writings. He mentions the matter in a manner that 
implies that the province thus instructed and advised 
was an exception to the rule— different from the 
churches of other provinces. And this, and the evidences 
against the rejected ("apocryphal") books, 
and the evidences in favor of the four Gospels we still 
recognize, were so weighty with the churches that 
Theodoret evidently had no difficulty in convincing 
them of the propriety of the course he advised. 

No secret has been made of the fact that certain 
records respecting that time were rejected, and some 
Bibles, especially old Family Bibles, contained numerous 
of those rejected books, separated from the accepted 
ones, and styled as a whole The Apocrypha. 
And we have no hesitation in saying that the difference 
between these rejected records and those accepted 
and kept are so great that not one of our readers 
would be unable to quickly detect the wide differences 
between the style and general presentations of these 
and the simple, grand, unostentatious presentations of 
our four Gospels. 

But, some one may ask, If these Gospels were not 
selected in the apostle's day, but long afterward, how 
do we know that they were inspired? We answer, 
that in the apostles' days most of the evangelizing 
was done by word of mouth, few people knew how to 
read, even if they had books; and the Lord evidently 
did not intend to fix matters so that there should be 
no room for doubts and doubters, and no room for 
exercise of faith in his supervision of his own cause. 
He undoubtedly did supervise the matter, so that we 
have in the four Gospels a very full record of the 
facts. Nor are we to think that inspiration is requisite 
to the telling of the truth; and these Gospels 
make no claim to having been inspired or needing inspiration; 
—they are histories. We read Macaulay's 
history of England and believe its records without 
thinking of asking whether Macaulay was inspired 
to write it. We trust it even tho we have no reason 
to assume that God supervised its statements, as we 
have good reason to expect he did with the Gospel 
records. 

As for the Epistles, their case is different,— they 
are not merely historical records; they are doctrinal 

R2816 :page 169 

treatises; respecting the authority, the inspiration, of 
their writers we have good reason to inquire. And 
whoever will examine the rejected or Apocryphal 
epistles will find that they are wholly inferior to those 
retained, and in addition, that no apostolic epistle was 
rejected and no unapostolic epistle retained. The conclusion 
of the early Church was the same that ours 
now would be. (1) That Paul was the Apostle chosen 
of God to fill Judas' place (the uninspired and undirected 



action of the eleven in choosing Matthias, 
previous to Pentecost, being entirely ignored by the 
Lord). (2) That all of the apostles were specially 
selected and specially inspired and directed of the 
Lord for the work given them to do; and that they 
have no successors in office and authority;— even tho 
Papacy has since claimed, to the contrary, the same 
inspiration and authority for its popes. The last book 
of the Bible sets its seal to the thought that the twelve 
were special representatives of God, and that the number 
could not be added to,— by showing the glorified 
Church of the future, under the symbol of a city— 
whose twelve foundations had in them written the 
names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. 

It is objected further, that some of the books now 
recognized as parts of the New Testament were regarded 
with suspicion by some of the churches for quite 
a while, and openly rejected by some for a season;— 
among others the Second Epistle of Peter, and Revelation. 
We answer, that this is not surprising; and 
so far from being an unfavorable item it is favorable; 
—showing clearly that whatever indifference might 
have been manifest in some congregations at first, 
some were very critical, very exacting as to the proofs 
of genuineness of what they received. And as for the 
Book of Revelation, it belonged less to that day, anyway. 
It is specially ours of to-day, and contains 
abundant internal evidence of its one-ness with the 
remainder of God's Book. 

However, as at first stated, all these things, 
while clear as crystal to those possessed of and taught 
by God's spirit, are obscure to all others who will find 
abundant opportunity for "stumbling at the Word, 
being disobedient." It is still as true as when our Master 

R2817 :page 169 

said it, that— "If any man will do my Father's will, 
he shall know of my doctrine." Whoever will not do 
this, whatever else that is good he may do, will not 
know,— not being of the kind "to whom it is given to 
know the mysteries of the Kingdom." (Matt. 13:11.) 
To all others the matter may be foggy, at best; even 
as the Prophet declared, "None of the wicked [unfaithful 
to their covenant] shall understand." The 
Scriptures are for and addressed to the Church— the 
saints and the household of faith; and their evidences 
are internal, not external; just as the symbolic vessels 
and furniture, etc., of the Tabernacle and of the Temple 
were completely hidden from outsiders, and could be 
fully seen only by the typical priesthood, in the light 
of the typical oil and lamp. 

Does some one ask, What can we do for friends 
whom we may expect more and more to see drifting 
off into skepticism? Must we let them go without 
endeavoring to help them? 



We answer, No; we should do all we can for each 
one, even tho we know that it will avail nothing for 
the vast majority. Give them the following treatment, 
asking divine wisdom to know how to approach 
them wisely. (1) Let them read this paper, and (2) 
loan them MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., the first four 
chapters of which were specially written for the assistance 
of truth-seekers, who need first of all to have 
faith established in the Bible as a whole. If they are 
in the proper condition of heart, that is to say, if they 
have the "hearing ear," they will get a start at least 
in that volume, which perhaps has converted more infidels 
than any other book in print today. If they 
love the truth and appreciate the divine character as 
set forth in the Plan of the Ages, they will want to go 
on and on in the green pastures of truth, and by the 
still waters they will be refreshed, and doubtless the 
great Shepherd will by his rod and staff guide them 
to the Kingdom. But the record is that a thousand 
to one shall fall.-Psa. 91:7. 

WHENCE THE PRESENT GENERAL BLINDNESS? 



Prevalent blindness and loss of faith in the Bible 
are attributable to the various so-called Orthodox 
creeds of Christendom; formed during the "dark 
ages," these are full of superstitions and falsehoods, 
and vain attempts to reconcile these with the holy 
Scriptures. Now that reason is awakened it does 
not occur to the devoted sectarian that the fault is 
wholly with his creed, and that it really is in violent 
conflict with God's Word as reverently and reasonably 
interpreted. On the contrary, he loses faith in 
his Bible in proportion as he loses faith in his creed; 
because he considers them to be in harmony— identical 
in their teachings. 

He has a reverence for his Bible as an antique, as 
a remembrancer of the past,— intimately associated 
with his earliest experience at a pious parent's knee; 
and he has a similar reverence for the creed and denomination 
to which his parents and himself have 
long been attached. But he has lost faith in both. He 
can see at a glance the inconsistency of the teachings 
of the various creeds, that God is either incapable of 
extending the knowledge of Christ to all mankind, 
and giving all a fair opportunity for believing and 
obeying the gospel, or else that he is unwilling to do 

R2817 :page 170 

so to any but an elect few; and that the vast remainder 

are to be tormented to all eternity;— which, if 

God knew the end from the beginning, implies that 

he provided them with eternal life with the foreknowledge 



and intention that they should thus suffer. 

Men could stifle reason in this manner once, but 
they can do so no longer. It is to their credit as 
reasoners, and to their credit as men and women of 
heart and sympathy, that they reject such theories as 
impossible of belief, and declare that such testimony 
bears on its face the evidence that it is untrue; that it 
is a blasphemy against the true God and a dishonor 
to the conscience and reasoning powers of every one 
who so professes; and that they had rather trust to a 
theory of their own construction, built on love and 
reason, than stultify themselves longer by such 
professions. 

And not seeing that their creeds malign the Bible 
as much as they do the Creator, they reverently lay 
aside Bible and catechism as relics of their thought-infancy. 
Nominally they still adhere to their denomination 
as being "as good as any, and as correct as 
any;" and the denomination still adheres, nominally, 
to the creed and the Bible and the accustomed forms 
and ceremonies: believing them to have a salutary 
effect upon the young and a restraining influence upon 
the immorally inclined. 

However it may be kept secret, the "broad-minded" 
and "intelligent," "up-to-date" ministers 
and members of the various denominations have taken, 
or are rapidly taking, the view advanced by Dr. 
Abbott, set forth foregoing: that morality, and not 
faith in Christ, is the divine test. The tendency of 
many is to universalism; but the majority, having lost 
faith in the Bible, have no guide whatever except 
their own or other men's reasons, and are full of 
doubts. They have lost their anchor and are being 
driven to shipwreck on the rocks of infidelity by the 
increasing winds of reason. 

These all need help; but there are none who can 
render aid except such as by the grace of God have 
gotten their own eyes open to see that the Bible has 
been unintentionally traduced in the house of its 
friends— that it is loyal to God, and most beautifully 
grand and self-consistent to the sanctified reason, and 
able to stand the test today and to come off victor, as 
much as in the past; while, on the contrary, the sectarian 
creeds can find no defenders among reasonable 
men. 

The bolder infidels tell us that the Bible was made 
up by priests and knaves. We inquire, which priests 
and knaves?— of which denomination? 

Was it made by Methodist priests and knaves? 

If so, why did they not add a dozen or so more 
texts to support their special tenet— that divine grace 
is free during this Gospel age? And why did they 
not omit those texts which mention "election" and 
the "elect"? 

Was it the Presbyterians who made the Bible? 

If so, why did they not add more texts on election, 



and omit the three or four which appear to be contrary 
to the doctrine of election, and which they cannot 
explain away? 

Was it Lutheran priests, Episcopal priests, or 
Baptists? No! for similar reasons. 

Oh! Finally they conclude that it must have been 
made by the priests and knaves of the church of 
Rome! Well, let us see whether its internal evidences 
favor that view. What object did they serve by such 
a fraud? 

If the Roman Catholics made the New Testament, 
and pretended that they gave the words of Jesus and 
the apostles, so as to furnish a foundation for their 
teachings, how comes it that they are and have long 
been the bitter foes of the Bible— Bible readings, Bible 
Societies, etc? And how comes it that they did not 
make a Bible which would support their theories? 
Why did they not put into it clear statements to the 
effect that Peter was the first pope; that our Lord's 
mother was the "Mother of God," and that she should 
be prayed to; that saints are to be prayed to; that images, 
crucifixes and pictures are to be adored? Why did 
they omit mention of "holy water," "holy candles," 
"extreme unction," consecrated cemeteries, and the 
invalidity of any but priestly marriages? Why did 
they not insert commands respecting the wearing of 
"scalpels," the necessity of masses for the dead, to 
get them out of purgatory? Why did they not insert 
instructions to all to apply to the priests for indulgences, 
and fix liberal prices at which they should be 
supplied? Why was Purgatory left unmentioned 
when it is the mainstay of their church treasury? 
Why did they not throw in at least a dozen or so texts 
amongst the epistles of Paul, Peter, James and John 
describing hell and purgatory in vivid colors, instead 
of omitting a single mention of either? Why did they 
not insert a dozen texts or so on the doctrine of Trinity, 
instead of leaving the entire Bible without such a 
text, until the seventh century, when one text was 
corrupted, so as to indirectly imply something of the 
kind? (1 John 5:7— admitted by all trinitarians to 
be corrupted, and omitted from the Revised Version). 
Why did they not insert a passage to show that the 
"clergy" are separate and distinct from the "laity"? 

Why, on the contrary, did they insert passages 
which say that there is no such class distinction as 
"clergy" or "laity" in God's Church, but that— "Ye 
are all one in Christ Jesus"? Why did they permit 

R2817 :page 171 

that their favorite, the Apostle Peter, should be made 
to contradict their theory and practice, by saying, not 
of the "clergy," but of the whole Church, "Ye are a 
royal priesthood"? (1 Pet. 2:9.) Why did they permit 
the oft repeated statements that the end of the 



wicked would be "destruction"— "second death," 
etc., which would be wholly contradictory to their 
theory of "eternal torment"? 

We answer, that the evidence is conclusive that 
the Bible was not made by any of the sects, and is in 
antagonism to them all, and that injustice it should 
be judged by itself— by its own internal evidences. 
And all who have seen its beauty from this standpoint, 
praise God for the light:— for his wonderful plan of 
the ages, of which the ransom at Calvary, once for all, 
is the center, the election of the Gospel Church a 
grand incidental, and the blessings of the Millennial 
age, bringing opportunities for obedience unto eternal 
life to all the redeemed, is the grand outcome. 

Whoever knows this gospel and does not desire 
and endeavor to spread it to others about him who 
are blind to it, but hungry for it, surely lacks the 
spirit of Christ, whatever may be his profession. How 
dwelleth the love of God in him? 



R2818 :page 171 

"HE ASCENDED UP ON HIGH." 

-ACTS 1:1-11.-MAY 19.- 

"While he blessed them he was parted from them 
and carried up into heaven."— Luke 24:51. 

LUKE, the writer of the Acts of the Apostles, in 

its introduction refers to his Gospel narrative 

of the life of Jesus— respecting "all that Jesus 

began both to do and to teach until the day in which 

he was taken up." It was no doubt of divine intention 

that he should express this matter in this particular 

form, and refer to the personal work of Jesus 

as merely the beginning of his work. Only those 

who grasp this thought; viz., that the body of the 

Church, "the body of Christ," in the flesh, is a continuation 

of the work of Jesus, the Head of that body, 

in the flesh— only such can grasp with clearness the 

divine plan. We are to consider the name, Jesus, as 

the personal name of our Lord and Head, and the 

name Christ, or Anointed, as the official name, applicable 

to him as the head, and to the whole Church as 

his body. From this statement the two advents of 

Christ are brought close together, for the work of the 

first advent, the sacrifice of Christ in the flesh, will be 

little more than completed, until the work of the 

second advent begins, the blessing of all the families 

of the earth with restitution privileges and mercies, 

at the hands of the glorified Christ, Head and body. 

Indeed the preparation for the new age and its work 

laps upon this Gospel age and its work. 



It was in harmony with this thought (that the 
work which he had begun his apostles, and all his 
footstep-followers, were to carry on) that the Master 
so particularly instructed them during the forty days 
after his resurrection. We have already noticed that 
he appeared to them in all some six or eight times, 
and now in the present lesson we have an account of 
his seventh (or ninth) appearance, at the end of the 
forty days. It was probably at least a week after he 
had seen seven brethren in Galilee that he appeared to 
them again at Jerusalem, where he evidently had appointed 
the apostles to assemble. Here he met with 
them and gave them his final parting instructions, 
which were perfectly in harmony with his previous 
teachings, that their mission was to continue to be a 
spiritual one, to feed his sheep and to feed his lambs 
—to continue the work which he had begun, and to 
follow in his footsteps. But he impresses upon their 
minds the fact that they are incompetent for this work 
until first they shall have received of the Father 
through him a special power from on high, for which 
he bade them wait at Jerusalem. He reminded them 
that this blessing for which they were to wait was the 
same that he already had mentioned before his crucifixion, 
—telling them that the Father would send the 
holy spirit in his name, that it would bring to their 
remembrance all things that he had spoken unto them, 
and guide them into all truth, etc.— John 14:16,26; 
15:26. 

He would impress his disciples with the importance 
of the blessing for which they were to wait, and 
with the fact that it meant to them a new era, a new 
dispensation: as they knew of the reformation movement 
instituted by John the Baptizer, and that the repentant 
sinners were immersed in water, he would 
have them know that now he was instituting a Church 
on a much higher plane, and that all who would be received 
into it would be immersed in holy spirit,* holy 
power— come under an influence of power from on 
high. His declaration that this would be not many 
days hence, was indefinite purposely; first, that they 
should expect it soon, and not be disheartened or discouraged, 
and yet he left the exact number of days 



*"Ghost" is old English for "spirit"— the word is really 
obsolete, and had the American Revision Committee had its 
way it would never have appeared in the Revised Version, we 
are told. It is not used in the American Committee's Version; 
it is misleading. 

R2818 :page 172 

unstated, so that they might be continually watching 
for it. This left the apostles in a waiting attitude, 



and, as Luke informs us, in an attitude of prayer and 
expectancy, very profitable to them at this juncture. 

Slowly, during the forty days, the disciples were 
learning to expect very different things from what 
they had in mind at the beginning and throughout 
the Lord's ministry: they were learning that the 
Kingdom glories and honors were not to be distributed 
immediately; but that a new dispensation, and a new 
kind of work in harmony with it, was set before them 
to be done; and gradually their minds reverted to the 
prophecies in which the blessings of the Lord upon 
the nation of Israel are set forth, and the intimation 
given that the blessings upon the whole world are to 
flow through the children of Abraham in some national 
capacity. They had confidence in these prophecies, 
and now they would ask the Lord respecting 
them. How could these prophecies be fulfilled under 
the new arrangement, which seemed to ignore the 
nation and to merely use themselves, the Lord's followers, 
a mere fragment of the nation. Hence their 
inquiry of the Master whether now or soon or when 
the prophecies would be fulfilled, which promised the 
restoration of Israel to divine favor as God's Kingdom, 
thus implying its release from the power of 
Rome and all other dominions. 

Our Lord's answer was not to the effect that they 
had misunderstood these prophecies, and that they 
would all have some kind of spiritual fulfilment; on 
the contrary, by his answer he implied that their conception 
of the prophecies was quite proper, but that 
the time for their fulfilment had not yet come, and 
that they must not press the question as to the times 
and seasons; they must trust to God, who has these 
in his own keeping, and who will abundantly fulfil 
every promise he had ever made in its due time. 

Our Lord, then, drew the minds of his disciples 
back to their own work, to which he had called them 
—to the work which they were to accomplish as members 
of his body in the flesh. He informs them that 
they shall be specially empowered through the holy 
spirit, which the Father would send in his name; and 
that using this power, this influence, they would be 
privileged to be his witnesses— his representatives- 
representatives of his character, his teachings and his 
work, not only in Jerusalem and throughout Judea 
and Samaria, but also eventually to the utmost parts 
of the earth. He would have them see that a great 
work was being committed to their care. God would 
attend to all of his promises in due time; now they, 
to be his co-laborers and witnesses, must be attentive 
to the work to which they had consecrated themselves, 
and for which they now were to be thoroughly 
empowered and quickened through the holy spirit. 
With this parting lesson, while he was walking with 
them and talking to them on the Mount of Olives, 
going in the direction of Bethany, he began gradually 



to ascend from them, a cloud receiving him out of 
their sight. 

One error leads to another; and the failure to 
note that our Lord's change of nature from human to 
spiritual took place in his resurrection, and that his 
presence during the forty days was that of a spirit 
being, unseen except when he for a few times very 
briefly appeared to his disciples for the purpose of instructing 
them, and these different appearances in 
different forms, in different kind of clothing, etc.— 
has led some to very peculiar ideas respecting our 
Lord's ascension. Thus we find one Doctor of Divinity 
saying on the subject: "The ascension was a 
noble and fitting close of the earthly career of Jesus; 
far better than to die again, as Lazarus died, or to remain 
always on earth in his body— the only alternatives!" 
Poor man! How tightly error has blindfolded 
the eyes of his understanding, that he should 
think thus. 

From the Scriptural standpoint, that our Lord 
was raised "a quickening spirit," invisible to mankind, 
and that he merely "appeared" in forms of flesh, 
the matter has an entirely different aspect. From this 
standpoint we see that this last appearance of our 
Lord to the disciples, like the other appearances, was 
intended for their instruction, and to help natural 
men, not yet begotten of the holy spirit, to understand 
deep things, which otherwise they could not so 
well have comprehended. Our Lord's ascension was 
simply another way of disappearing. When he appeared 
to them in the upper room, the door being shut, 
and talked to them and convinced them, having finished 
his lesson he "vanished" as suddenly as he had 
"appeared." The body of flesh and its clothing, which, 
by miraculous power, he had organized within the 
room, he could and did disorganize again by a power 
beyond our comprehension— the same power which 
turned the water at Cana into wine; by the same 
power by which angels had frequently appeared as 
men for a purpose,— disappearing when the purpose 
had been accomplished. Indeed, in one of these instances 
narrated in the Scriptures, an angel accomplished 
his disappearance in very much the same 
manner in which our Lord disappeared on this last occasion 
of his ascension.— Judges 13:19-21. 

The propriety of thus terminating his intercourse 
with the disciples is evident: they would have no further 
expectation of his appearing to them again as a 
man, in different forms, after such a farewell: they 
would understand that he was gone from them now as 

R2819 :page 173 

a spirit being, as he had previously said: "It is expedient 
for you that I go away, for if I go not away the 
Comforter will not come." The confusion of the D.D. 



from whom we quote foregoing, is the more manifest 
from the fact that in further writing upon this subject 
he recognized the "two men" of vs. 10 as being 
angels who, for the time being, had assumed human 
form for the purpose of communicating with the disciples, 
and impressing upon them a certain valuable 
lesson. Why could not the gentleman see that our 
Lord, having finished the work which the Father had 
given him to do (viz., the laying down of his life as 
the man Christ Jesus) was no longer a little lower 
than the angels, a fleshly being, but was now 
"changed," and as he was, previous to coming into 
the world, a spirit being of the highest order, so now, 
as the Apostle declares in his resurrection, he was a 
life-giving spirit? (1 Cor. 15:45.) And if the angels 
had power to appear as men, and did so appear, why 
should not their chief and Lord have power so to appear 
to his disciples in various forms, for the purpose 
of convincing them that he was no longer dead, but 
risen,— no longer a man, but "changed"? 

Our Lord's words, "It is expedient for you that 
I go away," lead us to inquire, Why was his ascension 
expedient? Let us consider the matter. Had he remained 
with the disciples, present but invisible, and 
appearing to them and to all of his followers occasionally 
throughout this Gospel age, of what special advantage 
would it have been? What could he do for 
us in this manner that could not as well be done for 
us from his high station in the heavens with the 
Father? And again, had he remained with the Church 
it would have seemed all the more inexplicable that 
he should have permitted his representatives to be 
misused, slandered, abused in various ways, and that 
he should seem to take no part in the management of 
the affairs of the world, while claiming the legal right 
through purchase, by his own blood, to be its prince 
and Savior from the power of sin and Satan. For all 
these reasons it was appropriate that he should not be 
with us, but that we should know that he was with 
the Father, and should wait for him until the time appointed 
of the Father— until all of his faithful disciples 
had been called and proven acceptable, and the 
foreordained number of the elect fulfilled;— and that 
he should then come to receive them to himself, and 
to establish them as his joint-heirs in the Kingdom; 
and to assume the rulership of the world, to bind the 
Adversary, to overthrow his dominion, and to establish 
truth and righteousness on a permanent basis by 
the divine authority and power which he possesses. 

But there was another and all-important reason 
why he should ascend to the Father, and it is that which 
our Lord mentions, "Except I go away the Comforter 
will not come." (John 16:7.) Why not? We answer, 
that the whole world being under divine condemnation, 
none could be recognized by the Father 
and adopted into his family, begotten of the holy 



spirit as his sons, so long as they were sinners. And 

the death of our Lord Jesus, while it was the ransom-price, 

had not as yet affected any of those for whom 

it was intended. Before it could benefit them he must 

ascend to the Father and must present that sacrifice 

or price as on behalf of those to whom it would be applicable: 

that they, being justified by faith and sanctification 

or setting apart to holiness and divine service, 

even unto death, might receive the spirit of adoption 

into the family of God's spiritual sons. 

This was the reason, and it is in full harmony 
with the Apostle John's statement: "The holy spirit 
was not yet given because Jesus was not yet glorified." 
(John 7:30.) He had received his glorious body in 
the resurrection, as the Apostle shows us in 1 Cor. 15:43,44; 
but it remained for him to be glorified 
(honored) after he would appear in the presence of 
the Father and present before him his complete work, 
and officially receive divine approval; then he was 
honored, glorified, with a name that is above every 
name, "that at the name of Jesus every knee should 
bow and every tongue confess, to the glory of God 
the Father."-Phil. 2:10. 

We can imagine the eleven apostles (all Galileans) 
standing looking after the disappearing Master, 
and endeavoring to peer into the cloud that had received 
him from their sight, and endeavoring to 
comprehend the meaning of the various lessons of 
experience through which they had recently passed; 
and their perplexed thoughts respecting the promised 
coming of Christ again, and the interim of loneliness 
which he had promised should be compensated for by 
the promised holy spirit which should comfort them. 
Then appropriately, at the needed moment, under the 
divine providence, two beings stood by them, "men" 
in appearance, but in garments which indicated that 
they had only assumed the form of men for the occasion, 
and which told the apostles that these were 
really angels. These in cheerful tone and impressive 
manner assured them that they need not continue to 
look into the sky, but to remember that he would so 
come again in like manner as they had seen him go. 

How strange that so many of the Lord's people, 
even amongst those who fully believe in, and with 
deep interest long for his second coming, should 
overlook the particular features of this angelic 
testimony! First, that it was the same Jesus that 
should come again— not the former Jesus, whom they 
knew in the flesh, but the same Jesus, who was taken 
up from them, and whom they recognized as so 
thoroughly "changed" from the time of his resurrection 
—the spirit Jesus, "a quickening spirit." This 
is the one promised to come again, not in weakness, 
as "in the days of his flesh," but a spirit being, 
clothed with full plenitude of divine power to establish 
them as his Kingdom, and through them to bless all 



the families of the earth. 
How strange, too, that the other important fact 

R2819 :page 174 

which the angel noted, viz., the "manner," is so often 
overlooked by the same class ! What was the manner 
of our Lord's going? Was it with great ostentation, 
with the sound of a literal trumpet calling the attention 
of the whole world? Was it in a manner known 
to the whole world? Or was the manner of his going 
an extremely quiet one, known only to his most faithful 
followers? His second coming is to be "in like 
manner!" Those who give to the words of the angels 
their true weight and force, laying the emphasis upon 
the right words, will receive a blessing in so doing, 
and be the better prepared to understand the character 
of our Lord's parousia. They will be less surprised 
to know that it fulfils all these conditions; that 
he is now seen only with the eye of faith, and only by 
the most consecrated of his people. It will be after 
his second coming, that he (unknown to the world) 
will reckon with his own servants, his saints, exalting 
the worthy, faithful over a few things, to be rulers 
over many things. (Matt. 25:14-30.) It will be still 
later on that he will restore the Kingdom again to 
Israel— to the worthy ones of that people, through 
whom, as the earthly agents of the spiritual Kingdom, 
the blessing of divine grace and truth shall flow to all 
the families of the earth. And in connection with 
the giving of the Kingdom to the elect the great time 
of trouble will reveal the new ruler to all the families 
of the earth in the fiery judgments upon all iniquity, 
until every eye (of understanding) shall see him— revealed 
as King of kings and Lord of lords. 



R2819 :page 174 

PENTECOST-THE DAY OF JUBILEE. 

-ACTS 2:1-1 l.-MAY 26.- 

"When he, the spirit of truth, is come, he 
will guide you into all truth."— John 16:13. 

PENTECOST signifies fiftieth, and was used 
amongst the Jews as the name of one of 
their most important feasts or religious celebrations. 
As their fiftieth "Jubilee" year followed a cycle of 
seven times seven years, so Pentecost, as a jubilee 
day, followed a cycle of seven times seven days, from 
the time of the gathering of the sheaf of first-fruits, 
which was presented before the Lord as a "wave-offering 
This sheaf of the first-fruits evidently 



typified our Lord in his resurrection on the sixteenth 
of Nisan— he having been slain as the Passover 
Lamb on the fourteenth of Nisan. — 
Lev. 33:5,6,15,16. 

In our last lesson we noted the fact that it was 
the eleven apostles that were witnesses of our Lord's 
ascension, "men of Galilee;" and it was these, who 
were to be his special representatives, and through 
whose word others were to believe, that he instructed 
to tarry at Jerusalem until endued with power from 
on high. The present lesson shows us the same 
eleven apostles in the upper room complying with 
our Lord's injunction, waiting in an attitude of 
prayer and expectancy, and in readiness to begin 
their mission of feeding his sheep and lambs. In 
harmony with this view is the statement, a little later 
on, when the preaching began, that "all these are 
Galileans." And again, "Peter standing up with the 
eleven." (Acts 2:7,14.) We are not positively informed 
that any others were present at this time, but 
from previous statements, to the effect that others (to 
a total of one hundred and twenty) met with the 
apostles, "continuing with one accord in prayer and 
supplication," we may reasonably infer that they 
were present at the time of the pentecostal outpouring 
of the holy spirit, and that the whole company 
was thus baptized, immersed in the holy spirit, which 
filled the place where they were assembled. There is 
no good reason, however, for questioning respecting 
the cloven tongues of fire— that these sat upon any 
but the apostles. The statement is that "It sat upon 
each of them, and they were all filled with the holy 
spirit, and began to speak with other tongues, as the 
spirit gave them utterance." The subsequent statement 
is that all those who spoke, all to whom the 
spirit gave utterance or tongues, were Galileans; but 
whether or not the apostles were thus specially recognized 
at this time, we are assured, not only from 
our Lord's words, but also from his subsequent revelation, 
that the apostles occupied a special place in 

R2820 : page 174 

connection with his Kingdom, his Church, assigned 
to no others.— John 6:70; Rev. 21:14. 

The Pentecostal blessing signified divine acceptance 
of the sin-offering which, finished at Calvary, our 
Lord at this time had presented before the Father. 
The outpouring of the holy spirit upon the consecrated 
believers constituted their begetting of the 
spirit to the new nature, and implied thus, that the 
condemnation upon them as the children of Adam 
and under the Law Covenant was cancelled, and that 
now they were accepted in the Beloved, counted as 
children of God, and if children then heirs of God, 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord, if so be that 



they would suffer with him, that they might also be 
glorified together— Rom. 8:16,17. 

As is implied in our Lord's statement and in his 
promise, this was a new thing. No such outpouring 
of the divine spirit had ever occurred before as respected 
the children of Adam. Indeed, no such 
acceptance and new begetting on God's part was 
possible until first the sin-offering had been made and 
accepted. The only thing corresponding to it was 
the descent of the holy spirit upon our Lord at the 
time of his consecration at baptism in Jordan. He 
there received the holy spirit of adoption in the same 
sense, but "without measure," he being perfect; 
those who received this holy spirit at Pentecost received 
it by measure, that is, in limited degree. 
(John 3:34.) Altho they were all "filled" with the 
spirit, yet, because of weakness and imperfections of 
their organisms, they could only receive limited measures, 
—these differing one from the other according to 
natural temperaments, etc. 

God's holy spirit had indeed been manifested in 
various ways previously, but all of them differed from 
this manifestation. For instance, it was the holy 
power of God which moved upon the waters in connection 
with the world's creation. (Gen. 1:2.) 
Again, as the Apostle Peter declares, "Holy men of 

R2820 : page 175 

old spake and wrote as they were moved by the holy 
spirit"— mechanically. (2 Pet. 1:21.) He further 
explains that what they spake and wrote they did not 
comprehend; because their utterances and writings 
were not for themselves, but for us of the Gospel age. 
We are, therefore, to recognize the fact that the spirit 
dispensation had its beginning in Jesus, when he was 
thirty years of age; but so far as others were concerned 
its beginning was in the sanctified ones at Pentecost, 
as recorded in this lesson. Neither are we to think 
that these Pentecostal outpourings and baptisms require 
a repetition, for the holy spirit thus once poured 
upon the Church was to abide, to continue, with the 
Church, not to be withdrawn and poured out afresh 
repeatedly. Some have concluded that there were 
times when the holy spirit was not in the world at all; 
but this was because they were looking for it in a 
wrong direction or under wrong conditions. At times 
the nominal church of outward professors has been so 
overgrown with the "tare" element that the true 
"wheat" could not so readily be discerned, yet we 
are confident that the Lord never left himself without 
a witness, and that even in the darkest hour of the 
dark ages there were some of God's true people in the 
world; some representatives of the body of Christ; 
some, therefore, possessing the holy spirit; some who 
therefore constituted the salt of the earth and the 



lights of the world, even tho the darkness was great 
around them and its influence so powerful that no 
record of the true Church is to be found, but only the 
records of the apostacy. 

The holy spirit, in harmony with our Lord's 
promise, was sent only to the consecrated class, and 
was to abide in the true Church class, "the body of 
Christ;" and we, and all others who since have come 
into fellowship and union with our Lord, "the head 
of the body which is his Church," have thus come 
into and under the influence of the holy spirit, our 
rightful portion and privilege. By this spirit we 
were begotten to the spiritual nature, and became 
heirs of all the exceeding great and precious promises 
which belong to "the body of Christ." 

It was appropriate that the giving of the holy 
spirit should be with certain outward demonstration 
and manifestation; not merely to impress and convince 
the apostles and the early Church, but also for the 
benefit of those who should subsequently come into 
relationship with the Church. Faith must have a 
ground to rest upon; an assurance that there was at 
the beginning such a direct recognition of the Savior's 
sacrifice and of the divine acceptance of the consecrated 
ones who trusted in him. The rushing wind 
fitly represented this holy spirit; indeed the words 
"spirit" and "wind" are both from the same 
Greek word; a wind is the best illustration of God's 
spirit, because it is powerful, and yet it is invisible. 
The cloven or split tongues "like as of fire" or light, 
was also fit symbols by which to teach the Church 
something respecting the divine power that had come 
upon her. 

As a tongue it represented the influence which 
God would use during this Gospel age as the agency 
of his spirit in accomplishing the work he now 
designs to do; for "it pleased God by the foolishness 
of preaching to save them that believe." (1 Cor. 1:21.) 
This way of preaching is not a foolish way, since it is 
God's way; but it is so different a way of effecting a 
work from what the natural man would have chosen 
that it seems to him to be an unwise way. True, at 
the beginning of this age the tongues, the preaching, 
was supplemented by miraculous "gifts" among the 
Lord's people, but these were not designed to be permanent, 
as the Apostle explains (1 Cor. 13:8); and after the 
apostles who alone had the power to confer these 
gifts had died, the gifts themselves of necessity 
gradually vanished; since which time the preaching 
tongue has been practically the only instrument which 
the Lord has used in connection with his great work 
of calling out and sanctifying the peculiar people to 
be the Bride, the Royal Priesthood, the Body of 
Christ. 

Some have incorrectly identified the fire-likeness 
of these tongues with the prophecy of John the 



Baptist, respecting Christ, saying, "He shall baptize 
you with holy spirit and with fire." (Matt. 3:11,12.) 
John's words were not addressed to the disciples, 
but to the promiscuous company of his hearers, 
some of whom were Israelites indeed, and some, as he 
declared, a generation of vipers. The Pentecostal blessing 
was indeed the fulfilment of a part of John's prediction; 
viz., the baptism of the holy spirit (Acts 1:5); 
but this was not the fulfilment of the latter part of 
John's prophecy respecting the baptism of fire. The 
room wherein the disciples were assembled was not 
filled with fire, and they were not immersed in it, 
either literally or figuratively. The cloven tongues 
which appeared upon their heads were not fire, but 
light, a fitting symbol of the holy spirit, and the 
message of light and truth and blessing which the 
apostles were proclaiming. The baptism of fire, 
which John predicted, came later, not upon the faithful 
of Israel, but upon the class whom John designated, 
a "generation of vipers"— upon the class of 
whom the Apostle Paul says, "Wrath is come upon 
this people to the uttermost." The trouble, the 
destructive trouble, the fiery trouble, in which that 
whole nation was figuratively engulfed and baptized, 
and which ended in A.D. 70, after witnessing the 
destruction of millions of lives, millions of property, 
and the complete overthrow of Israel's national polity, 
was the worthy fulfilment of John's prediction of a 
baptism of fire. 

The fact that the holy spirit upon the apostles 
was accompanied by miraculous manifestations or 
gifts, tongues, etc., does not imply any greater favor 
of God toward the primitive Church, which had those 
gifts, than toward the Lord's people of a later day, 
after those gifts had ceased; for, as the Apostle points 
out, it was possible for some to have those gifts 
without having much of the real spirit of the Lord. 
He says, "Tho I speak with the tongues of men and 
of angels, and have not love, I am become as sounding 
brass or a tinkling cymbal. Tho I have the gift of 
prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, 
and tho I have all faith, so that I could remove 
mountains, and have not love, I am nothing." (1 Cor. 13:1,2.) 
We are, therefore, to esteem love for the 
Lord and for the brethren and for the neighbor- 
active love, which does as well as wishes and says— 
to be the best evidence of an acceptable condition 

R2820 : page 176 

with the Lord, the best evidence of a filling with 
his holy spirit— a far better evidence than the possession 
of the "gifts" described. Far greater, far more 
precious gifts of the spirit, then, are the gifts which 
the spirit develops in us— the fruits of the spirit— joy, 
peace, faith, love, etc. 



The news respecting the miraculous manifestation 
of divine power spread rapidly through the city 
of Jerusalem, which, in addition to its general population, 
had at this season of the year visitors from all 
the neighboring countries, speaking various languages 
and dialects. And this furnished the opportunity 
for the Lord's humble disciples, "unlearned 
men," to begin their great work for which now they 
were fully commissioned and empowered. Quite 
possibly by this gift of tongues the Lord made up to 
his disciples the lack of larger education and fitted 
them for the work; at all events, not only on this 
occasion do we find that they were able to discourse 
in all the various languages, but subsequently, when 
traveling in various quarters, we have no mention of 
any difficulty encountered in respect to the languages 
or dialects, tho these were many amongst the different 
classes and nationalities. 

The concourse of the people at Jerusalem attending 
this feast was of a religious kind— the most 
religious Jews from all the surrounding countries and 
nations (where more Jews resided than in Palestine), 
gathered on such occasions to do homage to the Lord, 
to render thanks and to pray for the promised blessings 

R2821 : page 176 

and Kingdom. In addition to this it was the 
custom for many of the most religious to permanently 
remove to Jerusalem in their old age, that they might 
die there; and thus we see that the Lord's arrangements, 
and the human arrangements which his 
providence had favored, all cooperated at this time 
for the favorable presentation of the good tidings that 
Messiah had come, and that he had redeemed Israel 
and the world, according to the prophets and the 
types; that he had ascended to the Father as the great 
High Priest for his people; and that this Pentecostal 
blessing represented the divine favor bestowed 
through him, and open to as many as would really 
receive him and become his followers— disciples. 
When we consider the class of hearers, and the miraculous 
power resting upon the speakers, it need not 
surprise us that so many were converted in so short a 
time— three thousand.— Acts 2:41. 

We are given but a meagre account of the preaching; 
viz., an extract from Peter's discourse; but from 
the number of converts it is evident that all of the 
apostles engaged in the service. A summary of 
their preaching is given in vs. 11, where the hearers 
are represented as saying, "We do hear them speak in 
our tongues the wonderful works of God." These 
wonderful works we have already referred to as relating 
to our Lord's death and resurrection, and his 
commission to his apostles, which they were now 
carrying out. True, it is said that the apostles used 



other words, amongst them, "Save yourselves from 
this untoward generation"— thus intimating the 
condemnation of the Jewish Church and polity, and 
the fire of divine wrath, the trouble, shortly to come 
upon them. 

But the main part of their discourses was not a 
tirade against the Jews, but rather a showing forth of 
the wonderful features of the divine plan; and even in 
the charge against the rulers and the people for the 
great crime they had committed in crucifying Jesus, 
the Apostle puts the matter as kindly as possible, 
saying, "I wot that in ignorance ye did it, as did also 
your rulers." Herein we have a valuable lesson for 
all the followers of Christ who preach in his name 
and who would win souls from the darkness of error 
to harmony with God. The proper, the effective 
preaching, today and then, is that which tells of the 
wonderful works of God in man's redemption, and 
not that which tirades against the nominal church- 
even tho it be necessary occasionally to point out the 
errors of Babylon, as the apostles pointed out the 
errors of Judaism. Our course, like theirs, should be 
one of great moderation and kindness, as well as 
plainness of speech, "speaking the truth in love." 

The harvest work of the present time reminds us 
much of this gathering of the harvest in Israel. Now, 
as then, those who are addressed by the holy spirit 
are the Israelites indeed— "devout men out of every 
nation under heaven." And so prominently is this 
the direction in which the holy spirit is guiding in 
this harvest work that one of the charges against the 
work is, that we are not going after the drunkards 
and harlots and gamblers and thieves and vagabonds, 
but are seeking to feed the Lord's sheep and lambs,— 
seeking to present present truth, meat in due season, 
to the devout of every nation. And such, we believe, 
is the will of God concerning us; and so we advise 
that all of the Lord's people, as they seek to proclaim 
the grace of God, remember the words of the Lord, 
that we are to feed his sheep and his lambs, and not 
spend unnecessary time with the goats and the 
wolves, as soon as we recognize their kind, except it 
be to drive them off or to expose their true character 
to the sheep. 

Our commission is to "preach the Gospel to the 
meek," not to the froward and the vile; to bind up 
the broken-hearted, not to seek to break the hard 
hearts. The Lord has his own plan for dealing with 
the stony hearts in the time of trouble which is near, 
and during the Millennial age, in which the necessary 
force will be used to restrain the evil and to open 
their eyes and ears of understanding. Now our commission 
is to go to those who have an ear. "He that 
hath an ear let him hear." Those who have not the 
ears to hear the message, and who have not the 
hearts to appreciate its beauty, should not be argued 



with or wrangled with, but wisely left as quietly as 
possible in their ignorance and blindness until the 
Lord's due time for scattering the pall of darkness, 
the gross darkness which Satan has brought upon the 
people. We had rather leave in ignorance and under 
the bonds of superstition those who manifest no 
appreciation of the grace of God; for doubtless, if 
their superstitions were loosed in the present time, it 
would be nothing to their advantage; perhaps to the 
disadvantage of others. Let us remember that the 
Gospel message is to gather out the Lord's peculiar 
people, a little flock, and that so far as the world is 
concerned the Gospel is only a "witness" now. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 