Do You Remember?
Have you found the recent issues of The Watchtower to be of practical value? Then why not test your memory with the following:
□ What is Armageddon?
Armageddon is the worldwide situation where all earthly nations will battle against God’s Son, Christ Jesus, and his angelic army in “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” (Revelation 16:13, 14, 16)​—1/1, page 6.
□ Who today holds the key position in Jehovah’s earthly organization?
The Kingdom publisher holds the key position because, in living up to Jehovah’s name, the publisher must be a zealous minister.​—1/1, page 14.
□ Why is it that agencies such as the UN are powerless to prevent wars?
The nations around the earth are dedicated to national sovereignty and rights, so they care little about international sovereignty or rules of conduct. Their repeated failure emphasizes the Bible truth that “it does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” (Jeremiah 10:23)​—2/15, page 4.
□ Why is a “greedy person” also called “an idolater” in Ephesians 5:3-5?
Those who are obsessed with a desire for sex, love for money, voraciousness for food and drink, or an ambition for power and fame, become slaves to such desires and make them, as it were, their idols. Hence, their chief aim in life now becomes a satisfying of their greedy desires.​—2/15, page 25.
□ What was it, in all probability, that moved Abraham and Isaac to represent their wives as their sisters?
Jehovah had already indicated to Abraham that the blessing of “all the families of the ground” depended on Abraham’s seed. (Genesis 12:2, 3) Hence, Abraham (and later Isaac) needed to stay alive to produce offspring and thus fulfill Jehovah’s promise. For this reason, when they were in dangerous territory with their wives, these men probably determined that it was prudent not to let their marriage relationship be known. In so doing, the line of the seed would not be endangered.​—3/1, page 31.
□ How did Noah set a fine example for family heads today?
Of Noah it is recorded: “Noah proceeded to do according to all that God had commanded him. He did just so.” (Genesis 6:22) Noah’s faithfulness and diligence impressed on the minds of his sons the importance of showing the same qualities in their lives. He spent a lot of time talking to and working with his sons. They were sharing and doing things together as a family. Being “a preacher of righteousness,” Noah also taught his own family Jehovah’s laws and requirements. (2 Peter 2:5) In all these aspects Noah set a fine example for family heads today.​—3/15, page 26.
□ In what ways are Jehovah’s Witnesses different from the world?
They are different in being zealous preachers of the good news of God’s Kingdom, in their shunning what is bad in God’s eyes, in maintaining neutrality toward worldly affairs, and in their demonstrating their love and consideration for the whole association of their Christian brothers. (Matthew 24:14; Hebrews 1:9; John 15:19; 13:35)​—4/1, pages 10-14.

