Announcements
ASSEMBLING WITH THE NEW WORLD SOCIETY
All persons who have faith in the kingdom of God and the blessings it will bring are commanded not to forsake the gathering of themselves together, but to continue encouraging one another to steadfastness in the public declaration of their hope. (Heb. 10:23-25) July will witness a great demonstration of devotion of Jehovah’s servants in the world assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses at Yankee Stadium, New York, July 19 to 26. Unquestionably, it will be one of the largest Christian assemblies of modern times. Every person interested in the progress of the New World society will have his attention fixed upon this assembly. Nevertheless, all publishers of good news will contribute toward the advance of true worship during July by everywhere presenting an offer of three bound books, on a contribution of $1.50, with three booklets free. Any books of your choice may be presented.
1953 CONVENTION REPORT OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
Following the New World Society Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses at Yankee Stadium, New York city, July 19 to 26, a comprehensive report will be published giving many of the convention high lights and details. This report, with two-color cover, will be 96 pages in length and contain a generous sprinkling of pictures of the assembly. It will be excellent for all people of good will; be sure to order copies for them now, as well as for yourself. Wherever possible, all of Jehovah’s witnesses are encouraged to place their orders through the local congregations. However, individuals may place their order direct if they wish. Specify clearly the number of copies of the 1953 Convention Report of Jehovah’s Witnesses that you want, and enclose a remittance of 25 cents per copy. Type or print your name and address plainly. If your address should change between now and October 1, please be sure to advise us.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 2: Shadows of Family Unity Hold Forth Promise.
Week of August 9: Unity in New World Living a Reality.

