Assembling with the New World Society
JEHOVAH is causing a New World society to be formed today. It consists of his dedicated servants organized and drawn together by means of God’s revealed truth, by means of his holy spirit or active force, and by means of his earthly instrument or channel, the “faithful and discreet slave”. (Prov. 4:18; Matt. 24:45-47; Acts 20:28, NW) They are being prepared for service in Jehovah’s new world of righteousness, which will function after Armageddon makes a clean sweep of this present wicked system of things.
Just as Jehovah’s dedicated servants in days of old regularly came together in their three annual feasts, and as the Christians regularly assembled in the days of the apostles, so it is essential that all dedicated servants of God in our day assemble with the New World society. In fact, assembling together is even more important in our day, for Paul states: “Not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.”—Heb. 10:25, NW.
Is that day drawing near? It certainly is. We have been living in the day of Jehovah since 1914; in the day of Christ since 1918; and even Satan knows the time is short until “the war of the great day of God the Almighty”. (Rev. 16:14, NW) And why is it all the more urgent that we assemble now? Because conditions are growing ever worse; never before have there been such severe tests on the integrity of God’s servants: there is increasing lawlessness; critical times hard to deal with are here; having been cast down to the earth the Devil is making a final all-out attempt to corrupt the human race and to destroy God’s servants.—Matt. 24:12; 2 Tim. 3:1-6; Rev. 12:12, 17, NW.
Now, just as the individual Christian finds the need of associating himself with a local congregation of Christians, and just as the individual congregations benefit greatly from meeting together in circuit and district assemblies, just so it is of great value for God’s servants to come together from various lands in a great international assembly.
Just how will the attending of an international assembly benefit us? In the first place it will give us much happiness. Since all God’s servants are happy, there is bound to be the greatest of happiness when so many of them come together. Secondly, such association for eight days with servants from different lands, of different races and languages, etc., getting acquainted with them and working and worshiping Jehovah together, eating at the same spiritual table, all this will have a most powerful effect of drawing them together in love, into one compact body. Third, on such occasions there is provided a sumptuous spiritual banquet of increased light and stirring admonition to increased zeal and faithfulness that will certainly strengthen each dedicated servant present for the tests of integrity that lie ahead. Finally, by each servant’s making use of every opportunity to give the witness, a great testimony will be given to the honor of Jehovah’s name.
That is why the Watch Tower Society urges all dedicated Christians and persons of good will who can possibly do so to attend the international assembly of the New World society held July 19-26 at Yankee Stadium, New York city.

