Showing Appreciation at Assemblies
IF THERE is any time, place or occasion at which the dedicated servants of Jehovah in modern times really “taste and see that Jehovah is good”, it is at an international assembly. At such an assembly Jehovah literally pours out so many blessings that they cannot contain them all. No wonder, then, that his servants were glad when the Watch Tower Society said to them, in effect, “Let us go unto the house of Jehovah,” by arranging for another international assembly. It is to be held at Yankee Stadium, New York city, July 19 to 26, 1953.—Ps. 34:8; 122:1-3; Mal. 3:10, AS.
No question about it, Jehovah will pour out many blessings at that assembly, and, knowing that, every one of us that can possibly attend will do so. But merely being present in person at Yankee Stadium during those eight days is not enough. To what extent will we be drinking in those blessings? Will our conduct be such as to show that we really appreciate them? Or will our conduct make apparent to all that we are thoughtless and indifferent regarding the assembly blessings?
To illustrate: Suppose a friend gave us tickets for an evening at the opera because he knew we were music lovers. Would we go to the opera and then spend most of the evening walking around in the lounge, visiting outside with others, or eating at the refreshment stand, and be in our seats listening to the beautiful vocal and instrumental music coming from the stage and orchestra pit only part of the time? Of course not! We would be in our seats before the orchestra began to play the overture or prelude, and if we stepped out for refreshments between the acts we would make sure to be back in our seats before the next act began; and we would stay until the final curtain fell. We would not want to miss a thing.
But suppose that we were not only music lovers, amateurs, but professionals, singers or instrumentalists whose vocation in life is music. We would have all the more reason for not wanting to miss anything. Knowing more about music we would get more out of the opera. We would note how every bar of music was being interpreted. We would be alert for ideas and effects, for greater appreciation and understanding of the music, all of which would serve us well as professional musicians. Yes, as professionals we would not only enjoy the opera more but learn a great deal from hearing it.
Now let us apply this illustration: This summer at Yankee Stadium there will be theocratic music such as never has been heard before. And we will be there, not only as music lovers, but also as professionals, as singing fighters! As such we will not only be thrilled by the beauty of the spiritual music but be alert to take note of the many fine points, the new thoughts, the practical suggestions that will be presented and which we shall be able to use as professional singing fighters when we get back to our home territory. Right?
If we have that appreciation, will we be milling around in the long passageways under the stands during the time the programs are being given? Will we be visiting with some old acquaintance or taking a nap during the programs? Will we?
SHOWING APPRECIATION AND CONSIDERATION
Or suppose a dear friend invited you to dinner, preparing for you many courses consisting of your favorite dishes. Would you come a half hour late, bolt down the food while reading a newspaper and then rush off before the dessert was served so as to listen to your favorite radio program, leaving your friend alone and not even thanking him for having been such a generous and thoughtful host? How unthinkable!
Jehovah as a generous and thoughtful host is providing a feast of fat things at the coming assembly. How many of us will come late for the various programs? How many will be munching a sandwich, sipping soda water or licking at an ice-cream cone during our spiritual feasts? Or be rushing away before the closing song? Will we treat our heavenly Friend and Host in a manner we would not think of treating an earthly one?
Or what would you think of a member of a family who was continually competing with his fellows for the best of everything? Who at mealtimes could not wait for the blessing to be said to grab the choicest or largest portions of food? Or who hurried through his meal so as to have the best seat in the parlor for watching the TV show? Or who rushed to get the front seat of the auto every time the family drove anywhere? How childish, how immature! you say?
Of course, we would not consciously think of acting so childishly; yes, and so selfishly, for a child instinctively thinks only of itself; it must be taught consideration of others. But how often do we thoughtlessly act in this way when we come together as a big family at our international conventions? Do we compete for choice seats and insist on an excessive reserving of them? Do we rush off before the close of the program so as to be first in line at the cafeteria, at the refreshment stands or in obtaining a new release? Are we so concerned about not having to wait that we do not mind how long the others behind us have to wait, just so long as we are in front of them?
Then there is the matter of the rooming accommodations. What would you think of a friend whom you had invited to spend a week end with you, who, after accepting the invitation, disappointed you by not showing up? Or who came a day later than he had advised you, causing you to wait away into the night, all in vain? Or who, after coming and taking a glance at your home and guestroom, spurned your hospitality by going to a hotel instead? Would you still consider him your friend?
We have many potential friends, householders in New York who have consented to house Jehovah’s witnesses during the assembly and who will have been advised by the convention committee that some of us will stay with them. Then how will they feel when we fail to show up? Or when we come a day late? Or come and then leave because of not being satisfied with the accommodations? Where is the concern about the impression we give to those on the outside? Where is the care that we do not stumble a prospective “other sheep”? Where is the doing to others as we would have them do to us?—Matt. 7:12; Luke 17:1, 2; 1 Tim. 3:7, NW.
SUPERVISING CONDUCT OF CHILDREN
And as regards the children. Could we imagine a school where children are allowed to amuse themselves as they please? Go and come as they please? Where they are permitted to play or quarrel with each other during the time the school teacher is trying to instruct them? Or could we imagine little Samuel acting that way when his mother brought him to the temple for service there? Or Jesus behaving in such a manner when his parents took him to Jerusalem for the annual feasts?—1 Sam. 1:23, 24; 2:11; Luke 2:46-52.
Children may not be able to grasp all the fine points made by every speaker, but that is no reason why they should not sit quietly with their parents and try to get as much benefit from the programs as possible so that it will have been worth while for their parents to bring them along. By paying attention they will become better acquainted with theocratic words and phrases. And regardless of what they may understand they can profit greatly from the sincerity, earnestness and enthusiasm manifested by the speakers. Many of our foreign brothers will not be able to understand every word, yet it will be well worth while for them to attend. Parents who appreciate these facts will exercise proper authority so that their children may receive the greatest possible good from the assembly.—Ps. 34:11, AS.
Yankee Stadium, for the duration of the assembly, will be “the house of Jehovah” for Jehovah’s witnesses, a mammoth Kingdom Hall. And in view of the quality and abundance of the spiritual food being provided there at that time we should show even more respect for its presentation than we do at our local Kingdom Halls. Let us not in effect sniff at these provisions or say “the table of Jehovah is contemptible” by milling around in the passageways or by visiting with others when we should be in our seats in the stadium listening to what is being said from the platform.—Mal. 1:7, AS; Mal 1:13, Mo.
Let us show appreciation of this spiritual treat by giving it our whole-souled attention, by being entirely absorbed in what is being presented, coming on time and remaining to the end of each program.—Eph. 6:6; 1 Tim. 4:15, NW.
Let us be considerate of each other, being concerned not only with our own welfare but with that of others, remembering that love is long-suffering and does not look out for its own interests.—1 Cor. 10:24; 13:4, 5, NW.
Let us also not overlook our obligations and privileges regarding the householder to whose rooms we have been assigned. What are a few minutes of travel or a few physical comforts compared with the opportunity of putting someone in the way of getting everlasting life? Think of the inconveniences our missionaries put up with for the sake of having opportunities to witness!
And finally, let us remember our obligation to our children. The Society is urging that we take them along, not so that they can have a good time in a worldly way, but so that they will profit spiritually. Let their attendance at Yankee Stadium be a milestone in their training for life in the new world.
So, one and all, old and young, let us keep in mind that “the kingdom of God does not mean eating and drinking, but means righteousness and peace and joy with holy spirit”. Let us show appreciation for the spiritual feast by putting first things first.—Matt. 6:33; Rom. 14:17, NW.

