R730 : page 1 



VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH, 1885. 

NO. 7. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 



come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

WALL CHARTS.-We still have a supply of the "Chart of the 
Ages," such as appears in FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS, 
page 105, only enlarged-33 inches long, mounted on rollers. These 
we will send free to our SUBSCRIBERS who are willing to pay 
expressage on the same. 



R747 : page 1 

The pamphlet entitled THE TABERNACLE AND ITS 
TEACHINGS is now out of print. Many requests for this pamphlet 
continually coming to hand we have arranged to publish it soon as a 
number of the TOWER. Thus all may have it and appreciate the 
beauty and force of those types which God caused Israel to perform 
year by year continually— for our edification upon whom the ends of 
the ages are come. 



R730 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The National Baptist, commenting upon the report of the Baptist 
churches of Philadelphia says: 

"We have a total membership of 19,676. Of the additions by 
baptism, 300 came from three churches: Grace, 125; Shiloh, 111; 
Mantua, 64. Nine churches reported no baptisms. We have also 
nineteen missions, some of whose members are not members of 
city churches. Let us place our Baptist army at 20,000. Think of the 
vast expenditures for pastors, church buildings, Sunday school 
rooms, etc., and only a net gain of 450. It took over forty members 
to gather in one convert. And the figures over our State are equally 
startling, when 235 churches during the past year do not report a 
single baptism." 

Our Baptist friends are perhaps as near the truth, or more so, than 
any other sect of Babylon, which is not flattering them, we hope. 
The above statement affords an opportunity to suggest a criticism 
applicable to all the Babylonish sects. The rivalry among them is 
for numbers; for quantity rather than quality; for the praise of men 
rather than that which cometh from above only. 

Two or three centuries ago, when Baptists were only called such by 
their enemies, and when they called themselves simply Christians, 



their numbers were far less, but they occupied more nearly by far, a 
position in harmony with the days of the Apostles, both toward 
themselves and the world. 

With the creation of new sects and the general race for pre- 
eminence among them, which has been in progress for the past 
three centuries, the people now calling themselves Baptists were 
gradually drawn away from the primitive piety and simplicity for 
which in early times they were noted. Now, with all the rest, the 
chief aim is, not to build one another up in the most holy faith as 
members of the body of Christ; not to edify one another; not to 
grow in grace and in the knowledge and love of God; but to build 
themselves up as a sect; and to flatter the worldly to "get them into 
the church" that the pews and treasuries may be full; that they may 
have a great name, and that the name of Baptist should be a 
synonym for respectability and honor among men. 

The popularity with the world for which the sects so much seek, 
and in large measure have gained, is a bad and not a good omen to 
them, as well as to their prototype the nominal Jewish Church at 
our Lord's first advent. He still declares, "Woe unto you when all 
men speak well of you." Luke 6:26. 

In order to gain in numbers, honor and influence, every other thing 
has been sacrificed in great measure-not only by Baptists but by 
every sect. In order to attract the world, the DOCTRINES of the 
Bible have been more and more neglected. The repulsions of 
Christianity— the self-denials, besetments, reproaches, sacrifices, 
and the sneer and "hate" of the world always attendant upon the 
true Christianity, have all been put out of sight, because these 
would repel the worldly, and the sect would not be so rapidly built 
up. Hence, not only the preaching of taking up the cross and 
following Christ's example, passed away, but the lower plane 
assumed, brought the world's honor and respect instead of its 
"hate. " The Lord was not mistaken when he said, Whosoever will 
live godly shall suffer persecution, but godliness has passed away, 
and therefore there is no persecution. 

Now, as a matter of fact, the various sects have degenerated into 
merely social clubs. The condition of membership in them is not 
FAITH in God's Word. Though an endorsement of their respective 
creeds is required, they are not generally understood; and even the 
moral standard is so low, that it implies no change on the part of the 
average worldling who joins. 

The result of this course, which has been in progress specially for 
the past fifty years, is that these sects are full of worldly moralists, 
who enjoy these systems because they are fashionable; because 
they are the best and quickest passport into "society"; because it is 
advantageous to them from a business standpoint; and finally 
because man is a religiously inclined being anyway, and traces of 
that inclination still linger despite the "fall." Even true children of 
God still fettered in the sects, so far as the doctrines of the Bible are 



concerned, are the merest "babes," always fed on skimmed "milk" 
and never on "strong meat." (Heb. 5:12-14.) They are both 
unskillful in the use of God's Word and ignorant of his doctrines. 
There are no more, nor as many saints as if the true Christian 
standard had been lifted; and those saints in the sects are starved 
and sickly, not strong and valiant soldiers of the cross having on the 
whole armor of God. 

Now we are reaching an epoch in which thought is being awakened 
and these starved and sickly saints in Babylon, together with the 
children of the world labeled Christians, are being forced to think 
by the startling utterances of popular preachers, infidels, and 
scientists. What the result must be no reasonable mind can doubt. 
Unskilled in the Word of God, ignorant of everything called 
religion except the raising of funds for and increasing the numbers 
of their sect, the vast majority must fall a prey to the specious errors 
termed liberal Christianity, now like a dense miasma spreading 
gradually over the world. Beginning with the cities, and among the 
"influential," it will spread over all the so-called "Christian world." 

The membership of the sects, composed mainly of the worldly, the 
carnally- minded, are already demanding "progress and liberality." 
Not, however, a progress toward clearer and fuller study of and 
obedience to the Bible; this would not be progress to the carnally 
minded; but by progress they mean the endorsement of the 
assertions of scientists regardless of the Bible. The minister who 
does not satisfy this craving is becoming unpopular, and those who 
will "preach to please the pews" (i.e. to suit the majority -the 
carnally-minded) are getting all the "best" pulpits and largest 
salaries. What the Apostle wrote prophetically, is being rapidly 
fulfilled before our eyes: The time will come when they will not 
endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts [desires or liking] 
shall they heap [accumulate] to themselves teachers having itching 
ears" ["tickling the ear" -Diaglott]. And they [the ear-pleasing 
teachers] shall turn away their ears from the truth, and [they] shall 
be turned unto fables. " How forcible then are the Apostle's words to 
every true saint and preacher in view of this: "I charge thee 
therefore before God.. .preach the WORD; be instant in season and 
out of season [whether convenient to you or 

R731 : page 1 

not]; REPROVE, REBUKE, EXHORT, with all longsuffering and 
DOCTRINE." See 2 Tim. 4:1-4. 

The honest and earnest saints who will follow this "charge," will 
soon find themselves as well as their names out of Babylon —cast 
out as evil. But by that time the increase of grace, knowledge and 
love which shall come as a result of faithfulness, will lead them to 
rejoice and be exceeding glad— to rejoice that they were counted 
worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Christ-for his doctrines. 

The result will ultimately be: Moralists will be called Christians; 
they will be too wise and scientific to use the Bible as their text- 



book. Every one will be called a Christian who abstains from a 
flagrant violation of the laws of civilization. Then the saints will 
again be called "fools," and the Bible will be termed "a relic of 
barbarism," "a bundle of old wives' fables," "a fetich." Is it not 
becoming so even now? 

It is too late to reform the sects— the vast majority is against you. 
The only thing to do now is what God commands, "Come out of 
her, my people; that ye partake not of her sins and receive not of 
her plagues." She might have been healed once, (Jer. 8:18-22,) but 
now, like her prototype Israel, she is given up -left desolate. The 
ax is now at work at the very root of the tree and its complete fall is 
at hand. It is not now a pruning but a destroying process as with the 
first house of Israel when it was rejected, only it stumbled to rise 
again, while Babylon's destruction is to be complete and forever. 
(Matt. 3:7-10, and Rev. 18:21.) 


