Do We Really Need Others?
“WHEN we survey our lives and endeavors, we soon observe that almost the whole of our actions and desires is bound up with the existence of other human beings,” observed the well-known scientist Albert Einstein. He added: “We eat food that others have produced, wear clothes that others have made, live in houses that others have built. . . . The individual is what he is and has the significance that he has not so much in virtue of his individuality, but rather as a member of a great human community, which directs his material and spiritual existence from the cradle to the grave.”
In the animal world, it is common to observe instinctive companionship. Elephants move about in herds, carefully guarding their young. Lionesses hunt together and share their food with the males. Dolphins play together and have even protected other animals or swimmers in distress.
Among humans, however, social scientists have noted a tendency that causes growing concern. According to a newspaper published in Mexico, some scientists hold that “decades of personal isolation and an erosion of community life have had a huge toll on U.S. society.” The newspaper stated that “the well-being of the nation depended on broad-based social change, which involved a return to community life.”
This problem has especially spread among those living in developed lands. There is a rapidly growing tendency for many to isolate themselves. People want to ‘live their own lives’ and strongly resist having others ‘invade their space.’ The view has been expressed that this attitude has led human society to be more prone to emotional problems, depression, and suicide.
In this regard, Dr. Daniel Goleman stated: “Social isolation​—the notion that one doesn’t have anyone else with whom to share private feelings or maintain close contact—​doubles the possibility of sickness or death.” A report published in the journal Science concluded that social isolation ‘is as significant to mortality rates as the habit of smoking, high blood pressure, elevated cholesterol, obesity, and the lack of physical exercise.’
For various reasons, then, we really do need others. We cannot stand alone. So how can the problem of isolation be solved? What has given true meaning to the lives of many? The following article will address such questions.
[Blurb on page 3]
“Almost the whole of our actions and desires is bound up with the existence of other human beings.”​—Albert Einstein

