Announcements
HEALING FOR LIFE IN THE NEW WORLD
“On this side of the river and on that side there were trees of life . . . And the leaves of the trees were for the curing of the nations.” (Rev. 22:2, NW) Note, these trees are in evidence while there is still need for “curing” or “healing” the nations, that is, people of all nations. Actually the provision for life and healing is that which flows from the Word of God. (Prov. 3:18) The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures makes access to this “tree” more readily available. Why? Because it offers in understandable English the life-giving truths taught by the Lord and his disciples. This translation, together with the study aid What Has Religion Done for Mankind? is a remarkable means of bringing spiritual health to those seeking it. These two books constitute the offer to be made during the month of May to carry life-giving truth to all who desire it. The contribution for this excellent combination is only $2. Obtain it and present it to others at every opportunity, and report your activity at the close of the month.
“THIS MEANS EVERLASTING LIFE”
“In his certain knowledge of what is immediately ahead Jehovah God is causing the means of knowledge to flow forth like an ever-widening, ever-deepening river of crystal-clear water. It is a river of Kingdom truth. It flows, not from a spring that may fail with a disastrous water shortage for the people, but forth from the established kingdom of God and of his Christ. . . . How precious is life! Without it nothing exists for your enjoyment. It is your privilege now to choose it in preference to destruction. . . . Choose now to live forever in the blessedness of the new world under God’s kingdom by Jesus Christ.” The foregoing is an extract from the beautifully bound and excellently arranged book “This Means Everlasting Life”. Get your copy, on a contribution of 50c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 4: Is God Responsible for World Distress?
Week of May 11: Pinning the Blame on the One Responsible.

