Jehovah’s Witnesses Around the World​—Colombia
COLOMBIA is a unique South American land. Both the Atlantic and the Pacific oceans hug the coastline of this volcano-decked country. The heat of low tropical shorelines and plains yields to the cold of the high, snowcapped peaks of the Andes Mountains.a
Though Colombia is noted for gold and emeralds, the people are its most precious assets. Today, Jehovah is filling his spiritual house with glory. Beautiful, desirable worshipers are streaming to it in all parts of the earth, including Colombia.​—Haggai 2:7.
Business Executives Impressed
Sunday, November 1, 1992, marked the dedication of the Watch Tower Society’s new branch office and printing facility at Facatativá, 26 miles [42 km] northwest of Bogotá. Tours of the branch have had a great impact on visitors. Upon returning to the factory where he works, one visitor excitedly urged his managers to go and observe an organization that is ‘a wonder of efficiency, order, and employee morale.’ During their subsequent tour, the executives showed intense interest and asked many questions.
These executives wanted to send their superintendents, supervisors, and foremen​—in fact, all their workers—​on tour. Each week, they would schedule from 15 to 25 employees for tours until the whole work force of 1,300 could observe such organizational efficiency.
Hundreds of their workers have toured the branch facilities and have watched the video Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name. Impressed by the magnitude of the organization and the worldwide scope of the Kingdom-preaching work, they marvel at the high level of the technology used in the Society’s operations. Upon leaving, many are heard to say that they feel as though they were ‘leaving Paradise to go back into a disorganized world.’
The Truth Reaches All Kinds
People of all kinds are being reached with the good news. (1 Timothy 2:3, 4) For example, a former composer and leader of a heavy-metal rock band accepted Bible truth, made changes in his life, and soon became a regular pioneer. Later he was appointed a ministerial servant. Several individuals who were members of subversive groups have learned to put their confidence and hope in Jehovah’s Kingdom. They are now actively involved in preaching the message of a peaceful new world.
Drug addicts and dealers have also turned to the truth. One young man who is now a Witness had managed a drug plantation and a cocaine laboratory in the jungle for five years before he broke away from that kind of life. He has found happiness in learning and practicing Bible principles. In a penitentiary convicted assassins moved by a sincere study of the Bible are earnestly praying that Jehovah forgive their sins and accept them as his servants.
So it is that people of all kinds are responding to the Kingdom message. In Colombia, as elsewhere, Jehovah is thus filling his house with glory.
[Footnotes]
For additional information, see the 1994 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Box on page 8]
COUNTRY PROFILE
1993 Service Year
PEAK NUMBER WITNESSING: 60,854
RATIO: 1 Witness to 558
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE: 249,271
AVERAGE PIONEER PUBLISHERS: 8,487
AVERAGE BIBLE STUDIES: 100,927
NUMBER BAPTIZED: 5,183
NUMBER OF CONGREGATIONS: 751
BRANCH OFFICE: FACATATIVÁ
[Picture on page 9]
Branch office personnel and missionaries in 1956
[Picture on page 9]
Aerial view of branch office

