Why Does Fear Grip the World?
WHO wants to live in fear? The average person desires security, with no threat to his life or possessions. Hence, many move out of crime-ridden areas. Yet, causes for fear exist everywhere.
Dangers from nuclear weapons and reactor accidents arouse fear of devastation for mankind. Skyrocketing violence promotes fear. Many are fearful that AIDS will become the most death-dealing epidemic of the century. Destruction of our environment is among other causes of fear. Are these fears especially significant? And can we ever hope to live in a world without such fear?
Worldwide Fear Significant
Today’s widespread fear is significant because of what was foretold in the Bible. In his prophecy about the last days, Jesus Christ cited conditions that would cause fear. He said: “Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another.” Jesus also spoke of “the increasing of lawlessness.” Since 1914, unparalleled wars, famines, earthquakes, and lawlessness have resulted in great fear and loss of life.​—Matthew 24:7-14.
Even the attitudes of people give rise to fear today. At 2 Timothy 3:1-4, we read the apostle Paul’s prophetic words: “In the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.” Since we are surrounded by such people in these last days, no wonder there is so much fear!
What This World Can Expect
Jesus compared this period to the last days of the world of Noah’s time. Doubtless, fear was then great, for the Bible’s historical record says: “The earth came to be ruined in the sight of the true God and the earth became filled with violence.” Hence, “God said to Noah: ‘The end of all flesh has come before me, because the earth is full of violence.’” (Genesis 6:11, 13) That wicked world was so violent that God put an end to it by means of the global Flood. Out of love, however, Jehovah God preserved righteous Noah and his family.​—2 Peter 2:5.
What can the present violent world therefore expect? Well, God detests violent disregard for the welfare of others. This is evident from the psalmist’s words: “Jehovah himself examines the righteous one as well as the wicked one, and anyone loving violence His soul certainly hates.” (Psalm 11:5) Jehovah brought an end to the violent world of Noah’s day. So, then, should we not expect God to bring an end to this world plagued by fear-inspiring violence?
The apostle Peter was divinely inspired to speak of Christ’s presence and to prophesy calamity for the present wicked world. He wrote: “In the last days there will come ridiculers with their ridicule, proceeding according to their own desires and saying: ‘Where is this promised presence of his? Why, from the day our forefathers fell asleep in death, all things are continuing exactly as from creation’s beginning.’” Peter then used the term “heavens” to represent the system of imperfect rule over mankind and the word “earth” for unrighteous human society. “For,” said he, “according to their wish, this fact escapes their notice, that there were heavens from of old and an earth standing compactly out of water and in the midst of water by the word of God; and by those means the world of that time [Noah’s day] suffered destruction when it was deluged with water. But by the same word the heavens and the earth that are now are stored up for fire and are being reserved to the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly men.”​—2 Peter 3:3-7.
In a similar vein, Paul pointed out that Christ and his powerful angels would bring “vengeance upon those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus. These very ones will undergo the judicial punishment of everlasting destruction.” (2 Thessalonians 1:6-9) The last book of the Bible speaks of the gathering of the nations for “the war of the great day of God the Almighty” and assures us that Jehovah will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”​—Revelation 11:18; 16:14-16.
A Time for Joy, Not Fear
Instead of being terrified by what the Bible foretells for this world, upright people have reason for joy. Jehovah will soon bring an end to this wicked world, but this will be done for the good of those who love righteousness. What is to follow the divine ending of the present system of things? Why, a new system under the heavenly Kingdom of God, for which Jesus taught his followers to pray! He said: “You must pray, then, this way: ‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.’” (Matthew 6:9, 10) What changes can be expected when God’s will is done on earth?
War and its terrors will have ended. Psalm 46:9 says: “He [Jehovah God] is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth. The bow he breaks apart and does cut the spear in pieces; the [war] wagons he burns in the fire.” Then the people “will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble.”​—Micah 4:4.
Deadly diseases will no longer cause fear and claim lives. The divine promise is: “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’” (Isaiah 33:24) What a cause for joy!
Fears associated with crime and violence will also be things of the past. Psalm 37:10, 11 promises: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more; and you will certainly give attention to his place, and he will not be. But the meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”
How will present-day fears be replaced by true peace and security? By means of one righteous government​—God’s Kingdom. Regarding our time, Daniel 2:44 states: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” Jehovah’s appointed King, Jesus Christ, ‘must rule until God has put all enemies under his feet.’ (1 Corinthians 15:25) Jesus’ Thousand Year Reign will fulfill God’s original purpose to have a paradise earth inhabited eternally by joyful humans.​—Luke 23:43; Revelation 20:6; 21:1-5.
In that Paradise earth, there will be one wholesome fear. It will be “the fear of Jehovah.” (Proverbs 1:7) In fact, we should have this fear even now, for it is profound reverence and awe coupled with a dread of displeasing God because we appreciate his loving-kindness and goodness. This fear calls for implicit trust in Jehovah and faithful obedience to him.​—Psalm 2:11; 115:11.
Fearsome events mark these as the last days. If we prove our love for God, however, we can rejoice instead of being fearful. Bible prophecies show that the divine termination of this world is at hand. It will be replaced by Jehovah God’s promised new world of righteousness. (2 Peter 3:13) Indeed, under Kingdom rule there will soon be a world without unwholesome fear.
[Box on page 6]
THE POWER OF A SINGLE COPY
  TOMASZ, a young man from Poland, ran into legal trouble that caused him to flee the country. For six months he hitchhiked across Europe, sleeping in a tent and working at various jobs. Meanwhile, one question was constantly on his mind: What is the purpose of life?
  Tomasz’s question was answered when he was given a copy of The Watchtower in Polish. He read it several times and recognized that this magazine contained the truth he had been looking for. Tomasz hitchhiked 120 miles [200 km] to the Watch Tower branch office in Selters/​Taunus, Germany. Arriving on a Monday evening, he held out his Watchtower magazine and said: “I would like someone to explain more about what is in this magazine. What do I need to do?”
  That evening, two of Jehovah’s Witnesses talked to Tomasz about the purpose of life, using the Bible as a basis for their conversation. Eager to learn more, Tomasz returned to the branch office every day that week, studying the Bible and the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth.
  Tomasz decided to return to Poland, though he could face problems there. Thus, on Friday, just four days after arriving at the Selters branch office, Tomasz set off for his homeland. He immediately began studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses in Poland. Tomasz made rapid progress and zealously began talking to others about what he was learning. In October 1993, only four months after his initial visit to Selters, he was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
  Just one copy of The Watchtower helped this young man to investigate the purpose of life!
[Picture on page 7]
Under Kingdom rule by Jesus Christ, never again will fear grip the world

