Why Make Mountains out of Molehills?
HAVE you ever seen that mouselike creature, the mole? Perhaps not, for he spends most of his life underground. A small burrowing mammal, the mole in many places averages only some six inches in length. Because of his burrowing and insect-eating habits and his fur he is held to be quite a valuable creature.
By reason of his burrowing habits the mole often mars lawns and gardens. However, his hills can be considered as little more than nuisances, since they average but two to four inches in height.
Because a molehill is so small it has become proverbial. A figurative molehill, therefore, is something that might be a nuisance but certainly would present no serious problem over which to get greatly disturbed. Then why do persons at times make mountains out of molehills? For any number of reasons, some of which they themselves might not be aware of because, as the Bible tells us, “the heart is more treacherous than anything else.”—Jer. 17:9.
Some make mountains out of molehills due to youth, a lack of knowledge and experience. To a little child even a tiny problem may seem like a mountain. A pair of newlyweds may suddenly discover that their hearts do not always beat as one, nor do their minds always hold but a single thought. Their differences may be very minor, actually molehills, but because of their lack of knowledge and experience they may make mountains out of them.
Still others make mountains out of molehills because of having petty spirits. To an ant a molehill does look like a mountain, and to those who dwell on petty things any trifling thoughtlessness or injudicious word or act becomes a crime.
Religious, racial, national or family clannishness or prejudice often causes persons to make mountains out of molehills. Any nuisance or faux pas committed by their own group is overlooked but when made by one of another race or religion it is exaggerated and made an excuse for unloving, unreasonable words and actions. Thus also mothers-in-law may overlook the failings of their own brood but make mountains out of the failings of their sons-in-law or daughters-in-law.
Then again, there are those who make mountains out of molehills because they are on the defensive, being sensitive in a certain respect. If a man is sensitive about his color or his religion, or a woman about her age or weight, he will be quick to take offense at any oversight or slight remark that touches this tender spot, and so makes a mountain out of a molehill.
Still others make mountains out of molehills because of bearing a grudge or cherishing resentment against another. They have been hurt by that one and so seek to retaliate. Because of this wrong heart condition anything and everything that the other person may do that is the least bit irregular or that may be annoying becomes an excuse for expressing annoyance, displeasure or indignation, although it would be overlooked if anyone else did it.
At times there is a partnership in business, religious activity, in marriage or an engagement to get married that becomes burdensome to one or the other. The one who wants to dissolve the partnership often seeks to find an occasion in the conduct of the other to justify his course of action. To accomplish this purpose he too will make mountains out of molehills. Thus we find at times that a person who has made a dedication to do Jehovah God’s will and becomes weary in doing it will look for some excuse to change his course, to quit. And usually, sooner or later, someone will say or do something, or something will be published, that will furnish him with the needed excuse. Invariably it is a molehill that is made into a mountain, and a mountain represents an insurmountable obstacle to such a person.
But making mountains out of molehills is unwise, unfair, unloving and at times betrays a lack of faith. It is unwise because it makes no one happy but only adds to the miseries of life. We are told that “the insight of a man certainly slows down his anger, and it is beauty on his part to pass over transgression.” Wisdom knows that nothing good is accomplished by making issues out of trifles, by exaggerating slights or offenses.—Prov. 19:11.
The “golden rule” that Jesus Christ gave, “just as you want men to do to you, do the same way to them,” also rules out making mountains out of molehills. It allows for no clannishness or prejudice because of race, religion, nationality or family relationship.—Luke 6:31.
In particular, making major issues of others’ minor failings is unloving. “Love covers a multitude of sins,” rather than exaggerating them and giving them undue attention. Yes, love “does not keep account of the injury. It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.” It is ready to forgive, not only seven times, but seventy-seven times.—1 Pet. 4:8; 1 Cor. 13:5, 7; Matt. 18:22.
And finally there is the matter of faith and trust in God and in his Word, the Bible. It will not only keep you from making mountains out of molehills but will help you to make molehills, as it were, out of mountainlike situations or problems. As Jesus said: “If you have faith the size of a mustard grain, you will say to this mountain, ‘Transfer from here to there,’ and it will transfer, and nothing will be impossible for you.” The apostle Paul had such faith. That is why he could confess: “For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me.”—Matt. 17:20; Phil. 4:13.
So guard against making mountains out of molehills by guarding your heart, and let wisdom, love and faith aid you in your efforts.
Blessed be Jehovah, who daily carries the load for us, the true God of our salvation.—Ps. 68:19.

