VOL. XXXV FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Job's Experiences Typical of Human History 51 

Job's Hope of a Resurrection 52 

Difficult Lesson for Many 53 

False Peace of Many 53 

Restitution for Mankind Pictured 54 

Enduring Hardness as Good Soldiers 54 

Terms of Warfare Stated at Beginning 54 

Self, Our Special Foe 54 

Careless Living, a Form of Profanity 55 



Lawful on the Sabbath 56 

Seventh Day— First Day 56 

Parables of the Kingdom 57 

What Doth Jehovah Require? 59 

Interesting Questions 61 

How Did Saul of Tarsus See Jesus? 61 

Giving Counsel to One in Trouble 61 

Some Interesting Letters 62 

Personal and Class Rights 62 

End of Antitypical Atonement Day 63 

Berean Lessons in Scripture Studies— Vol. II 63 

page 50 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5410 : page 50 

THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

Answering various inquiries, we report that the DRAMA is 
not a mere statement of the Divine Plan— not a mere sermon. 
It therefore appeals to the public. We trust that its effect 
will be a broadening of human intelligence and interest in 
respect to the Bible and the Plan of God therein set forth. 
It is in four parts of two hours each. All witnessing it, we 
believe, will have larger conceptions of God, of the Universe 
and of humanity— everything. Freed from some of the 
shackles of error and superstition and ignorance, some, we 



hope, will be the better enabled to receive the knowledge of 
God which the Bible sets forth. Many who have witnessed 
the DRAMA and heard its lectures express great delight. One 
minister is reported to have said: "I have learned more in 
these two hours than I learned in the entire three years of 
my theological course in the U.B. College at Dayton, Ohio." 
Catholics, Protestants and Jews— all come, all are interested, 
and no ground for offense is given to any. 

The DRAMA is exhibited in Cincinnati at MUSIC HALL; in 
Cleveland at THE TEMPLE, Prospect Ave. and E. 22nd Street, 
at VICTORIA THEATRE in St. Louis, and at the AMERICAN 
THEATRE in Toledo— twice every day. In Boston it is shown 
in THREE PARTS every Sunday. Approximately twelve thousand 
people are now being reached daily in the cities 
mentioned. 

Our pictures are very beautiful, very costly, and require 
a great deal of time for preparation. We are, therefore, 
limited as to the number of sets of the DRAMA we can put 
forth; we are limited also by the expense incidental to each 
presentation— for rent, light, operators, etc. We shall not be 
able to reach very far for some months. 

Many more brethren have prepared themselves to be operators 
than we shall be able to employ for a good while. 
However, we have in mind something which we will mention 
as soon as it is ready, which may give opportunities of service 
to many more than are now employed. As for the sisters, 
we are relying upon the Classes at the various cities where 
the Exhibition is shown to supply the necessary Volunteers 
for ushers. 



R5382 : page 50 

"WONDERFUL COTTON SEED "-FREE 



Last year we offered our readers a few grains each from 
a wonderful stalk of cotton seven feet high, bearing hundreds 
of bolls. The only conditions were that they should send us 
one-half the seed of their crop, keeping the remainder for 
their own use. As a result we have received some sixty or 
seventy pounds of cotton seed. We will be pleased to send 
this to cotton-growers, giving a preference to those whose 
names are found on THE WATCH TOWER lists— on the same 
terms as that sent out last year. However, because of the 
better supply, we can increase the quantity sent to you. 

Write soon, and then wait. We will allow reasonable time 
to elapse before sending any, so as to determine what quantity 
may go to each. 



page 50 



CO-OPERATION OF FRIENDS APPRECIATED 



Our dear readers can save much of our time: 

By writing their letters plainly. 

By putting their full address at the head of the letter. 

By giving their orders on a separate piece of paper from 
their correspondence. 

By giving our file reference in replying to any communications 
from our office. Write "File A," "File B" or "File R," 
as the case may be, on face of your addressed envelope or 
postal-card and at beginning of your letter. 

Some, we notice, are using a small rubber stamp for their 
address. This is convenient and may also be used for stamping 
return address on your envelopes. 

We thank you for interesting clippings sent in, but request 
that you give name and date of the publication. If 
you send the paper be sure to mark the articles distinctly, so 
we will have no difficulty in locating the desired part. 



R5401 : page 51 

JOB'S EXPERIENCES TYPICAL OF HUMAN HISTORY 

"All these things happened unto them for ensamples [margin, 
types], and they are written for our admonition upon whom 
the ends of the ages are come."— 1 Corinthians 10:11. 

THE Book of Job is credited with being the 

finest piece of literature in the Hebrew language. 

It is a poem: and all scholars admit 

that no translation yet given does it justice. 

Martin Luther, after reviewing his last effort 

to translate it into the German, said, 

"Job is suffering more from my version 

than from the taunts of his friends, and 

would prefer his dunghill to my translation 

of his lamentation." The Book of Job 

"is admitted, with hardly a dissenting voice, to be the 

most sublime religious poem in the literature of the 

world," said Samuel Cox. "I call that one of the grandest 

things ever written with pen. ...There is nothing 

written, in the Bible nor out of it, of equal literary merit," 

said Thomas Carlyle. 

Whoever was used of God as the penman, his name is 
not given. The book is introduced with a prose narrative 
of Job's losses and sufferings. (The account of Satan's 
conversation with God concerning Job should be considered 
as allegorical— after the style of Pilgrim's Progress.) 
Then his patient endurance is set forth. Next 
follow the poetic colloquies between Job and his three 
friends, then Elihu's argument, then the Almighty's address, 
then Job's confession. The conclusion, relating to 



Job's return to favor and blessing, and his death, is in 
prose. 

Some have assumed that the Book of Job is merely a 
parable; and that Job himself is merely an imaginary 
character. But if this were the case, the teachings of 
the book would not be different. However, we see no 
cause to doubt that such a person did live and pass 
through the experiences related. In Ezekiel 14:14 and 
James 5:11, Job is classed with other holy men, which 
would not be the case were this narrative merely a parable. 
Besides, there are particular details given, such as 
are not common to parables. 

The fact that Job lived a hundred and forty years 
after his adversities, or probably over two hundred years 
in all, together with the fact that neither he nor his 
friends make any allusion to Israel or Moses or the Law, 
nor to Abraham and God's Covenant made with him, 
seems to indicate beyond doubt that he belonged to the 
Patriarchal Age. Possibly he lived about the same time 
as Abraham. His home was evidently in Arabia, and 
probably not far from Palestine. 

Job is introduced as a man of great learning and influence; 
as a man of great piety, who knew and reverenced 
God and appreciated justice; as a man of great generosity, 
who considered the widow and the orphan; and as 
a merchant prince of great wealth, who by his numerous 
servants and three thousand camels, carried on an extended 
and very prosperous traffic. 

Suddenly disaster came upon him and he was bereft 
of his children, his wealth, his influence and his health. 
He sought in vain for an explanation as to why God 
should permit such evils to befall him. Yet still he 
trusted in God, saying, "Though he slay me, yet will I 
trust in Him!" His wife urged that it had been without 
Divine appreciation that he had sought to do justice 
and mercy all his life, and exclaimed, "Curse God and 
die!" 

His three friends came to visit him, and, taking much 
the same view, told him in lengthy argument that he 
must have been a great sinner and a hypocrite. But, conscious 
of his own heart-honesty toward God, Job defends 
himself and goes to too great an extreme in declaring his 
innocence, but silences his critics. He seems to realize 
his need of some one to represent his cause before the 
Lord. He cries out that he is as righteous as he knows 
how to be; that he cannot reason the matter with God, 
being so much beneath Him in knowledge and power. He 

R5402:page51 

declares that the wilfully wicked are not so troubled, 
while he who has pursued righteousness is so afflicted that 
life has no further pleasure and he wishes that he had 
never been born. (Chapters 9, 10, and 16.) Feeling his 
own insufficiency to state his case before the great Jehovah, 
he desires a "daysman [a mediator] betwixt" God 



and himself.— Chapters 9:33; 16:21. 

Job's masterly reply to the false reasonings of his 
friends (which many improperly quote as inspired), and 
his expressions of confidence in God and of his ultimate 
deliverance, are clearly presented in Chapter 13:1-16. And 
then, with prophetic wisdom, in Chapter 14, he presents a 
most wonderful statement of the course of God's dealing 
with mankind. 

THE PROBLEM OF THE AGES 

The question which perplexed Job and confused his 
reasonings was the same that for centuries has confused 
others of God's people; namely, Why does God permit 
evil (calamities, afflictions, etc.) to come upon His faithful 
servants? and why are the wicked permitted to flourish? 
But not until the Gospel Dispensation was it possible 
for any to know the mind of God on this subject; 

R5402 : page 52 

for it is one of the deep things which could be revealed 
only by the Spirit of God, and only to those begotten of 
that Spirit, as St. Paul explains. (1 Corinthians 2:9-14.) 
And the Holy Spirit was not thus given, as a guide and 
teacher, until after Christ had redeemed us and ascended 
up on High, there to present His sacrifice as the price of 
our return to Divine favor, peace and communion. 

Although many are still in the dark on this subject, it 
is now open and clear to all the earnest ones to whom "it 
is granted to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of 
Heaven," to understand "the deep things of God." (Matthew 12:11; 
1 Corinthians 2:10.) These see that the 
reign of evil, the reign of Sin and Death, under Satan, 
the Prince of this world, is permitted for two reasons: 
first, that all men may gain a full experience of the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin and the bitterness of its legitimate 
fruit; and, second, that God's people may be fully 
tried and tested as to their loyalty to God in the shadow 
of affliction and trial, as well as in the sunshine of health 
and prosperity. 

Thus while God did not directly cause the evil state 
of things which surrounds us in nature and among men, 
but let it come upon men as the legitimate result, or fruit, 
of disobedience, sin, yet He does make use of the wrath 
of man and the sins of men and the animosity of Satan 
to work out grand designs which they do not comprehend, 
and of which His children know only by faith in 
His Word of revelation. For instance, how little did 
Satan and those malicious Jewish priests and Pharisees 
and those heartless Roman soldiers know that they were 
assisting in the working out of the Divine Plan when 
insulting, mocking and crucifying the Lamb of God! 

And so it is with the many afflictions of God's people 
—especially those of the Little Flock, the Bride of Christ. 
Trials are designed to fit and polish them for the greater 



usefulness and honor in the future developments of God's 
great Plan. Thus, regardless of the wilfulness or the 
ignorance of the persecutors, these trials of faith and 
patience are working out for such a "far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." This they do by preparing 
the called ones to be heirs of glory, by cultivating 
patience, experience, brotherly sympathy and love— which 
is God-likeness. Such, and such only can rejoice in tribulation 
and realize that all things— bad as well as good; 
unfavorable, as well as favorable— will be overruled in 
God's providence for their ultimate benefit. 

JOB'S HOPE OF A RESURRECTION 

But, returning to our consideration of Job, let us note 
in Chapter 14 some of his prophetic wisdom. The first 
four verses graphically picture what all of experience 
realize— that human life under present conditions is full 
of trial and sorrow, from the cradle to the tomb. And 
Job shows that he realizes that as a son of fallen parentage 
he could not be perfect, free from sin, clean, in the 
full sense of the word. 

In verses 5,6, he tells the Lord that he recognizes the 
fact that the authority and power to limit man's days are 
in His hands, but urges (not seeing the ministry of 
trouble), Why not let me and all men live out our short 
time in peace— even as we would not afflict a hireling 
who already has a heavy, burdensome task! 

Verses 7-10 are close reasonings respecting the utter 
hopelessness of man in death, so far as any powers of 
his own are concerned. A tree may die and yet its root 
retain life, which, under favorable conditions, may spring 
up into another tree. But when man dies there is no 
root left, no spark of life remains. He giveth up the spirit 
of life, and where is he? 

Having confessed that there is no ground for hope inherent 
in man, Job begins to express the only, the real 
hope of our race— a resurrection— see verses 12,13. Man 
lies down in death and loses all power to arouse himself 
—nor can he be resuscitated from the sleep of death by 
any one, until God's due time. This will be the Resurrection 
morning, the Millennial Day, when the present symbolic 
heavens shall have passed away, and the new 
heavens or new spiritual ruling power— Christ's Kingdom 
—shall have come into control of the world. In this Job 
fully agrees with the teachings of our Lord and the 
Apostles. 

The more he thinks of that blessed time when evil 
shall no more have dominion, but when a King shall 
reign in righteousness and princes shall execute judgment, 
the more he wishes he might die and be at rest. 
He exclaims (verse 13), "Oh, that Thou wouldst hide me 
in the grave [sheol]; that Thou wouldst keep me secret 
[hidden] until Thy wrath be past; that Thou wouldst appoint 
me a set time and remember me!" Job had faith in 
a resurrection, else he would never have uttered this 



prayer for death— for hiding in the grave. But he preferred 
death, and desired to sleep (verse 12) until the 
morning, for one reason only— that he might have no further 
experience with sin and with God's wrath— evil. 

A short period in the end of the Gospel Age is specially 
called "the day of wrath and revelation of the 
righteous judgment of God," because it will be "A time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation." Yet 
the entire period from the time Adam fell is called a time 
of Divine wrath, and properly so; for in all this long 
period "the wrath of God is revealed against all unrighteousness," 
in a variety of ways. While Love is a controlling 
principle in the Divine Government, it can operate 
only in harmony with Justice and Wisdom. It was both 
just and wise to let man feel the real weight of condemnation 
to death incurred by wilful transgression, in 
order that when Love should in due time provide a Ransom 
and a Resurrection, the culprit might the more gladly 
avail himself of the provided favors of Restitution and 
everlasting life. Thus death and all the evils permitted 
to come upon the culprit race are manifestations of God's 
wrath, which will be yet further shown in the great Time 
of Trouble. This will be followed by full and clear manifestations 
of God's Love and favor in Christ and the glorified 
Church during the Millennial Age.— Romans 1:18. 

In verses 14 and 15, he puts the question pointedly, as 
though to determine and settle his faith; but he immediately 
answers affirmatively: "Thou shalt call, and I will 
answer Thee [and awake out of the sleep of Adamic 
death— compare John 5:28,29]; Thou wilt have a desire 
to the work of Thine hands"— for His people are His 
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus.— Ephesians 2:10. 

ELIHU'S HOPE OF A REDEEMER 

When Job had refuted the arguments of his three 
friends, Elihu (whose name signifies God Himself) spoke 
from a different standpoint, reproving the three friends 
as well as Job. Elihu shows Job that he had been reasoning 
in part from a wrong premise— that he must not 
expect to fully comprehend all the ways of One so far 
above him, but must trust in God's Justice and in His 
Wisdom. And in Chapter 33:23,24 he shows the one 
thing necessary to man's recovery from the power of 
death, and his restoration to Divine favor, saying, "If 
there be with Him a Messenger as defender, One of a 
thousand [i.e., a rare One] to declare His own righteousness 
for man, then will God be gracious unto him [man] 

R5402 : page 53 

and say, Release him from going down to the grave; I 
have found a Ransom." 

This is indeed the case with man. God's Wisdom and 
Justice cannot be impugned. The sentence of death is 
justly upon all men through Father Adam. (Romans 5:12.) 



But God has provided us a Redeemer, Christ Jesus 
our Lord; and He, in harmony with the Father's Plan, 
became a man, and then gave Himself a Ransom-price 
for all by paying the death-penalty that was upon Adam. 
And as soon as the Bride, otherwise called His Body and 
the Temple, is complete, this great Mediator will stand 
forward to declare His righteousness as for, or applicable 
to, every one who will accept it. 

Then will follow Restitution, as pictured in verses 25 and 26. 
Physically, these for whom the Mediator stands 
shall be restored to a perennial youth, in which death 
and decay will find no place. They shall find acceptance 
and communion with God in joy and peace; and He will 
restore them to the original perfection, lost through sin in 
Eden. But an acknowledgment that God is just, and that 
the Restitution was unmerited will be required. This is 
indicated by verses 27,28: "He will chant it before men, 
and say: I have sinned and perverted the right; and it was 
not requited me. He has redeemed my soul from going 
into the pit and my life that it may be brought to the 
light." 

Elihu's words were as wise as any of those spoken by 
Job's comforters— probably wiser; but they were merely 
human wisdom, so far as we can discern. In Chapter 34:29 
he asks the question, "When He [Jehovah] giveth 

R5403 : page 53 

quietness, who then can make trouble?" Evidently the 
young man sought to draw a line in the criticism of Job, 
agreeing with neither Job nor his friends, but endeavoring 
to be moderate in his position. He defended the 
Almighty, claiming that if God had not so ordered, Job's 
adversities could not have come upon him. 

To Elihu it seemed clear that God had a hand in Job's 
experiences. Satan could not have sent all these calamities 
unless God had permitted it. Neither man nor angel 
of whatever rank could thwart the Divine will. God, not 
Job, had the authority to decide what should be done. God 
alone had the right to order all of life's affairs. Incidentally 
Elihu showed that Job was more righteous than 
were his friends; and that while he was imperfect, like 
all, yet he was not being punished on this account. 

A DIFFICULT LESSON FOR MANY 

The Christian may very well draw a lesson from 
Elihu's question. Although the words are not inspired, 
yet they are very wise. We can recognize the truth they 
contain— that when God purposes to give peace, quietness, 
the whole Universe will be in obedience to His Laws, and 
none can make trouble. 

If we have difficulties, if we have persecutions, if we 
have troubles of any kind we should look to God. We 
should say: This thing could not happen to me unless the 
Lord permitted it. We have come under special Divine 



care. God has promised that all things shall work together 
for good to us who are His children. The lesson of trust 
is one of those difficult lessons for us to learn and apply- 
to realize that all of life's experiences are under Divine 
supervision and that nothing can happen to us but what 
is for our highest good. This is not now true of the 
world, but merely of God's family. By and by God will 
make all things work out blessings for the world. 

It is in respect to these who are His children that all 
things now work for good. When we are in difficulty, we 
are to look up in confidence and trust to the Lord. Our 
Heavenly Father wishes us to exercise faith in Him. St. 
Peter tells us that we are "kept by the power of God, 
through faith unto salvation." Therefore we greatly rejoice, 
even "though now for a season we are in heaviness 
through manifold trials" and temptations. "The trial of 
your faith is much more precious than that of gold that 
perisheth."— 1 Peter 1:5-7. 

FALSE PEACE OF MANY 

There is another way by which some may have quietness. 
Many in the world enjoy a measure of peace, or 
rest from worry. Yet they are unaware of the great 
truths which we enjoy, and are in blindness, ignorance, 
superstition, error, through Satan's delusions. They have 
a feeling of security and ease, through the blinding influence 
of error and falsehood. Those of the world who 
come into relationship with God, are therefore sometimes 
awakened from false security. Then they gain the true 
peace and rest of heart. The Lord says: "Come unto 
Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give 
you rest." No true rest can be gained otherwise. 

The Lord's people have a peace and rest of mind 
through the knowledge of the Lord's Plan, the knowledge 
of His Justice, Mercy and Love, and a blessed realization 
that He is our God. All these things give us peace and 
quiet and rest of mind. While the world are troubled 
more or less, God's children have a peace that the world 
knows not of, that the world can neither give nor take 
away. And when the trials are all over, the Lord will 
make up for all the troubles of the present time, for all 
His children have suffered. We shall then look back on 
these trials and consider them but light afflictions, only 
for a moment— 2 Corinthians 4:17. 

TESTS OF LOYALTY AND DEVOTION 

When the Lord permits great clouds of trouble to 
come upon us, we should first look to see if we can discern 
any wrong-doing in ourselves which might properly 
bring chastisement. We should have joy in the Lord. 
But perhaps we have not been living close enough to the 
Lord. Yet these clouds of affliction do not necessarily 
mean that we have not been living close to Him, as we 
have seen in the case of Job. 



We remember likewise in the experiences of our Lord 
Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane the night before His 
crucifixion, how He said to His disciples, Peter, James and 
John, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death." 
We remember that God did not give Him quietness, but 
allowed trouble like a great flood to sweep over His soul. 
He was troubled to know surely whether He had been 
entirely loyal, faithful and obedient, as was necessary to 
maintain the Father's favor. We are told by the Apostle 
Paul that our Lord Jesus "offered up prayers and supplications 
with strong crying and tears unto Him that was 
able to save Him out of death— and was heard."— 
Hebrews 5:7. 

We find that the Father sent His angel to minister 
unto His dear Son, in His deep distress. As soon as the 
angel had given our Lord the assurance of the Father 
that He was well pleasing in His life and conduct, He 
became perfectly calm. And the assurance sustained Him 
in all the trying experiences which followed— the trial 
before the Sanhedrin, before Pilate, the treatment of the 
soldiers, the journey on the way to Calvary, and in the 
midst of the trying process of execution which followed. 

Only at the last, when the Father, because Jesus must 
take the sinner's place, withdrew His presence from Him 
in His dying moment did our Lord manifest disturbance of 
mind. Then He cried out in agony of soul, "My God, My 
God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" It was necessary for 
our Lord to experience the entire cutting off from God 

R5403 : page 54 

and from all relationship to God, in order to pay the full 
penalty for Adam's sin. This experience was at the very 
last moment. The Heavenly Father permitted this, for it 
was necessary to our Lord that He should realize the 
meaning of the sinner's separation from God. 

We do not consider it necessary that in every case 
our Lord's true and faithful followers should have a 
similar experience. We are not, as was our Redeemer, 
the Ransom, the Sin-bearer for the world; but it would 
not be surprising if some may have similar experiences 
to those of our Lord. Some of the saints have died, exclaiming 
"I am sweeping through the gates of the New 
Jerusalem!" while others have had dying experiences 
more like those of our Lord, and have cried out, "My 
God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" 

We can be content to leave our experiences entirely in 
the hands of Him who loves us, and can have an inward 
peace and calm and a rest of soul, knowing that no outward 
storm will be permitted but such as the Father sees 
will bring forth in us the peaceable fruits of righteousness, 
if we are properly exercised thereby. 

RESTITUTION FOR MANKIND PICTURED 

In the concluding chapters of the Book of Job, Jehovah 



addresses His afflicted servant, reproving his temerity in 

attempting, with his little knowledge, to judge God. This 

Job acknowledges, and finds peace in trusting God. Job's 

three friends, however, are severely reproved by God. 

But when they obey God and go to Job and offer up for 

themselves a burnt offering according to the Lord's commandment, 

and Job prays for them as God further instructed, 

they are restored to Divine favor. At once Job's 

prosperity returns— his friends and influence are restored; 

his wealth was exactly doubled, for he had twice as many 

flocks and herds and camels. He had also the same number 

of sons and daughters as before, and the Scriptures 

note that there were "no women found so fair as the 

daughters of Job." 

This ending of Job's career with a general Restitution 
is incomprehensible to those who have never seen that the 
Plan of God in Christ provides for a "Time of Restitution" 
of all things lost in Adam, to all of his race who 
will accept them under the terms of the New Covenant. 
(Acts 3:19-21.) But those who do see this Plan of God 
can readily see, too, that Job's experience was not only 
actual, but also typical. He seems to represent mankind. 
Man was at first in the Divine likeness and favor, with all 
things subject to him. (Psalm 8:4-8.) Because of 
Adam's sin Satan obtained an influence in human affairs 
which has resulted in degradation, sickness and death. 
God, however, has never really forsaken His creatures, 
and is even now waiting to be gracious unto all in and 
through Christ Jesus our Lord. 



R5403 : page 54 

ENDURING HARDNESS AS GOOD SOLDIERS 

"Thou, therefore, endure hardness as a good 
soldier of Jesus Christ."— 2 Tim. 2:3. 

THERE are many illustrations used in the 
Bible, and all of them very forceful. The one 
which represents the Christian as a soldier, 
has a great deal of meaning. We are not 
to suppose that the angels in Heaven are 
soldiers, nor that that term would be applicable 
to them. There is no war going on 
in Heaven, but there is a war going on here 
on earth. 

Six thousand years ago our first parents 
became entrapped, and the whole race was sold under 
Sin— became the servants of Sin and Satan. More and 
more this influence has prevailed— not that all willingly 
surrender to Satan, but that he puts darkness for light 
and light for darkness, and thus deceives mankind and 
leads them captive at his will. 

All who desire to be in harmony with God would be 



out of harmony with Satan and Sin. And they might at 
times have resisted these, and have tried to do God's 
will. But there was no organized undertaking for the 
overthrow of Sin until Jesus came. His mission was to 
overcome Satan, overcome Sin, and to bring everything 
into full harmony with God's arrangement. Earth, this 

R5404 : page 54 

province of God's great Empire, being in a rebellious 
state, needed to be conquered and restored, and Jesus 
undertook the work, with Divine backing. 

The first step was laying down His own life as a 
Ransom-price for the sin of the whole world, and thus 
making good for the original transgression. But before 
taking His power and exercising it in the overthrow of 
Satan and Sin, Jesus, according to the Father's will, 
began the selection of a Church class, variously styled 
members of His Body, His Bride, His companions and 
brethren in the Kingdom, His Royal Priesthood, under 
Himself as the great Royal High Priest. All those who 
have heard the Message, and whose hearts have been 
responsive, who have recognized the wrong conditions 
here prevailing, and who have felt sympathy for the race 
that is here sold as slaves of Sin and Death— all these 
have been invited to become members of this select class. 

TERMS OF WARFARE STATED AT BEGINNING 

These were informed at the very beginning that it 
would be necessary for them to fight a good fight. They 
were invited to enlist in the army to battle against Satan, 
and instructed that they should have full confidence that 
ultimately faith would have its victory. They were also 
told that they must suffer, laying down their lives as their 
Head and Forerunner laid down His life— not living for 
the world, but contrariwise, accepting His arrangement 
and living altogether for the purpose of carrying out their 
consecration with Him. 

The final honor to which God has invited them is to a 
share in His great Kingdom, with His Son. This implies 
a change of nature to all who have become soldiers of 
the Cross, followers of the Lamb; for "flesh and blood 
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." These are called 
to forego the rights and privileges of the present time, 
and by their lives to leave their mark, for a testimony to 
the world, for the benefit of mankind, and especially for 
the glory of God and for the calling out of others who 
might desire similarly to walk in the narrow way. 

The warfare that these are called upon to wage is a 
warfare against sin and the powers of darkness. (Eph. 6:11.) 
They are pledged to the Lord for right, for truth, 
for goodness. They are thus to fight the good fight. 
These soldiers will find, too, that some of their greatest 
difficulties are right in their own person. They have 
tendencies toward sin, because of being members of the 



human family, children of wrath, of sin, even as others. 
Their relationship to the Lord is as New Creatures. 

SELF OUR SPECIAL FOE 

The New Creature is obliged to fight against and to 
control the flesh. This is a great battle which each fights 
for himself. Each soldier may more or less assist and 
set an example to the other soldiers, but the chief battle 
is with himself. It is a hand-to-hand conflict. Although 
he is expected at all times to be on the alert against the 
wiles of Satan and the world, yet his special fight is with 

R5404 : page 55 

the enemies in his own flesh. St. Paul himself had taken 
the shield of faith— wherewith to quench the fiery darts 
of the wicked— and the helmet of salvation, and the Sword 
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. Timothy was a 
young soldier, and the Apostle was encouraging him with 
advice. He had already come into the Lord's company, 
under the Lord's standard. 

THE QUALITIES OF A GOOD SOLDIER 

St. Paul intimates that any one of us may be a good 
soldier, or contrariwise, a bad soldier, a poor soldier. 
We can imagine some soldiers who would be very disregardful 
of orders, not prompt to obey the command of 
the Leader. We can see that a good soldier is (1) one who 
is very much in sympathy with the Captain of his Salvation. 
He is an intelligent soldier, and sees that he has on 
the proper armor, that he wears it properly and that he 
gets the very best possible use out of this armor. He 
sees that in his walk he has a soldierly bearing, as a 
proper representative of the King, and of the great Kingdom 
so near at hand. 

(2) He is not ashamed of his flag, nor of the garment 
of Christ's righteousness. He is to lift up the standard 
of righteousness everywhere. He enlists in this warfare, 
knowing that it means his death— the death of the flesh, 
of the human nature. He is to be a good soldier— not 
merely outwardly loyal, merely wearing the uniform, but 
having the full spirit of the Cause. This means that 
whatever experiences come to him he is to receive these 
thankfully, and be glad to have the privilege of enduring 
something for His Captain and in the interests of the 
Kingdom to which he has sworn allegiance. 

The thought which the Apostle is impressing is that 
all good soldiers should endure hardness— hard, distressing 
conditions, circumstances that are quite unpleasant, 
difficult. Earthly soldiers are obliged to tramp 
through water and mud, enduring long, wearisome 
marches. Sometimes they are short of rations, sometimes 
obliged to sleep on the ground. Sometimes their 
battles are waged in the face of great opposition. 



So the soldier of Christ is to endure whatever experiences 
may come to him, under the guidance of his 
Captain, not only willingly, but gladly, rejoicing that he 
has been permitted to enter this army of the Lord, knowing 
that these experiences are working out for him "a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." These 
various hard experiences of the Christian are designed 
to work out for his good, that he may "lay hold on 
eternal life," and gain a share in the Kingdom with his 
Redeemer. 



R5404 : page 55 

CARELESS LIVING A FORM OF PROFANITY 

"Thou shalt not take the name of the 
Lord thy God in vain."— Exodus 20:7. 

THIS command was not given to the Gentiles; 
for the Lord had no dealings with the world. 
It was given to the Jewish people, who had 
come into relationship with God through the 
Law Covenant. We have every reason to 
believe that many of the Jews tried very 
hard outwardly to keep the Ten Commandments, 
the keeping of which meant life, the 
failure to keep which meant death. All of 
their endeavors failed, and they continued 
to die.— Romans 7:10. 

Notwithstanding the endeavor of many to observe this 
command of our text, St. Paul declared respecting them 
that the name of God was blasphemed through them 
amongst the Gentiles. (Romans 2:24.) We cannot suppose 
that the grosser meaning of blasphemy was the 
Apostle's thought. Blasphemy was a terrible thing among 
the Jews. Even a parent who heard his own child 
blaspheme was instructed to stone that child to death for 
so doing. We suppose the Apostle meant that the kind of 
living practised among the Jews really blasphemed God's 
name before the world. They were professedly God's 
people. And if under Divine instruction, Divine care, 
and Divine recognition, they did the things dishonoring 
to God, they were blaspheming His name. 

While the Ten Commandments were not given to the 
Church, yet every feature of the Ten Commandments is 
a command; for by the character of our consecration we 
are bound to seek to know God's will, even beyond 
the mere letter of His Word. Hence, while the Church 
is not under the Law Covenant, we are under the general 
instruction of the Ten Commandments. Therefore the 
Apostle says that "the righteousness of the Law [the 
true meaning of the Law] is fulfilled in us, who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit."— Romans 8:4. 

It is not supposable that any real child of God, any 



consecrated follower of Christ, could have a desire to 
take the name of the Father in vain. Hence the apparent 
meaning of this command is not applicable to us; 
for since we have become His children, and have received 
His Spirit, it would be the farthest thing from us to wish 
to profane His name. But as the Jews profaned the 
name of the Lord by careless living amongst the Gentiles, 
so there is great danger of Christians profaning His name 
by careless living. And this is indicated in the Scriptures 
as being a danger. 

Our Lord speaks of some who, at His Second Coming, 
will say, "Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in 
Thy name, and in Thy name done many wonderful 
works, and in Thy name cast out devils?" And He will 
say, "I do not recognize you." They have been deceiving 
themselves. (Matthew 7:21-23.) They did not come in 
by the door of the sheep-fold, and have never been recognized 
by the Lord as His sheep. Amongst them there 
will perhaps be a great many who have done philanthropic 
and reform work. 

But the thousand years of Christ's Reign will be the 
time when God will institute the real Reform Work, 
through Christ's Kingdom. Now the Lord is working 
in the hearts of His people, through His promises, seeking 
the particular class who are moved and exercised by 
these promises. Thus He is finding a Little Flock, a 
peculiar people, to be joint-heirs with Christ in His 
Kingdom. 

LET US TAKE NOT HIS NAME IN VAIN 

From this standpoint, all of God's people should be 
very much on guard that they do not take the name of 
the Lord in vain when they profess to be His people, His 
children— when they profess to be the followers of Jesus 
and call themselves Christians. It would be far better if 
many professed Christians did not take the name of 
Christian at all. The only ones who may properly take 
Christ's name are those who really become His disciples. 
The only condition under which any may become His 
disciple is to take up his cross and follow Him— give up 
his life, surrender his will. 

Although this commandment was not given to Spiritual 
Israel, we can readily see how the spirit of it applies to 

R5405 : page 56 

us. We have taken the name of Christ as our name. We 
profess to be members of the Body of Christ. And the 
holy name of the Head belongs to all the members of His 
Body. The honored name of the Bridegroom belongs to 
His Espoused. What carefulness the thought of this 
should give us, and how appropriate it is that we should 
see to it that we have not taken that blessed name in 
vain; that we appreciate the honor, the dignity, the 
responsibility, of our position as His representatives and 



ambassadors in the world! Let us, therefore, walk circumspectly, 
taking earnest heed that we bring no dishonor 
to that hallowed name; but on the contrary, that 
we honor it in our every thought and word and deed. 
"What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy 
conversation [behavior] and godliness?" "As He which 
hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of 
conversation [behavior]; because it is written, Be ye 
holy; for I am holy."-2 Peter 3:11; 1 Peter 1:15,16. 



R5405 : page 56 

LAWFUL ON THE SABBATH 

--MARCH 15. -LUKE 13:10-17; 14:1-6.- 

"The Sabbath was made for man, and 
not man for the Sabbath."-MARK 2:27. 

MUCH confusion prevails amongst Christian 

people respecting the Sabbath day. One 

fruitful source of this confusion is that 

few realize that God's arrangements with 

the followers of Jesus are totally different 

from those which He made with Natural 

Israel under the Law Covenant. Everything 

under that Covenant was a type and 

contained a valuable lesson for Christians, 

but to mistake the type for the antitype is 

to confuse our minds and to miss the beauty and force of 

the antitype. 

There was no Sabbath day before the Jewish Law, 
except in the sense that the word Sabbath signifies rest, 
and that we are informed that God rested on the seventh 
great Day, or Epoch, of the Creative Week. Enoch, who 
walked with God; Abraham, the friend of God, and others 
pleasing to the Lord, knew nothing about the Sabbath, 
even as they knew nothing about the Atonement 
Day and its sacrifices, or other matters appertaining to 
Israel's Law Covenant. 

The Apostle Paul explains that the Israelites were a 
House of Servants, under Moses; but that the Church is 
a House of Sons, under Christ. (Hebrews 3:1-6.) God's 
method of dealing with the House of Servants would 
very properly be different from His method of dealing 
with the House of Sons. Commands are given to the 
servants without explanation why or wherefore. But the 
Apostle explains that God deals with us as with sons. To 
the true Christian the Heavenly Father makes known 
His plans, His purposes, His arrangements, in order that 
His sons, who have His Spirit, may sympathetically enter 
into those plans, by obedience to the extent of self-sacrifice, 
not because of command, but because of joy to 
do the Father's will. 



Jesus and the Apostles were Jews, and were under 
obligation to the Law Covenant up to the time that Jesus 
by His death became the "end of the Law for righteousness 
to every one that believeth." Since that time the 
followers of Jesus are in no sense of the word bound by 
the Jewish Law. They are interested in the Ten Commandments, 
because those commandments in an outward 
way indicate the will of God; and all the sons of God 
are anxious to know the Father's will, that they may voluntarily 
do it. But God does not address the House of 
Sons, "Thou shalt not kill; thou shalt not steal"; for so 
surely as they have been begotten of the Holy Spirit at 
all, they will not wish to kill, nor wish to steal. 

In dealing with the House of Sons God, through the 
Head of the House, has set up a new law, which is all-comprehensive 
and means much more than the Law of 
Moses was previously understood to signify. It is the 
Law of Love. As the Apostle declares, "Love is the fulfilling 
of the Law." The Law is comprehended in the 
one word Love— love supreme for God, and love for our 
fellow men. Finally, Jesus declared, "A new command I 
give unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved 
you." This He said to us who are laying down our lives 
one for the other. 

SEVENTH DAY-FIRST DAY 

Early in the Gospel Dispensation the followers of 
Jesus began to meet on the first day of the week. Apparently 
the custom had its start in the fact that Jesus 
rose from the dead on that day, and appeared several 
times on that day to His followers; and on the following 
first day of the week He appeared again. It became a 
custom amongst the disciples to have their fellowship on 
that day, not that it was commanded of the Lord, but because 
of their desire to remember the Master and to have 
fellowship with each other. Quite probably they kept the 
Sabbath day and the first day as well, for a time. They 
evidently had difficulty in realizing how completely they 
had passed from the domination of Moses and his Law 
to be under the headship of Jesus and His guidance— 
"the liberty wherewith Christ makes free" indeed. 

Although Christians have now abandoned the observance 
of the seventh day in favor of the first day of the 
week, many erroneously think that God authorized the 
change. But not so; the Christian is not under law, but 
under grace. It was from privilege that the early disciples 
met together on the first day, and not by instruction 
of God. So it should be still, and so it is yet with some. 
True Christians cannot have too much opportunity for 
fellowship together for the study of the Heavenly Father's 
Word, and for offering Him the worship and homage 
of their hearts. 

True Christians undoubtedly are glad that there is a 
special day of the week set apart, in which they can more 
particularly give themselves to prayer, worship, praise 



and Bible study, and good works— even though the enforcement 
of such a Sunday be by human law and 
through a misconception. Glad would many of the Lord's 
people be if their earthly affairs were so arranged as to 
permit of two Sundays in each week, or more. But in 
order to enjoy Sunday properly, the Lord's consecrated 
people should be freed from the misconceptions which so 
generally prevail. 

THE SABBATH OF REST 

Israel's Law provided two Sabbaths. One, every 
seventh year, found its multiple and fulfilment in the 
fiftieth year, the year of Jubilee and of full release. The 
other was every seventh day, and found its fulfilment 
through its multiple, in the fiftieth day— the day of Pentecost 
—the day which foreshadowed the rest into which 
the people of God may enter even now. 

The Apostle refers to both of these in Hebrews 4:1-1 1. 
The Sabbath day has its fulfilment in the rest and 
peace of heart enjoyed by the antitypical Israelites. It 
is a perpetual Sabbath with them. They enter into rest. 

R5405 : page 57 

They have reached that place where they have the peace 
of God ruling in their hearts. They rest from their own 
works— from all hope that they could commend themselves 
to God by works of any kind, Sabbath keeping or 
otherwise. They enter into rest because they see that 
God has provided in Jesus the help necessary for all, that 
they are "complete in Him." This rest or peace no man 
taketh from them. It is theirs so long as they abide by 
faith in Christ, in God. 

But, as the Apostle points out, "there remaineth a rest 
for the people of God"— a future rest. The Church will 
enter into that rest when they experience their resurrection 
change, when they are made like the Savior and enter 
into the joys of their Lord. That will be the complete 
rest. So far as the world is concerned, the great Messiah's 
Reign of a thousand years will be the Sabbath of 
the world in general, in which they will have the privilege 
of attaining perfection in every sense of the word 
and thus will enter into rest by coming into harmony with 
God. 

Jesus did many of His miracles on the Sabbath days, 
partly no doubt to emphasize the fact that the great Sabbath, 
the thousand-year Day, the seventh thousand-year 
Day of earth's history, will be the time of His Kingdom, 
in which all mankind will be privileged to be healed from 
sin and sickness, sorrow and pain, and to be brought to 
the full perfection of human nature, to all that was lost 
in Adam and redeemed at Calvary. 

TO DO GOOD ON THE SABBATH 



Since Jesus according to the flesh was a Jew, and 
therefore bound by all the commandments of the Jewish 
Law, it follows that He could do nothing contrary to 
that Law. He could not set it aside, nor was it proper 
that he should explain to the Jews the real meaning of 
the Sabbath. All that would come later, under the Holy 
Spirit's instruction, after Pentecost, after the begetting of 
the Spirit; for "the natural man receiveth not the things 
of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because 
they are spiritually discerned." But Jesus could, and did, 
correct certain of the misapprehensions of the Law which 
had crept in through the teachings of their rabbis, the 
Doctors of the Law, and the Pharisees. 

These for show exaggerated the letter of the Law in 
some respects, while they entirely ignored its spirit. Thus 
when the disciples of Jesus, passing through a wheat field, 
rubbed some of the grains in their hands to hull them 
before eating, the Pharisees complained that they were 
breaking the Sabbath— they were threshing and winnowing. 
Jesus showed that this was not the purport of the 
Law. It was not made to hinder any good or necessary 
work, but to benefit the people. According to the Doctors 
of the Law, to search for a biting flea would be sin 

R5406 : page 57 

on the Sabbath day, because it would be "hunting." Thus 

in various ways they made the reasonable Law of God 

to appear unreasonable to the people; and while thus particular 

in trifles, they ignored the weightier matters of 

the Law, which appertained to justice, love and mercy. 

In the lesson before us we have two instances of healing 
on the Sabbath. A woman had an infirmity which 
had bowed her down for eighteen years. Jesus released 
her from her bondage on a Sabbath day. He laid His 
hands upon her and said, "Thou art loosed from thine 
infirmity"; and she was made straight and glorified God. 
But the ruler of the synagogue was indignant and said 
unto the people, There are six days in which you can 
come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day. 

This was intended as a special rebuke to Jesus, intimating 
that He was not so holy and so careful of the 
Sabbath as He should be, but was a violator of the Law. 
But Jesus replied: "Ye hypocrites! doth not each one of 
you on the Sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, 
and lead him away to water? and ought not this woman, 
whom Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen years, be 
loosed from this bondage on the Sabbath day?" And His 
adversaries were put to shame. 

The other case was that of a man troubled with 
dropsy. Jesus, knowing their attitude of mind, discussed 
the subject in advance on this occasion, asking the Doctors 
of the Law and the Pharisees, "Is it lawful to heal on 
the Sabbath day or not?" They made no answer. Then 
He took the sick man and healed him, and inquired of 
the critics, "Which of you having an ass or an ox fall 



into a pit would not straightway draw him out on a 
Sabbath day?" But they could not answer. 

A proper understanding of the Sabbath, the rest 
which God has provided for His people, is a great blessing. 
"We who believe do enter into rest"— an abiding 
rest, a perpetual Sabbath. And all such are glad to have 
special opportunities, as these may present themselves, 
for gathering together in the name of the Lord, for worship, 
praise, study and fellowship. Without regard to 
which day, the Apostle suggests to us, Let us forsake not 
the assembling of ourselves together as the manner of 
some is; and so much the more, as we see the Day drawing 
on— the glorious Day of Messiah's Kingdom approaching, 
and the shadows of night and darkness, of 
ignorance and superstition passing away.— Heb. 10:25. 



R5406 : page 57 

PARABLES OF THE KINGDOM 

-MARCH 22.-LUKE 13:18-30.- 

"Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into 
the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that doeth the will of My 
Father which is in Heaven. "-MATTHEW 7:21. 

FEW apparently have noticed that nearly all 

of Jesus' teachings related to the Kingdom 

of God. This was because the Kingdom 

of God is the great Divine remedy promised 

for the release of mankind from the 

curse, and the blessing of the willing and 

obedient with an uplift out of sin and 

death conditions, a return to harmony 

with God and the everlasting life which 

He is pleased to give to all who love Him. 

All that took place in the world prior to the coming of 

Jesus was merely preparatory. Life and immortality 

had not even been brought to light before the First Advent. 

Thus we read, "Christ hath brought life and immortality 

to light through the Gospel." There were 

hints, suggestions and promises of coming blessings; but 

the method of procedure, etc., was not brought to light. 

The typical sacrifices of Israel taught a great lesson; 
viz., that better sacrifices must be offered before the 
blessings could be received. The typical kingdom of 
Israel taught that Messiah would be a great King, and 
rule with great power. But when the last of the kings 
of David's line, Zedekiah, was dethroned, the Lord 
through the Prophet declared, "I will overturn, overturn, 
overturn it: until He come whose right it is; and 
I will give it unto Him."— Ezekiel 21:25-27. 

R5406 : page 58 



The work of Jesus at His First Advent, His sacrificial 
death as an Atonement for man's sin, was necessary 
as the foundation or preliminary to the setting up 
of God's Kingdom for man's deliverance from the power 
of sin and death. But, although the Redeemer died 
eighteen centuries ago, the Kingdom is not yet set up. 
We are still praying, "Thy Kingdom come." Nevertheless, 
when enlightened by the words of our Lord and 
the Apostles, we see that the Divine program has not 
stopped. An elect Church is being sought, which is to 
be the Bride of Christ and His Joint-heir in His Kingdom, 
and not until this great work shall have been accomplished 
can the Kingdom come. After the full number 
of His elect Church shall have been perfected in the 
First Resurrection, they shall reign with Him, as He 
promised— "a Royal Priesthood"; "kings and priests 
unto God." 

There should be no doubt that these features of the 
Plan of God constitute quite sufficient reasons why the 
Savior should preach and teach so much respecting the 
Kingdom. The different parables illustrative of the 
Kingdom treat it from different standpoints, just as we 
might take different photographs of persons or of a 
building, or of the same person or thing at different ages 
or stages of development or from different angles. So 
some of the parables of the Kingdom tell about the persecutions 
which would come upon those who would be the 
heirs of the Kingdom. Others tell that there would be a 
great outward appearance of prosperity, while the true 
Kingdom class would be still a Little Flock. 

One parable at least tells about the future work of 
the Kingdom, after the Church is completed and sits 
with Christ in His Throne. This is the Parable of the 
Sheep and the Goats, which has its fulfilment positively 
dated by the expression, "When the Son of Man shall 
come in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, 
then shall He sit upon the Throne of His glory; and 
before Him shall be gathered all nations; and He shall 
separate them the one from the other, as a shepherd 
divideth his sheep from the goats."— Matthew 25:31,32. 

This dividing of the world, the Gentiles, will progress 
for a thousand years, and eventually will make a most 
complete separation, identifying the sheep of the Lord's 
favor and introducing them to the blessings intended for 
them, and destroying the goat class as being really servants 
of sin and of Satan. These will go away into everlasting 
punishment, symbolized by fire. The punishment 
will be everlasting, even though they will be unconscious; 
for "the wages of sin is death," not torment. 
Therefore the everlasting punishment will be an everlasting 
death, from which there will be no redemption, 
no future recovery. 

A GRAIN OF MUSTARD SEED 



Two illustrations of the Kingdom occur in this lesson. 
In the one the Lord likens the Kingdom to a grain 
of mustard seed, which from a small beginning would 
become quite a large bush, and the birds of the air 
would lodge in its branches. This evidently was intended 
as a picture of the outward appearance of the 
Church— very prosperous, so prosperous as to invite the 
birds. Elsewhere Jesus declared that the birds represented 
the Wicked One and his agents, ever ready to 
take away the seed of Truth and to work adversely as 
respects the Gospel program. (Matthew 13:4,19.) In 
Revelation also the great Teacher speaks of the Church 
as becoming Babylon, confusion, and as being "a cage 
of every unclean and hateful bird." (Revelation 18:2.) 
The picture fits. 

Again the Master illustrated the experiences of His 
Church as an embryo tic Kingdom. His second parable 
tells of a woman who hid some leaven in three measures 
of meal until the whole batch was leavened. This, 
Bible students are coming to understand, signifies a corrupting 
of the Divine Message— the spiritual Food 
which God had prepared for the Church. A woman in 
symbolic language represents a church system; and the 
Master tells us that such a church system will mix 
leaven, or ferment, in the food of the family of God 
until the whole mass will be corrupted. For be it noted 
that leaven in the Bible is always used as a symbol of 
corruption, of sin. This parable shows that the faith 
once delivered to the saints would be lost, vitiated, mixed 
with error, until it would no longer be nourishing to the 
family. St. Paul pictures the same matter, saying that 
in the latter days "some shall depart from the faith, giving 
heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons."— 
1 Timothy 4:1. 

These false doctrines are what are troubling the people 
of God today. Our hearts are better than our heads; 
for the hearts of the consecrated are in tune with the 
Infinite One, while the creeds of the Dark Ages are quite 
out of tune. The blessings that are lately coming to Bible 
students are largely the result of breaking loose from the 
creeds formulated in the Dark Ages, and getting back to 
the teachings of Jesus, the Apostles and the Prophets— 
the only inspired authorities. Their words alone constitute 
the proper food whereby we are to be nourished. 
The Word of God is sufficient, that the man of God may 
be thoroughly furnished.— 2 Timothy 3:16,17. 

Some dear Christian people, looking at matters evidently 
from a wrong angle, are still deceived into thinking 
that it is possible for the Church, as the Kingdom of 
God in an embryotic condition, to do the work which God 
assigns to that Church in her future glorified, perfected 
condition. Such shut their eyes to the fact that the number 
of heathen in proportion to the number of Christians 

R5407 : page 58 



doubles every century. Such try to count up Christians 
by the hundreds of millions, entirely ignoring the fact 
that Jesus has declared that the Gospel Church, the Elect, 
who are walking in His steps, will be altogether but a 
Little Flock. --Luke 11:32. 

THE CALLED SAVED 

The blessing of the heathen is not merely for those 
now living, but for all who have ever lived. Messiah's 
Kingdom will triumph gloriously in the Lord's due time. 
The knowledge of the glory of God will fill the whole 
earth (Isaiah 1 1:9), until none shall need to say to his 
neighbor or to his brother, Know thou the Lord; for all 
shall know Him. (Jeremiah 31:33,34.) It is in order 
that all may come to a knowledge of the Truth that God 
has promised that "there shall be a resurrection of the 
dead, both of the just and of the unjust"; that "all that 
are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of 
Man and shall come forth." A faithful few will come 
forth to glory, honor, immortality and a share in the 
Kingdom; and the unreconciled many will come forth 
later, that the Love of God may be testified to them, and 
that they may have the opportunity of the rewards and 
chastisements of the Kingdom, to help them back to all 
that was lost in Adam and redeemed at Calvary. 

Some inquired of the Lord, Will there be but few 
saved? Jesus did not give a direct answer to the question, 
doubtless for two reasons: (1) The Holy Spirit had not 
yet come, and His followers could not then be prepared 
to understand the Plan of God thoroughly. (2) It was 

R5407 : page 59 

not due time to explain all the particulars of the spiritual 
salvation of the Church, to be like unto her Lord, and 
then later the human Restitution of the world to the 
image and likeness of the first Adam. Jesus applied the 
matter to His hearers personally, saying: "Strive ye to 
enter in [to the Kingdom] by the narrow door; for many, 
I say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. 
When once the Master of the House is risen up and shut 
to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock 
at the door, saying, Lord, open unto us, He shall answer 
and say to you, I know you not whence ye are." 

For a certain period of time the door to the High Calling 
of the Church stands ajar. Jesus opened up this new 
way of life through the veil; that is to say, His flesh— 
His sacrifice. (Hebrews 10:19,20.) The possibilities of 
entering into this way were first presented to the Jews; 
and after finding the suitable ones of that people, God 
has directed the Message hither and thither amongst the 
Gentiles for these more than eighteen centuries. Apparently 
the gathering of the Elect has been nearly completed. 
As soon as the last one completing the elect 
number shall have qualified for glory and shall have 



passed through the door, it will shut. 

About that time, a great awakening of religious 
thought will come to the world, in the midst of a great 
Time of Trouble. Then many will begin to say that they 
have been neglecting the great Prize, that they have failed 
to purchase the pearl of great price on the cheap terms 
on which it was offered to them— their little all. Then 
there will be great lamentation amongst this class, and a 
crying, Lord, Lord, are we not to be of the Bride class? 
But the Lord will disown them as respects the Bride company. 
Then they will be in great sorrow. Weeping and 
gnashing of teeth will prevail. This will not be in some 
far-off place of eternal torment, as once we supposed; 
but, as the narrative intimates, it will be right here on 
the earth, amongst a class who neglected the privileges 
of the High Calling when they knew of it. 

Bringing the matter down to His hearers, but still 
leaving it applicable to all who have heard the Message 
throughout the Gospel Age, the Lord intimates that some 
of these will have been in close touch with Him and His 
followers. They had a form of godliness and claimed to 
have done many mighty works, yet the Lord will disown 
them as respects any privileges in the Kingdom. They 
will not even have a share in the earthly kingdom. It will 
be given to the Worthies of the past who lived and died 
before the High Calling was opened up. 

Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and all the Prophets and faithful 
ones of the past are to be Princes in all the earth, the 
visible representatives of the invisible Messiah and His 
Church in glory. The heirs of the Kingdom will not be 
entirely Jewish, because the Jews as a nation were not 
sufficiently holy and because the Lord could accept only 
the holy. When the call to joint-heirship in the Kingdom 
would go out to the Gentiles, some would come from the 
East, the West, the North and the South, and have a 
share in the Kingdom. The Jews were first in God's 
favor and the Gentiles last; yet some of the first with 
privilege and opportunity would fail. 



R5407 : page 59 

WHAT DOTH JEHOVAH REQUIRE? 

-MARCH 29. -MATTHEW 7:24-29.- 

"What doth Jehovah require of thee, but to do justly, and to love 
kindness, and to walk humbly with thy God?" -MIC AH 6:8. 

JESUS sought to impress upon His hearers 
that it was not sufficient for them to hear 
that a Kingdom of God was coming, and 
that it would bring certain blessings to the 
world. It was not sufficient that they should 
know that a Kingdom class was being called 



out of the world to be Messiah's joint-heirs 

in that Kingdom. Action would be necessary 

on their part if they would attain to 

this high privilege which God had granted 

to them. "Show me thy faith without thy works, and I 

will show thee my faith by my works," wrote St. James. 

Not that we are to attain the Kingdom by our works; 

for, imperfect through the fall, we are unable to do perfect 

works, acceptable to God. It will be our faith in 

God and in the Lord Jesus that will bring us the victory, 

if we gain it; but the victory will be accounted only to 

those who shall, to the best of their ability, work out 

their salvation with fear and trembling. God will work in 

such, and through Christ bring them off conquerors, yea, 

more than conquerors. 

Jesus gave an illustration, or parable, declaring that 
those who heard His Message and rendered obedience 
thereto would be like a wise man, who built his house 
upon the rock, where the descending rains would not 
wash away the foundation from underneath, nor in any 
wise harm it. The storms of life are sure to come; and 
the great crisis of life, death, is sure to come. Amidst 
those trials there will be calmness, confidence and security 
for such as have accepted the Lord's arrangement 
and have been walking to the best of their ability in the 
footsteps of Jesus. To them death will be merely a 
transition from the earthly state to the Heavenly, by the 
power of the First Resurrection— "changed in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye"; for "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God." (1 Corinthians 15:50-52.) 
Their faith and confidence, built upon God's promises, 
can never fail them. For such there is laid up a crown 
of life, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give 
them at that Day.— 2 Timothy 4:8. 

On the other hand, Jesus intimates that many who 
heard His words and expressed great appreciation of 
them, would fail to take the proper steps to attain the 
glorious Kingdom privileges which He presented. They 
would allow custom, habit, love of pleasure, love of ease, 
the spirit of the world, to hinder them, either from 
making the proper, full devotion of themselves to God, or 
from carrying out that purpose. Such indeed might to 
some extent encourage themselves with hopes of the 
Kingdom which would never be realized, because they 
never took the proper steps. They did not build their 
faith upon the proper foundation. Perhaps some of them 
built upon the Law, and thought that they could commend 
themselves to God by their own endeavors, without 
the imputation of the merit of Christ. Such would be 
greatly mistaken. "Other foundation can no man lay 
than that which God has laid— Jesus Christ." His death 
is our redemption-price, and His appearance in glory as 
our Advocate is to make good for our unintentional 
shortcomings. 

With all such, the day of stress and trial will surely 
come; and their faith structure, being without a proper 



foundation, will give way. They will suffer the loss of 
all their hopes. This, however, does not signify, as many 
of us once supposed, that they will go to eternal torment. 
Evidently nearly all Christian people, misled by the 

R5407 : page 60 

creeds of the Dark Ages, read into the Word of God 
many things which it does not at all contain. 

COMPARE ST. PAUL'S PARABLE 

The Apostle Paul used a similar illustration, saying, 
"Other foundation can no man lay than that which is 
laid— Jesus Christ." "But let every man take heed how 
he buildeth thereupon"; for the Day that cometh shall 
try every man's work of what sort it is. Those building 
with the gold, silver and precious stones of Divine Truth, 
developing their faith and character in harmony with the 
Divine requirements and arrangements, will suffer no 
loss in the great trial day at the end of this Age. But 
others who build with the wood, hay and stubble of 
human tradition and self-complacency, will find that 
their entire faith structure will be consumed; for the fire 
of that Day shall try every man's work of what sort it 
is.— 1 Corinthians 3:10-15. 

Nevertheless, the Apostle tells us that even those who 
will suffer the loss of their faith structure, if they have 
built upon Christ, will themselves be saved, though so as 
by fire. They will be what is sometimes termed a tribulation 
class, described in Revelation 7:14-17: "These are 

R5408 : page 60 

they that have come out of great tribulation, and have 
washed their robes and made them white in the blood 
of the Lamb. Therefore are they before the Throne of 
God, and serve Him in His Temple day and night." On 
these, God has various blessings to bestow. These will 
be in proportion to their obedience and loyalty and faith. 

The class that the Apostle mentions as building with 
gold, silver and precious stones, will be a Little Flock, a 
Royal Priesthood, who will sit in the Throne, wearing 
the crowns, and be joint-heirs with Jesus in the Kingdom. 
But the class building upon the Rock without 
proper materials, yet saved so as by fire, will be the 
Great Company class, the antitype of the Levites, who instead 
of being in the Throne, will before the Throne 
serve those in the Throne; instead of wearing crowns, 
they will be granted palm branches, indicating a victory 
of an inferior kind. The priestly class will be the antitypical 
Temple of God; the Levite class, the Great Company, 
will serve God in and through that Temple class. 

Nor is this all of the salvation which God has purposed. 
These two classes include merely the spirit-begotten 
ones of this Gospel Age. The Ancient Worthies 



are to constitute another class of saved ones— saved to 
an earthly perfection, to be princes in all the earth, 
glorious representatives of the invisible, spiritual, 
Heavenly Kingdom class. Then finally will come the 
blessing of all the families of the earth who shall prove 
willing and obedient during the thousand years of the 
Kingdom Reign, and who will be gradually lifted up, up, 
out of sin and degradation, by resurrection power, back 
to all that was lost in Adam and redeemed through the 
precious blood of Jesus. On the other hand, all intelligent, 
wilful opposers of God and righteousness, after a 
certain period of opportunity, will be destroyed in the 
Second Death— whether they belong to the class that is 
now on trial, a class of spirit-begotten ones, or to the class 
which will be on trial during the period of Messiah's 
Reign. "All the wicked will God destroy." 

THE PEOPLE WERE ASTONISHED 

No wonder the people were astonished at such doctrines 
as Jesus gave forth, even though they but imperfectly 
understood these, for none could perfectly understand 
except through the enlightening influence of the 
Holy Spirit, which was not yet given because Jesus was 
not yet glorified. (John 7:39.) The teachings of Jesus 
had a positiveness quite different from the various speculations 
and wonderings of the scribes. So it is always 
with the Truth. Wherever there is confusion and 
mysticism, we may be sure there is error and ignorance. 
Hence the necessity that all who preach Christ should 
have the anointing, or ordination, to preach, which God 
alone gives through the begetting of the Holy Spirit. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

"What doth Jehovah require of thee, but to do justly, 
and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with thy God?" 
At first one might be inclined to say, Why, that is different! 
There is nothing in that text of Scripture to say 
that in order to be an heir of the Kingdom one must take 
up his cross, deny himself and follow in the footsteps of 
Jesus, self-sacrificingly! 

This is true; but we should notice that the one is a 
requirement and the other a privilege. God does not require 
sacrifice. What He requires is loyalty and obedience, 
but not sacrifice. Whatever is sacrificial is so much 
more than the Divine Law requires. Thus in the case of 
Jesus, the Divine Law could not require Him to do more 
than to obey it— to love God with all His heart, mind, 
soul and strength, and to love His neighbor as Himself. 
But could not all this have been done by Jesus without 
the laying down of His life at all! Surely! Hence the 
Scriptures represent that when Jesus presented Himself 
at Jordan, He consecrated all that He had to do the 
Father's will, even unto death— not merely to keep the 
Law. He delighted to do the Father's will, even 



beyond what the Father demanded in the Law. 
(Hebrews 10:5-7.) And so must it be with all 
who would be acceptable footstep followers of Jesus and 
attain with Him glory, honor and immortality on the 
Heavenly plane. 

The Prophet Micah addressed the Jews, and his message 
was from the standpoint of the Law. He was encouraging 
the Jews to do their best to fulfil its requirements. 
Nevertheless, we know that no Jew ever fulfilled 
the Law except Jesus, because all except Him were fallen, 
imperfect. He alone was "holy, harmless, undefiled and 
separate from sinners." 

During the Millennial Kingdom of Messiah, this same 
Law of God, given to the Jews through Moses, will be 
given to the whole world of mankind through Messiah. 
The requirements will be to do justly, to love kindness, to 
walk humbly with God. The reason why Messiah's ministration 
of this Law will be a success, while Moses' 
ministration of it was a failure, so far as bringing any 
to perfection was concerned, is that Messiah's Kingdom 
will be fully prepared and authorized to forgive sinners 
and to help them up out of their imperfections— back to 
the image and likeness of God as it was originally represented 
in Father Adam. 

The privilege and right to thus forgive sins and to 
thus lift the sinner out of degradation belongs to Messiah, 
by virtue of His sacrifice for sins which He finished on 
Calvary. The right to life which He there laid down 
without forfeiting He will be prepared to give to mankind 
during the Millennium; and only the wilful rejectors 
will perish in the Second Death. 



"O! we long to see Thy glory 

Streaming wide o'er all the earth; 

Every error, old and hoary, 

Flee to realms that gave them birth. 

"For this glorious culmination, 
Not for long shall Zion wait: 

Soon will come her coronation; 
Lo, her King is at the gate." 



R5408 : page 61 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

HOW DID SAUL OF TARSUS SEE JESUS? 

QUESTION.-"And last of all He was seen of 
me also, as of one born out of [before the] 
due time." (1 Cor. 15:8.) How could Saul 
of Tarsus have seen Jesus, if He was personally 



in Heaven, and was to remain there 
until the end of the Age? 

Answer.— The Lord evidently designed 
that Saul should have the opportunity of 
being the twelfth Apostle, to take the place 
of Judas. In order to be an Apostle, it 
was necessary that he should be a witness to our Lord's 
resurrection. And so Saul of Tarsus was given a demonstration 
which made him an eye witness to the fact of 
the Lord's resurrection from the dead. He tells of it in 
this way: after detailing how Jesus had been seen of 
above five hundred brethren at one time, St. Paul says, 
"And last of all, He was seen of me also, as of one born 
out of due time." 

The miracle that was performed to enable Saul to see 
Jesus was not sufficient to save his eyes. If Jesus had 
been a flesh being, Saul's eyes would have been spared. 
But the fact that he was permitted to see, and with unveiled 
eyes (for it is not the natural order of things for 
a natural eye to see a spirit being), is a proof that some 
power was miraculously exercised which enabled him to 
see the Lord. 

As to how this comports with the thought that Jesus 
went away, and that the Heavens were to retain Him 
until the end of the Age, we have this to say: He left 
the world, telling His disciples that in the end of the Age 
He would come in great glory to establish His Kingdom. 
But nothing in this statement indicates that He might not 
be present at some time previous to this. This may be 
illustrated in the typical Atonement Day sacrifices. The 
High Priest went into the Most Holy and offered the 
blood of the bullock; then he came out again and offered 
his second sacrifice, the goat. He then returned to the 
Most Holy. 

"SITTING ON THE RIGHT HAND" A FIGURE 

The Lord came to earth and was present among men. 
He finished the work that He had to do here. Then He 
ascended and appeared in the presence of God (the antitypical 
Most Holy) to make an appropriation of His 
merit (the blood of the antitypical bullock) on our behalf. 
We read that, having finished this work, He sat down on 
the right hand of the Majesty on High, until the time 
should come when the Kingdom would be delivered over 
to Him, and His enemies would be made His footstool. 
But the words sat down do not mean that He sat down 
on a literal seat, and has remained inactive during this 
Age. The thought is that He was seated at the Father's 
right hand in the sense of being given this permanent 
position of honor, dignity. 

The Scriptures declare that at His Second Coming, 
our Lord will be seen "sitting on the right hand of power, 
and coming in the clouds of Heaven." (Matt. 26:64.) 
We understand, then, that it was in the official sense that 
He left the earth for the entire Gospel Age, giving up all 



work as a man— and all work directly for mankind, 
until the close of the Age. But He appeared to Saul, to 
enable him (as before stated) to be the twelfth Apostle, 
in order to fulfil the Scripture statements concerning 
Judas. (Psa. 109:7,8; Acts 1:15-20.) This seems to have 
been an exceptional matter; for the power of the Holy 
Spirit was to operate in the world during this Gospel Age. 
We understand that Saul of Tarsus had only a momentary 
glimpse of our Lord. 

R5409 : page 61 

GIVING COUNSEL TO ONE IN TROUBLE 

Question.— If a person in deep distress of mind should 
appeal to us for counsel, should we refuse to listen lest 
we thereby be hearing evil or evil speaking of another? 

Answer.— We should not refuse to hear one who is 
in deep distress of mind and who comes to us for counsel. 
But we should suggest to the one in trouble, Now perhaps 
there is something about this matter which might be a 
reflection upon another. Perhaps you can state the trouble 
in such a way as not to tell me the name, and without 
even describing the person, so that I would be able to 
recognize him from the description. Thus, too, I might 
be able to give unbiased advice. If we found that another 
was involved, we would inquire, Have you fulfilled 
the requirements of Matt. 18:15? Have you spoken to 
the person? 

If he answers in the affirmative, we should ask, And 
it makes no impression? And is he [or she] still continuing 
the wrong-doing? If he says that the party is 
not now continuing the wrong, but that he has made no 
apologies, then we would say, But we cannot require one 
to apologize. We can merely require him to cease from 
doing injury. You may be very thankful to the Lord 
that you have been relieved from the pressure of the trial. 

Or the person might tell us that he had taken the 
Scriptural step, and that the party still continues to do 
injury. Then we would say, Have you taken the next step 
—to take two witnesses and go to Him? If he says Yes, 
we would advise, Then just continue to the conclusion. 
You have done well thus far. If he said that he had 
taken the two witnesses and they had followed the course 
laid down in Matt. 18:15 very carefully, and that the 
injury had been stopped, we would say, Well, then, I 
would stop also. You have no authority to punish him. 
That belongs to God. 

If the brother should say that he had taken the two 
parties and had gone to the offender, and that he would 
not listen to them, and that the wrong still continues, then 
we would advise that he go to the two and ask them to 
join him in bringing the matter before the Church- 
preferably one of the two being an elder— for they should 
go primarily to the Elders. If the Elders are not such 
persons that confidence could be placed in them in such a 



matter, they are not suitable for Eldership. And the one 
who was the Elder would be the proper one to bring the 
matter before the Church. Up to this time the case should 
not be discussed outside of these two witnesses. 



THE LORD LOVETH A CHEERFUL GIVER 

Question.— "Upon the first day of the week let every 
one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, 
that there be no gathering when I come." (1 Cor. 16:2.) 
Does this injunction apply to all the Lord's people? 

Answer.— We understand that the principle applies to 
all. This is not a law, however. The Apostle did not 
make laws for the Church. He would not have had authority 
to make laws. He taught that all of the Lord's 
people are put on their own responsibility as to the use 
of the things they have sacrificed to the Lord. 

What God commands is to be esteemed, not as a 
matter of sacrifice, but of obedience. Under the Jewish 
Law, each of the Lord's people, each Natural Israelite, 
was directed to give a tithe, a tenth. If he made a hundred 
dollars a month and gave one tenth of it, it would 
be ten dollars; if he made fifty dollars a month and gave 
a tenth of it, it would be five dollars. But the fifty 
dollars, or the one hundred dollars would include all that 
he would earn each month— not the net earnings, but the 
gross earnings. 

R5409 : page 62 

If out of a hundred dollars the Israelite, after paying 
his tithe, was obliged to spend forty dollars for rent, ten 
dollars for gas, thirty dollars for food, ten dollars for 
himself and ten dollars for his wife, he would be out 
exactly ten dollars, or he would have to cut off five dollars 
from his wife's allowance and five from his own. 

But Christians are not compelled to give one tenth. 
There are some in the Bethel family, however, who are 
giving one tenth. One of the family recently gave one 
fifth out of the net. We think a principle is here involved 
—a principle of sacrifice; and that if we follow 
the Apostle's advice, we would lay by something every 
week or every month to give to some who are in real 
need, and thus exercise a spirit of benevolence, like our 
Heavenly Father, and that we may be able to have at 
least a small share in the support of the Lord's work. We 
believe that to whatever extent we have this thought 
before our minds we are likely to have a special blessing. 
"He that watereth shall be watered also himself."— 
Prov. 11:25. 



"THE RIGHTEOUSNESS WHICH IS OF FAITH" 



Question.— "But the righteousness which is of faith 
speaketh on this wise, Say not in thine heart, Who shall 
ascend into Heaven (that is, to bring Christ down from 
above), or who shall descend into the deep (that is, to 
bring up Christ again from the dead)?" (Romans 10:6,7.) 
What is meant by one's descending into the 
deep, to bring Christ from the dead, and by ascending into 
Heaven to bring Him down from Above? 

Answer.— The Apostle here means that some in his 
time were doubting and did not believe the Message that 
the Messiah had come. They might have said that Jesus 
was a wonderful man, and that He did many wonderful 
works. But they were saying, "We do not believe that 
He was the Messiah and was put to death and then rose 
again. If you are willing to say that He was only a good 
man, we can accept that assertion, and are ready to call 
ourselves Christians. But harmony with God can be attained 
only by keeping the Law." 

This, the Apostle said, is not the language of faith. 
The Christian exercises faith in the Gospel Message. He 
does not ask how any one could go to Heaven to bring 
Jesus down to earth, or how any could go down to the 
grave and bring Him up. A Christian will accept the 
facts as they are. Others are not in the attitude to believe 
God. The essential features of the Gospel are that Jesus 
came from above— that He was holy, harmless and undefiled, 
and gave Himself a Ransom-price for sinners. 
God recognized the merit of His work and raised Him 
from the dead, and He ascended on High, there to appear 
in the presence of God— first for the Church class, later 
for the world. All this the Christian accepts by faith. 



R5409 : page 62 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
PERSONAL AND CLASS RIGHTS 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

I have never thought it wise or expedient to write to you 
before, except on one occasion, and then only to express my 
love and to inform you that I had taken the Vow. I feel the 
same reluctance in writing now, lest I unwisely interfere 
with your time, but feel that it is the proper thing to do. 

For a time some of the brethren have been holding in 
their homes regular meetings which have not been arranged 
for by the Church. In some cases these meetings are conducted 
by brethren who are neither Elders nor Deacons. In 
other cases, certain Deacon brethren in their love and zeal 
found an opportunity for assisting some beginners, and after 
a time began holding regular meetings in their interest, confining 
their meetings to evenings which did not conflict with 
the regular meetings of the Church. 



These matters came before the Church and were discussed, 
resulting in the following Resolution, which was voted 
upon and carried: 

Resolved— That, while we do not question for one moment 
the good intentions, love and zeal for the Lord and the 
brethren, on the part of those who may participate, in our 

judgment, the holding of regular meetings in , apart 

from those arranged by the Church as a whole, are not to the 

spiritual benefit of the Church of , tending, amongst 

other things, to prevent amongst the whole body here, that 
full measure of fellowship which we feel so greatly in need 
of at the present time. 

Personally, I supported the Resolution when it was voted 
upon. Later, after some misgivings as to whether I had acted 
wisely, I began giving the matter much prayerful thought, 
searching through the TOWERS and the Volumes for all the 
help I could find. Eventually, I came to the conclusion that 
so far as I was concerned I had made a mistake, and had 
participated in a Resolution that to my mind has the tendency 
to interfere with the freedom and liberty of others. 

Last night at a regular business session, the matter came 
up again for discussion, the brethren interested in some of 
these meetings having addressed a letter to the Church, requesting 
the Church to appoint a chairman for their meetings. 
After three hours' discussion the matter remains unsettled. 
And now I find myself confronted with a serious problem, 
which is giving me much concern. I find myself taking the 
opposite view from the other Elders, and standing alone as 
an Elder in the position I have taken; namely, that the Resolution 
which we passed was unwise and inexpedient, having a 
tendency to destroy personal liberty, and being specially injurious 
to some of our brethren. 

The position is taken that the passing of this Resolution 
does not tend to bondage nor in any way to interfere with the 
rights of others. But to me it now appears as being in a 
measure, "an appearance of evil," which I desire to avoid, 
having in my mind this thought, that the good which might 
be accomplished by the Resolution from one standpoint, 
would be more than offset by the injury it might do from 
another viewpoint. 

I have not been and will not be contentious, but I do want 

R5410 : page 62 

to know and to do the Lord's will; and finding myself taking 
the opposite view from the other Elders and some of the 
other members of the Class, I feel greatly concerned and ask 
your advice. Taking into consideration the present and future 
interests of the Class, I feel that the matter is now too important 
to be in doubt about. I am, 
Your brother in His blessed service, J. J. B. 

OUR REPLY TO THE FOREGOING 

We have endeavored to set forth in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. VI., what we believe to be the Scriptural 



teaching covering the queries of this letter. Repeating now, 

and seeking to make the matter applicable to the case in question, 

we would say: 

Each spirit-begotten child of God, by virtue of his anointing, 
has a right to speak, to preach, to declare his Heavenly 
Father's Word and Message. The right to preach is not confined 
to bishops, nor to those upon whom they lay their hands, 
nor to Elders and Deacons chosen in the Scriptural manner 
by the stretching forth of the hands of the Ecclesia. There 
are natural limitations, of course, such as lack of ability, from 
any cause, to hold the attention of an audience. Except the 
Apostle's restriction that the sisters are not to do public 
preaching, there are none. 

With this broad view of the Divine commission, the anointing 
or authorization of the Holy Spirit, we perceive that none 
has a right to interfere with another. As Jesus said to the 
Apostle John, "Forbid him not."— Mark 9:39. 

However, while none may interfere with or bind his 
brother, we may give over some of our own liberties. Recognizing 
that God is a God of order, and that every good work 
is prospered by order, and following the instructions of our 
Lord that His followers should assemble themselves together 
as one body, we realize that in taking our places in the body, 
we lose some of our own personal independence, liberties, privileges. 
We are glad to do this, for we believe it to be the 
Lord's will, because He instructs us: "Forget not the assembling 
of yourselves together." So all who thus become 
associates, or members, in a class of Bible students thereby 
surrender individual rights. They operate as a Class, deciding 
which meetings are necessary and which are unnecessary, 
which of their number would best lead and serve the class, 
which render other service, etc. 

R5410 : page 63 

From this viewpoint, it would not be proper for brethren 
associated in a Class to start new Classes and still consider 
themselves members of the original Class. For a member of 
a Class to individually start another Class separate from anything 
provided for by his Class, would mean to ignore it, to 
break off his relationship with the older Class and would indicate 
that he would no longer in any sense of the word 
recognize himself, either as a servant of that Class, or as a 
member of it, or as a sharer in its privileges. In reassuming 
his own personal liberty he laid down his privileges as a 
member of the Class. 

Hence from this standpoint we would say, that the 
brethren and sisters who participated in the organizing of the 
new Classes evidently had only the best intentions, and quite 
probably did not consider at the time the real force and 
meaning of their action in organizing the Classes. 

It would look, too, as though the parent Class and its 
Elders and Deacons had not fully provided for all the desires 
and necessities of the Class; otherwise there would 
have been no incentive or reason for the starting of new 
Classes aside from their arrangements. A sharp look out by 



the servants of the Class should always be maintained, to see 
that the spiritual needs of the interested are supplied; and a 
sufficient number of Elders and Deacons should be chosen 
and appointed. 

While we sympathize with the sentiments of those who 
drew up the Resolution, we incline to doubt the wisdom of 
the movement. We believe that the better way for all concerned 
would be for all parties to confess their error. The 
Class and the Elders might very properly say: "We regret, 
dear brethren and sisters, that we had not such a grasp of 
the situation as would have enabled us at the time properly 
to supply the needs of the Class as respects meetings. We 
promise to do our duty more faithfully in the future." 

Those who started the new Classes would, we think, do 
well to say: "We regret, dear brethren and sisters, that we 
did not take a broad enough view of the subject and put in a 
request for the meeting, to the intent that the need might 
have been supplied through appointments by the Class." 

With such apologies and resignations, we believe the entire 
matter will adjust itself and everybody feel relieved of a 
tension, and quite probably the results will not be far different 
from what they are now, except that the new meetings 
will be under the appointment of the original Class. 



CLOSE OF THE ANTITYPICAL ATONEMENT DAY 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

Loving greetings in the dear Redeemer. Our prayers are 
daily offered for you, dear Brother, both on your own personal 
account and as the Lord's servant in this, the time of 
the Harvest. 

We have read with deep interest the various articles which 
have appeared in THE WATCH TOWER, especially those of recent 
date, re 1914 as the end of the Harvest, or more strictly 
speaking, the end of the Times of the Gentiles. We have 
seen nothing in these articles which justifies the statement of 
some of the friends that "Pastor Russell has changed his 
views respecting what may be expected in October, 1914." On 
the contrary, if we have read the articles aright, and we believe 
we have, your views are still the same. We think, however, 
that these articles express the greatest moderation 
towards any who may desire to think otherwise. 

To come to the point, or the reason for intruding this letter 
upon your valuable time, may we offer the following for your 
consideration? 

Recently, when thinking over Amos 8:9, we were impressed 
with the thought that the Lord Jesus as Lord of the Harvest 
holds in His own power the closing of the present noon-day 
favors and privileges which are ours; and further, that the 
Lord Jesus Himself will close the present Harvest work suddenly. 
This thought stimulates us to greater zeal. 

The thought later came into mind that as our Lord's 
earthly career was marked at its close by an eclipse in the 
physical heavens, the sun being darkened, perhaps the Lord 



might mark the close of Harvest privileges by a similar 
eclipse. I attach hereto a sheet taken from a 1914 Almanac. 
Please note No. III., "A Total Eclipse of the Sun, August 
21st, beginning at sunrise, visible to the northeast portion of 
the United States and Canada. Visible also to North Atlantic 
Ocean, Europe, Asia and Africa"— practically the entire 
world. 

Reference to the little "Morning Resolution" card shows 
that following this day there are just forty days left to the 
close of September. If the above surmise be true, how fitting 
it is that the last forty days of the Age should be the testing 
time of the Feet Members of the Body of Christ under the 
fiery trials already promised! Such a fact would again demonstrate 
that our God is an exact Timekeeper to a day. 

Excluding the above speculation, the year 1914 presents 
some extremely interesting chronological data, as follows: 

I. STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, VOL. 2, page 60, paragraph 
3, points out that the fourteenth of Nisan rarely falls on a 

Friday. This date, marking the Passover celebration of the 
Jews and the Memorial of Christ's death among Christians, 
falls on Friday, April 10th, this year. This enables Christians 
of practically all denominations to celebrate the same event on 
the same day, likewise the friends in Present Truth. 

II. The Jewish New Year does not come about October 
1st, as is generally the case. The attached Calendar sheet 
shows that it begins with sunset, September 20th. Ten days 
later is the marked off period, or day, for the annual Atonement 
Day of the Jews. How fitting it would be for God to 

have marked the close of the great Atonement Day of this 
Age with the anniversary of the typical Atonement Day! 

Ever praying the Lord's rich blessing upon you, and that 
the end of the way may be crowned with an abundant entrance 
into His everlasting Kingdom, I am, 

Yours in the service of our dear Redeemer, . 



HOPE BUILT ON JESUS' BLOOD AND RIGHTEOUSNESS 

OUR DEAR BROTHER IN THE LORD:- 

A number of the brothers and sisters of the Winnipeg 
Ecclesia have expressed their desire to write you, and as 
each gave expression to the thought, we decided that one 
letter would suffice, knowing that we are all partakers of the 
same grace and baptized with the same spirit; therefore our 
thoughts in this are one. 

The circumstances which have given rise to this desire 
have been many, but chief among them has been our appreciation 
of the "meat in due season," on which we have been 
feasting through the columns of THE WATCH TOWERS and 
DAWNS. Truly can we say that we thank God upon every 
remembrance of you, always making mention of you in our 
prayers to the Throne of Heavenly Grace. The fact that the 
realization of our glorious hope is now fast approaching, yea 
even at the door, has caused one and all to look to the source 
from which our first light came, and to earnestly look for 



and appreciate more. Our hearts therefore are brimming 

over with love and affection for you, also with humble gratitude 

to our Heavenly Father for the way in which he has 

used you and ourselves in this most wonderful Harvest Work. 

The time features, which have been the general trend in 
the last issues of THE TOWER, remain the same to us. With 
great distinctness do they point out to us that each must 
work out his own salvation with fear and trembling. We 
most heartily coincide with your viewpoint in the matter that 
if it is His will we should be required to wait a little 
while longer, we will still glorify Him for the privilege of 
witnessing to the world the fact that our hope is not built 
upon the close proximity of the consummation, but rather 
upon Jesus' blood and righteousness. 

Our Beloved Brother, we have taken as our slogan the 
few words you gave us— "Let brotherly love continue"— and 
we one and all find in it, not the word of man only, but 
verily the Word of God, whom we all adore. Using it as a 
touchstone to all of our diseases it works as if by magic. 

Were we to write innumerable letters we could not express 
all we wish to say, so we hope and trust that from these 
few words you may receive a little comfort and assurance 
that your short sojourn with us last Summer has borne much 
fruit, and should it be our Father's will that we may not be 
permitted to see your dear face again this side of the veil, we 
know we shall see you at the Great Assembly of the Firstborns 
in the Kingdom. 

Leaving you with that peace which is the heritage of our 
Master, and in which we all rejoice, bound by that blest tie, 

Your co-laborers in His Service, 

SIGNED BY EIGHT BROTHERS AND TWO SISTERS. 



page 63 

I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF MARCH. 
QUESTIONS FROM MANUAL ON SECOND SERIES, "STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 

Week beginning March 1 Questions 1 to 8 

" 8 " 9 to 16 

15 " 17 to 24 

22 " 25 to 31 

29 " 32 to 40 

Question Manuals on VOL. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
5c. each, or 50c. per doz., postpaid. 



page 65 
