Announcements
CHOOSING NEW WORLD LIFE
“Choose life, that you as well as your descendants may live.” (Deut. 30:19, 20, AT) Good advice, indeed! With Jehovah’s new world at hand, this opportunity of choice is before all peoples of earth. More is required than just following any religion; just being honest and sincere is not enough either. An understanding of Jehovah’s Word is necessary, coupled with a course of action demonstrating one’s obedience. Show your choice by helping spread the good news of new world life. Encourage your friends and neighbors to subscribe for this magazine that will bring them information concerning new world life. It costs only $1 for a year’s subscription of 24 copies, and three booklets are given free.
YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
The 1953 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses reports that last year more than 63 1⁄2 million hours were spent by active ministers under the direction of the Watch Tower Society in preaching the good news of God’s kingdom world-wide. The Yearbook relates many of the experiences in more than 100 lands in performing their ministry. A copy will be sent you for a contribution of only 50c. The new 1953 calendar is also ready and may be obtained for 25c each, or five or more to one address for 20c each.
1953 MEMORIAL ANNOUNCEMENT
The date for observing the Lord’s evening meal in 1953 is Monday, March 30, after 6 p.m., Standard Time. All persons dedicated to Jehovah and his service should assemble that evening, along with people of good will. True Christians are obliged to keep this Memorial. (1 Cor. 11:20-26, NW) They will gather after 6 p.m. that evening, opening the meeting with song and prayer. A talk on the meaning and importance of the Memorial will then be given, preferably by a capable dedicated and baptized brother of the anointed, if such is available. The emblems, unleavened bread and red wine, will be served at an appropriate time in the course of the meeting, and the anointed will partake of them. Following the Memorial appropriate service announcements may be made, a song sung and the meeting closed with prayer. A report of the total number in attendance at each gathering, and the number partaking of the emblems, should be made to the Society.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 15: Deliverance to a Righteous World, ¶1-23.
Week of March 22: Deliverance to a Righteous World, ¶24-28; also, Saved from Wrath to Come.

