Choosing New World Life
FULFILLMENT of Bible prophecy indicates that we are living at the threshold of God’s new world. That new world, God’s Word assures us, will be a world of righteousness, peace and joy, a world of soundness of mind and body; a world in which all mankind will be united in the worship of Jehovah.—Isa. 26:9; Mal. 1:11; Matt. 24:32-34; Rev. 21:4, NW.
By gospel-preaching people in all nations are given the opportunity to choose life in God’s new world. Moses said: “I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that I have set before thee life and death, the blessing and the curse: therefore choose life, that thou mayest live.”—Deut. 30:19, AS.a
Choosing new world life requires, however, more than merely saying that we do in so many words. Just as by our actions, by eating, drinking, sleeping and working, by meeting the requirements of our bodies, we show that we choose to live now, so by our actions, by meeting Jehovah’s requirements, we must show that we choose life in God’s new world.
Some hold that showing neighbor love is all that God requires of them. But such entirely overlook the fact that in summing up God’s law Jesus Christ placed loving Jehovah God with all our heart, mind, soul and strength, first. He told the rich young ruler not only to give to the poor but also to be his follower. Jesus came to earth for the purpose of giving a witness to the truth.—Matt. 19:16-22; Mark 12:29-31; John 18:37, NW.
Neither will sincerity alone meet God’s requirements for life in his new world; otherwise he would not have given us his Word, the Bible, and commanded that we study it. It is the truth, not sincerity, that sets us free. “What man thinks a right course, may end upon the road to death.” Of the Israelites God said: “My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge.” To content ourselves with what we think is right is putting our will above that of God, and that is idolatry.—1 Sam. 15:22, 23; Prov. 14:12, Mo; Hos. 4:6; John 8:32; 2 Tim. 2:15, NW.
Nor will just any religion do. We must build the right works on the right foundation, otherwise Jesus will say to us: “I never knew you at all. Get away from me, you workers of lawlessness.” Every plant not planted by Jehovah God will be uprooted by him. If we blindly follow blind religious leaders we also shall end up in the pit of destruction.—Matt. 7:21-27; 15:12-14; 1 Cor. 3:10-13, NW.
We show that we choose the new world life by studying God’s Word and gaining a knowledge of the Kingdom and the new world so near at hand. We also show it by telling others about the new world so that they also may choose life in it. Such may be hard work and entail persecution, but what of that? We work hard to sustain life in this old world, do we not? Life in the new world is so much better.
[Footnotes]
For details, see The Watchtower, March 15, 1952.

