R1142:page 1 

VOL. X. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1889. 

NO. 11. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

DOMESTIC, -Fifty cents a year, in advance, by Draft, P.O. 
Money Order, or Registered letter. 

FOREIGN,-Two shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal 
Money Order. 

TO POOR SAINTS. 

This paper will be sent free to the interested of the Lord's poor, 
who will send a card yearly requesting it. "Ho, every one that 
thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, 
come ye, buy and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price. " And you who have it- "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor 
for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently— and eat ye that 
which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." - 
ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 



When ordering MILLENNIAL DAWN, always say which 
volume is wanted. 



NOTICE the special terms on Old Theology Tracts to Children- 
Colporteurs on page 8. Others are not expected to take 
advantage of these terms, except such as may get the tracts with 
the intention of employing children. We would like to have all 
the earnest ones of our readers on the OLD THEOLOGY list, 
for at least five numbers each quarter. You can certainly use 
these, with friends, in letters, etc. The regular rates quoted (page 
8) are certainly liberal, even for those who have no money. 



R1142:page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

How few there are who put together and see the relationship of 
those three statements of the prophet Daniel: (1) "Many shall 
run to and fro" [referring to the general and rapid 
intercommunion between the people of earth]; and (2) 
"Knowledge shall be increased" [the direct consequence of the 
intermixture of various peoples and their various ideas]; and (3) 
"There shall be a time of trouble such as was not since there was 
a nation. " 

Many who can see that the great and general increase of 
knowledge, of our day, is the result of the interchange of thought 
among the people-by means of printing, railroads, telegraphs, 
etc., etc.— fail to see that this very increase of knowledge is not 
producing happiness and contentment, but that, on the contrary, 
it is producing discontent and unhappiness; and this 
increasingly, as the knowledge increases; so that ere long it will 
lead to a fratricidal strife, and in general to just what the prophet 
has foretold— "a time of trouble such as was not since there was 
a nation. " 

It can not be denied that the grandfathers of the present 
generation, with a less degree of general intelligence than their 
children of to-day, with fewer of the comforts, conveniences and 
luxuries, were much more contented, and hence really much 
happier, than their children who possess these favors which are 
the results of increased knowledge. Shall we conclude, then, that 
knowledge is an injurious thing, and not a blessing? 

The Negroes of the South were probably happier fifty years ago, 
in slavery, than they now are; and though now possessed of 
many more privileges than were ever before accorded them, yet 
the reports are that a race war, between blacks and whites, is to 
be feared. It was an increase of knowledge that led public 



sentiment to a repudiation of human slavery and that 
emancipated the slaves; and it is a fuller knowledge of his rights 
as a man, under the law of God, and as a citizen, under the 
Constitution of these United States, that is stirring within the 
hearts of the Negroes a desire for more and more, until they 
shall feel satisfied that they have their full proportion of the 
rights, privileges and common blessings of our day. 

Is knowledge an evil thing, an injury to society, then, we again 
ask? 

Many would answer, "Yes, it is an evil thing: the lower classes 
of society would be wholly ungovernable, if all class- 
distinctions were obliterated, if they were not under the 
wholesome restraints at present exercised by society, which is 
well supported by the nominal church, which in turn is well 
upheld by the most intelligent, influential and most wealthy 
element of society. If the priestcraft and superstitions of the dark 
ages are vanishing before the greater intelligence of the 
nineteenth century, something must be found as a substitute 
therefor, else we shall lose the control of society; the masses 
will become so independent and dictatorial that we will be 
hindered from carrying on our governmental and business plans, 
which, while they have accrued to our own 

R1143 :pagel 

interest, specially and chiefly, were really better for the masses 
too, as evidenced by the growth of their ambition and discontent 
as their knowledge and privileges are increased. 'Let us put on 
the brakes ! Let us stop the spread of knowledge or it will wreck 
our social fabric!'" 

And to this expression the Papacy would breathe a fervent 
(though inaudible) "Amen!" and reflect upon its glorious career 
in the dark ages when priestcraft and superstition held full sway, 
and the pope was owned to be "another god on earth." And 
many nominally Protestants, some of them earnest, intelligent 
persons, would take a similar view, except that they would like 
to preserve the intelligence and liberty of the educated and 
wealthy, remembering with dread the time when Papacy held 
such control that even their classes dared scarcely to think, let 
alone to act or speak. 

Our answer to the question is, The fault lies in the imperfection 
of the social fabric and not with the increasing knowledge which 
threatens to wreck it. True, a knowledge that is only partial may 
for a while work more harm than good; for as some one has 
said- 

A little knowledge is a dangerous thing; 
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring. 

It would be better for all concerned, if full, absolute knowledge 
were general; all would then be more quickly adjusted, no 



doubt; the struggle would be shorter and sharper, and a new 
arrangement of human affairs, a new social fabric, suited to the 
increased knowledge and recognizing every individual's rights 
to the fullest extent, would supersede the present order. But this 
is not possible: knowledge must come gradually and 
individually; God's "due time" has come for knowledge to be 
increased, but he will not bring it about miraculously but by 
natural means, such as the "running to and fro" of men and 
ideas. God's method will not only bring about the great time of 
trouble predicted, but it will also give mankind a valuable and 
lasting lesson on justice, which will enable each, thereafter, to 
look fairly upon another's rights as well as his own, when their 
interests differ. 

The result of God's method of introducing knowledge will be 
that the old social fabric in the hands of the small class of 
favored ones -intellectually, financially and politically-will 
endeavor to remain, to continue itself upon the old lines and 
principles;-merely stretching itself a little more to 
accommodate itself to the increasing pressure from expanding 
ideas of the people in general. Yet all the while, its general 
structure prevents its expansion much beyond its present limits, 
and each increase of pressure from within adds to the strain 
upon both the people and the present social structure. The 
present liberty and privilege and share of earth's blessings 
accorded to mankind in general would have been grand and 
benevolent beyond appreciation in the "dark ages," but now it 
fetters and frets the masses, because knowledge has increased; 
and they will continue to fret and strike and plot until in 
everything they have their full share of all blessings, comforts, 
privileges, advantages and liberties as men; as common heirs of 
the world and its natural advantages. In this the masses respond 
to the principle of selfishness; even as the upper class of society, 
actuated by a similar selfishness, seeks not only to hold present 
wealth (which is at least an excusable weakness,) but also to 
perpetuate the present social structure which so greatly favors 
the already favored class. 

It is the new wine in the old wine-skins (Matt. 9:17) over again: 
it is the new principles, of justice and equality among men, the 
principles which must prevail during the Millennial age, that are 
now stretching the old system of things and which ultimately 
will burst and destroy the present social order in a period of 
troubles, disaster and anarchy. What lessons both parties will 
learn, regarding each other's worth and rights in that dark day! 
Thank God, his children are also advised by his Word of the 
glorious Day to follow, in which society shall be reorganized 
(the "new earth") under the blessed influence of the Lord and the 
glorified Church (the "new heavens"), upon a basis of fullest 
justice to all,— under the gracious provisions of the New 
Covenant. 



Many conscientious and even benevolent minds fail to see 
wherein the present social structure is unfair, or wherein it 
grants greater privileges to one than to another; and in 
amazement they inquire: "Do you mean to suggest that all who, 
by careful, prudent living, by industry and temperance in all 
things, have accumulated a few hundred or a few thousand 
dollars for their old age, that they may not be chargeable to any, 
should divide this product of industry and frugality with others 
who have been too indolent to work, or who have wasted their 
earnings in a wild, profligate course, and who would soon waste 
also the accumulations of others to their own injury?" 

No; such a view is held by few— by very few, if any, even among 
the reckless, professed anarchists. It is too much the case that 
people who are being actually pinched by want, and who have a 
little money laid aside for old age or "a rainy day," feel that their 
interests lie across the path of any social reorganization; and 
such too often dismiss all suggestions that the present social 
structure is imperfect and could be improved upon for the 
general good- for the benefit of the poorer class-without doing 
any injustice to the wealthier class; without interfering with a 
single one of their rights or a single dollar they already possess. 
Although, we confess, such a just and equitable re-adjustment of 
the laws would make it less possible for a few to become 
suddenly very wealthy, or others equally industrious and sober 
and careful to become miserably poor. 

But our overly-conservative friend further inquires: "Is not the 
present social arrangement a necessity? What would the 
miserably poor do if it were not for the benevolence of the rich? 
How could railroads and large manufacturing establishments be 
built and conducted were it not for the immensely wealthy 
class?" 

We answer: There are plenty of people who have sufficient 
intelligence to conduct 

R1143 : page 2 

large manufactories, railroading, etc. Our United States 
Government is a practical illustration of the principle; and the 
Postoffice department is another. Where private interest and 
competition alone control, selfishness is sure to prevail. And the 
result must be to reduce labor to the lowest point and keep it 
there; and to produce combinations and trusts, to offset 
competition and add thereby to the wealth and influence of those 
who have capital, and to keep at the foot of the ladder those who 
have none. Nor would a reconstruction in this line imply the 
same reward for unskilled, uneducated labor as for skill and 
education: we have this also illustrated in the Government and 
in the Postoffice, where various salaries are paid according to 
proficiency and ability, but where selfishness and greed can 



reduce none to starvation wages, or unhealthy conditions, or 
oppressive over-work. 

That something is radically wrong with society as at present 
organized all must admit. It was probably at one time as good an 
arrangement as could have been made, and doubtless served a 
good purpose; but its usefulness has been outgrown with the 
general increase of knowledge. And instead of endeavoring to 
curb knowledge, in order that people may be happy and 
contented under the old conditions, we should increase the 
knowledge and change the social conditions to correspond. 

Look, for instance, at the great London strike; in which the 
laborers about the docks and wharfs are seeking to improve their 
condition, just a little. Note the reply of the managers of the 
Docking Company: that, though the advance asked was not very 
large for each laborer, yet, there being so large a number of 
them, it would mean a large sum of money in the aggregate, 
equaling the interest on a very large sum. If the small increase of 
salary to each man were granted, it would reduce the dividends 
of the Dock Company, and thus depreciate their property. But 
who or what is this Dock Company? It is a corporation which, 
by investing capital in building docks for shipping, in the port of 
London, long since gained a monopoly of the suitable water- 
front of the city, and which doubtless long since repaid to the 
investors the original investment with good interest and has 
probably "watered" its stock several times, but still maintains its 
hold upon its franchises; and which long ago ground down its 
laborers, who are of the poorest class of London's poor, to as 
little as would enable them barely to live, in order that its 
managers could return larger and larger dividends to the share- 
holders. And now, notwithstanding the increase of general 
blessings, conveniences and knowledge, the managers and 
stockholders would selfishly reap all the benefits, and would 
deny the poor laborers any. And their fear is not only for the 
present increase demanded, but for the future. They know that 
even at the advance the laborers are not sufficiently paid, and 
they fear another and another demand. "Give them an inch and 
they will want an ell" is the saying, and it is true; and inch by 
inch it must be given, until they get all that their labor and skill 
honestly entitle them to, which is not less than an economical 
but a comfortable living. 

Around those very docks of London charitable people have for 
years kept up cheap restaurants, and coffee and lunch wagons, 
from which many of these poor were supplied with one or two 
meals per day at much less than the cost of the food —one cent 
for a bowl of soup and one cent for a tin of pudding. These 
charitable arrangements speak loudly of sympathizing hearts 
who helped supply the additional cost, as well as of those of the 

R1144:page2 



attendants who take turns in giving their time to the benevolent 
work of serving these stalls, wagons, etc. Doubtless some who 
hold stock in the Dock Company, and who draw their dividends, 
use a portion in this or in some other "sweet charity," and thus 
show the noble side of their hearts. But, such should realize that 
the proper thing to do is, to so right and reconstruct society and 
its laws that such men as are industrious should be enabled to 
work, and that at such a moderate compensation as would enable 
them to have enough to eat without appealing to charity. There 
will be much less need for "sweet charity" (though still plenty of 
room for it) when sweet justice comes to be rightly seen and 
practiced. 

In this land, though justice is not yet quite even-handed, and 
though the laws have not yet been fully arranged to thwart 
monopolies and trusts, there is certainly much less room for 
complaint of injustice as well as much less opportunity for 
charity. It is in the old world that the greatest changes must be 
expected. Nor is it in England alone, or even specially, that the 
foretold "trouble" is brewing, as a result of growing intelligence 
and the effort of the masses to secure a fuller share of the 
bounties and blessings of our day: our readers saw recently in 
the secular press accounts of the greatest strike of coal-miners 
ever known in Germany. So intense was the feeling, and so 
widespread the strike, that a revolution was feared, if the poorer 
classes got to see their strength, and the Emperor of Germany 
condescended to assist in compromising the difficulty. The 
following, clipped from the New York Tribune, gives a picture 
of the condition of things in another part of Europe:— 

"Standing in one of the ante-rooms leading to the office of the 
Mayor of the city of Amsterdam on a January morning four 
years ago, a spectacle was presented which seems to an 
American citizen a proof that the Millennium has not yet 
arrived. The previous afternoon a meeting of the unemployed 
laboring men had been held in Vondel's Park, and the crowd was 
so immense that the city authorities became alarmed with the 
thought that a bread riot might take place at the close of the 
meeting, so the Burgomeester issued a proclamation informing 
the people that his office would be open for audience on the 
following day. Never before in the history of that city had an 
interview of the working-men with the Chief Magistrate been 
allowed; a certain proof of the somber political atmosphere 
overhanging Amsterdam. The City Hall was overflowing with a 
crowd of pale, emaciated- looking men, holding in their hands 
certificates signed by the Prefects of Police that the bearer was 
actually in sore need of bread. According to the official list, 
signed by the Mayor's secretary, 2,243 certificates of this 
description were handed in that day. "The streets leading to the 
City Hall were crowded with women and children, and when at 
4 o'clock in the afternoon the city fathers gave orders to 
distribute 1,500 loaves of bread, the scenes enacted defy 



description. Men and women fought like ravenous beasts to 
obtain a loaf of bread, and in fifteen minutes the supply was 
exhausted. In the Leydsche Straat, an American lady inquired 
the cause of the multitude of men, women and children rushing 
as if demented toward a common center of the city. Being 
informed that the amount of bread given out at the City Hall had 
not half supplied the hungry ones, she entered a bake shop and 
bought out the stock on hand. Seven hundred and three loaves of 
bread were passed out the door to the people, who by their 
instant sampling of the gift, proved that dry bread was an 
absolute necessity to them. 

"The city press in general deplored the situation of affairs, but 
being under the strict surveillance of the Government, were very 
careful to express their thoughts in guarded language. It was 
stated that a woman with three little children was found in a 
small room actually starved to death, her husband being unable 
to procure bread by labor and being too proud to beg for his 
dying family. Below this statement in the same newspaper 
column was a notice that the Foreign Missionary Society at their 
meeting the night previous had raised 25,000 gulden ($10,000) 
to supply the foreign field. To give the starving workmen of 
Amsterdam something to do seemed not so necessary as to 
supply the inhabitants of Africa with Bibles and missionaries, 
and yet Americans wonder that European workmen become 
socialists." 



How often the generous and the selfish elements of fallen men 
are thus displayed side by side. The $10,000 raised for the 
heathen, to help keep some of them, as the donors doubtless 
supposed, out of an eternity of torment, speak of a sympathy 
which we must commend; while the hungry thousands at their 
own doors speak of unjust social regulations and laws, and of a 
selfishness on the part of the wealthy class which, seeing this, 
refuses or neglects to rectify those laws, lest its own march to 
greater wealth and perhaps further subscriptions for foreign 
missions should be interfered with. 

In our next issue we may point out briefly some of the defects of 
present social laws and customs, but suffice it now that we have 
pointed out that the trouble now gathering, described by Daniel 
as "a time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation, " 
is coming just as he, under divine guidance, foretold— as the 
result of interchange among men and the consequent increase of 
knowledge, as we are now witnessing it on every hand. 

Just a word of exhortation: To the few brethren who have 
means, and to all according to ability, we would say— Remember 
first of all to practice justice in all your conduct; then be as 
charitable as the Master's funds in your hands will in your 
judgment permit of. Remember that you are merely a steward 



and are to handle the Lord's money according to his will as 
nearly as you can know it. The poorer brethren we exhort to 
peace, patience and charity. This conflict is not one in which the 
saints are to take part: it is the world's part in the "Battle of the 
Great Day. " Our part in the conflict is to uphold God's Word, 
truth against error; and we will have plenty to do in our own 
quarter, if faithful. Even if you feel that you are being unjustly 
dealt with, do the best you can, but live peaceably. The Lord 
will avenge any wrongs you may suffer, so far as that part is 
concerned; and in any case we can look with a great deal of 
sympathy upon the selfish, remembering and pitying their fallen 
condition and rejoicing that the grand time of righteousness and 
restitution is nigh, even at the doors. 



page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

New York. 

MY DEAR FRIEND:-I enclose $1.00 on my account. Please 
send me about 5 each of the July and August Towers. I am glad 
that you are showing from historical data the course of 
corruption of the doctrine of the church. That, however, is but 
one of many good things found in the August TOWER. 

Some of my remarks in prayer meeting have recently aroused 
opposition and one zealous brother wants me prevented from 
speaking. Another to whom I lent DAWN tells another that it is 
a dangerous book, and I guess it is, to some bad doctrines. This 
fearful saint is a deacon and not long ago he called on and asked 
me to accept a nomination for elder. He was horrified to learn 
that I was not a member of their church and more so to learn the 
reasons. Well, I hope to accomplish something; else, why am I 
here? I have a few sympathetic hearers. I have been privately 
considering the calling together of such as will come to study 
the Bible some weekday evening, a non-sectarian Bible class. 
Am in some doubt how best to do it, but hope to reach the result 
some way. 

In haste, Yours very truly, J. A. S. 

Grant Co., Ind. 

C. T. RUSSELL-DEAR BROTHER:- Judging you and others 
by myself, I thought I would offer a few words of cheer. Bros. 
Leigh and Deming, willing servants, stayed with us, some time 
ago, from Saturday till Monday. We spent the time pleasantly in 
discussing, for the most part, the objections the nominal church 
brings against us. We again met in Marion and spent a few hours 
together, very pleasantly. These noble Christians are, indeed, 



making a "willing sacrifice" of all. They need encouragement. I 
received a postal by last mail, stating they were suffering from 
malaria, but after two days rest, went to Hartford to canvass that 
city. I want to write to them and have them come home and stay 
until they recuperate. How pleasant it is to be with these dear 
brethren. I want to tell you, we do not feel so lonesome now, as 
we felt a year ago. There is a rift in the dark cloud, and the sun 
is shining in; others are seeing the light, and as Bro. Leigh says, 
we have a plan, and notwithstanding it is so broad, it is entirely 
protected by God's Word. 

Others are beginning to see this plan, which is so simple and so 
plain, and so harmonious with the Bible and the character of a 
great and good God; and the best of all, as soon as they begin to 
see its unfolding, they thirst for more and want others to come to 
the fountain and into harmony with the truth. 

Mrs. M. joins me in Christian love to you and yours. 

G. P. M. 

London, England. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-With thankfulness for the great 
blessing the TOWER has been in the past, we again renew our 
subscription, still rejoicing in its teachings as meat in due 
season. We rejoice that we have been freed from Babylon by the 
truth and can now look with wonder and admiration at Jehovah's 
plan. DAWN, Vol. II., with its time proofs, is a marvel of beauty 
and clearness, setting the time proofs so clear before all who 
will patiently search for truth. 

The truth is finding a few over here and spreading, we trust, 
though quietly and slowly. We are able to sell a few DAWNS, 
from time to time, and think if we can get some old theology 
tracts and Arps well circulated, others may begin to inquire. 
Yours in love and service, 

S. A. H 

Lamar, Ark. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have received all the mail you 
sent; for which I return thanks. The truth has been such a 
blessing to me, I do not see how I could have made out without 
it. I was glad to get Vol. II. I wish I could express my feelings; I 
read and learn and rejoice, thanking the Lord for the blessed 
truths. I have read it through three times and began a fourth. I 
then got my Vol. I. home, which had been out on a mission, and 
I gave it another careful reading. 

Yours in Christian love, 

M. T. 

page 7 

[LETTERS CONTINUED.] 



Belvidere, Ills. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose a list of orders for 
DAWN, Vol. I., with Postal Note for the amount of the 
memorandum. I have had much traveling to do lately in my 
Insurance business, more than I like; there is danger I fear of 
being overcharged; I must try to cut off some. And yet, though I 
have not had much time for meditation and study of the Word or 
for dispensing the truth to others, and therefore feel more lean, I 
am glad that it has not come from any loss of appetite or relish 
for the spiritual food or 

page 8 

service, for I am very hungry and anxious for opportunities and 
must make them. 

My Son Paul (now a Brother in Christ, you will be glad to 
learn), though only in his thirteenth year, gives good evidence of 
full consecration; he has made a start at the colporteur work of 
selling DAWN, Vol. I., and has had sufficient success to warrant 
the sending of my last order of 100 copies, which were for his 
use. 

I enclose the subscription of a minister, Rev. S . He 

sat down in the car seat with me to-day, and I gave him the Old 
Theology- Wages of Sin. After he had read it nearly through, he 
turned on me and said he thought I had better stop giving such 
stuff out. He asked me, if I had ever saved anybody with it. I 
asked him in return, if he had ever saved any one with his God- 
dishonoring errors about eternal torment. I told him all we knew 
of the future was contained in the Book, and defied him to name 
a single passage proving his doctrine. Then he hedged by 
saying, It is best to be on the "safe" side. This of course was 
easily answered by saying that it is best to teach the truth as we 
find it in God's Word, and it is not good policy to try to improve 
upon God's theology. Our talk was very brief, much less than 
five minutes, but much to my surprise he promised to read 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

W. M. WRIGHT. 

Mears, Mich. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Second Volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, cloth bound, was safely received, and for the past few 
weeks I have been feasting myself with its contents. I have 
always opposed the fixing of a particular time for the setting up 
and establishing of the Redeemer's Kingdom; but your data so 
plainly established from what has hitherto been held to be 
hidden and obscure and at the same time so much in harmony 
with itself and the truth now shining so clearly, compel me to 
accept it. And in accepting it I find myself both cheered and 
comforted, as I realize the time is so near. 



My health is too poor to permit me to travel, but I do all I can to 
spread the truth in my limited sphere. May the Lord richly bless 
you and crown your labor with abundant success is the prayer of 
yours in the faith and service of the gospel. 

T. B . 

Grand Rapids, Mich. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I will tell you briefly of my 
efforts here. Have been here two weeks and have been working 
in the business part of the city nearly all the time. I have sold 
300 DAWNS-nearly half of them being Vol. H When here two 
years ago, I sold only about 35 in the business part of the city. 
The increase, I think, is owing somewhat to the interest formed 
by hearing of the book; but perhaps more directly by a better 
presentation of its merits. It requires considerable tact, 
earnestness and experience to interest business men in a 
religious work. Though if once interested the influence is apt to 
be good, as they are generally at the head of practical and 
representative families. 

The principal object now, I think, is to find the "sheep" and 
minister unto them; but in doing this, we can do good unto all, 
as we have opportunity. I have not yet decided whether it will be 
well to canvass the whole city again now. If the exceedingly 
warm weather continues it will perhaps be better to work in 
smaller towns for a while. 

It is interesting to note the way in which the truth and harmony 
brought out in DAWN is being circulated and found out. Being 
good tidings, they who find it go and tell their own brother, 
sister or friend. These likewise go and tell others, even as it was 
when the Savior was first discovered among men. And how 
blessed are they who are permitted to publish these things ! 

I greatly enjoyed the "View" in last TOWER. Truly, the Elisha 
class will be more numerous than that of the Elijah. And though 
the former class will be highly favored, I am striving and hoping 
to be one of the overcomers. In considering the subject I have 
been interested in trying to trace the import and typical meaning 
of 2 Kings 2:10— where we read "If thou see me taken from thee; 
but if not, it shall not be so. " Will it be that the Elisha class will 
need to know, or see, when the Elijah class is taken from them 
in order that they may inherit a "double" portion of the spirit? 
[This would seem to teach that it will be only such as keep in 
fellowship with the Elijah class, such, therefore, as will know 
them and realize that they are being exalted, who will constitute 
the Elisha class and be inspired to fresh zeal and redoubled 
earnestness in the service of the truth from a realization of the 
facts.-EDITOR.] 

With Christian love to you and Sister R. and others of them that 
are His, I remain, Yours in service, S. D. ROGERS. 



Indianapolis. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I enclose now $20 of which $5 is to 
be credited to my DAWN account and the other $15 is to be 
used to send Food and "Hail" to our dear Bro. H. I enclose his 
letter and order which of course you can fill much better and 
less expensively to him than I could. 

The return home to-day from my week's labors found all well, 
and I rejoice and praise the Lord for results. The whole week 
was a triumphal march of Immanuel's banner and cause against 
the hosts of sin, ignorance, superstition and unbelief. 

I told you that they had asked me to return to I., and give them 
another address on my way back home. I did so, and found that 
the interested ones had been unable to secure a church and had 
hired a hall and paid my board and all expense for the second 
discourse. I sold all my books and more, having to mail some 
back to-day. This morning I found them hanging on me still to 
have Scripture explained and I again preached to them from 7 
A.M. till train time at 10 A.M. I spoke three times on the trip, 
twice at great disadvantage, but my voice held out and grew 
stronger and my mouth was full of the high praises of our God. 

With kindest regards and remembrance joined by Sr. A. to you 
and Sr. Russell. In Christ the Lord, 

J. B. ADAMSON. 



R1144:page3 



YIELD NOT TO FEAR. 

Poor, fainting spirit, still hold on thy way- 

The day is near! 

True, thou art weary; but yon brighter ray 

Becomes more clear. 

Bear up a little longer; wait for rest; 

Yield not to slumber, though with toil oppressed. 

"The coming night is mournful, but look on— 

The dawn is here! 

Soon will earth's shadowy scenes and gloom be gone; 

Yield not to fear: 

The mountain's summit will ere long be gained, 

And thy bright hopes with joy and peace attained. 

'Joyful through hope!' thy motto still must be- 

The dawn is here! 

What glories will that dawn unfold to thee! 

Be of good cheer! 

Gird up thy loins; bind sandals on thy feet: 

The way is short, though rough; the end is sweet. " 



R620 : page 3 



A little while, our fightings shall be over; 
A little while, our tears be wiped away; 
A little while, the power of Jehovah 
Shall turn our darkness into gladsome day. 

A little while, the fears that oft surround us 
Shall to the memories of the past belong; 
A little while, the love that sought and found us 
Shall change our weeping into heaven's glad song. 

A little while! Tis ever drawing nearer- 
The brighter dawning of that glorious day. 
Blest Savior, make our spirits' vision clearer, 
And guide, O guide us in the shining way. 

page 3 

A little while, O blessed expectation! 
For strength to run with patience, Lord, we cry, 
Our hearts up leap in fond anticipation; 
Our union with the Bridegroom draweth nigh. " 



R1144:page3 

THE AUTHORSHIP AND 
CREDIBILITY OF THE BIBLE. 

While the Bible is generally accepted by Christian people as of 
divine authority, comparatively few are able to clearly state just 
why they so esteem it. The internal evidence of its truthfulness, 
and its grandeur of doctrine, are the principal evidences on 
which its testimony is, and should be, generally received; and 
truly these are strong, and convincing of its divine authorship 
and authority; yet the man of God who would be thoroughly 
furnished with the truth, and armed against every attack of 
skepticism, should endeavor to know all he can of the time, 
manner, circumstances, etc., under which it was written; 
whether it has been preserved free from corruption; and whether 
in its present condition it is worthy of full confidence. Let us, 
therefore, briefly consider what testimony we have to the 
credibility of the Sacred Writings. 

From numerous expressions, references and quotations in the 
New Testament by our Lord and the apostles it is evident 

R1145 : page 3 

that a certain body of writings was at that time considered to be 
of divine authority. The Sacred Scriptures then in existence are 
now characterized as the Old Testament Scriptures (the 



Scriptures of the Old or Law Covenant), while that which was 
added by our Lord and the apostles is termed the New 
Testament (the New Covenant) Scriptures. 

No other book which the world has ever known has such a 
history as the Bible. Its origin and authorship, its antiquity, its 
wonderful preservation in the midst of the unparalleled and 
continuous opposition which sought to destroy it, as well as its 
diversity and teaching, make the Bible the most wonderful book 
in existence. 

It is a collection composed of sixty-six separate books, written 
by about forty different writers, living centuries apart, speaking 
different languages, subjects of different governments, and 
brought up under different civilizations. Over 1500 years 
elapsed between the writings of Moses and of John. 

As no other reliable history dates so far back as the Bible, we 
are obliged to look mainly to its own internal evidence, as to its 
origin, authorship, and the reason for its existence, and indeed 
for its credibility in every respect; and further, we should look 
for such corroboration of its statements as reason, its own 
harmony with itself, and with other known facts, and subsequent 
developments furnish. And indeed this is the evidence of 
reliability on which all history must rest. To such evidence we 
are indebted for all our knowledge of past events and of all 
present events as well, except such as come under our own 
immediate observation. He who would cast away Bible history 
as unworthy of credence, must on the same ground reject all 
history; and to be entirely consistent, must believe nothing 
which does not come under his own personal observation. 

If its statements, thoroughly understood, are contradictory, or 
are colored by prejudice, or are proven untrue by a positive 
scientific knowledge, or if subsequent developments prove its 
predictions untrue, and thereby show the ignorance or 
dishonesty of the authors of the Bible, then we may reasonably 
conclude that the entire book is unworthy of confidence, and 
should reject it. But if, on the contrary, we find that a thorough 
understanding of the Bible, according to its own rules of 
interpretation, shows its statements to be in harmony with each 
other; if it bears no evidence of prejudicial coloring; if many of 
its prophecies have actually come true, and others admit of 
future fulfilment; if the integrity of its writers is manifested by 
unvarnished records, then we have reason to believe the book. 
Its entire testimony, historic, prophetic, and doctrinal, stands or 
falls together. Science is yet in its infancy, yet in so far as 
positive scientific knowledge has been attained, it should and 
does corroborate the Bible testimony. 



INTERNAL EVIDENCES. 

Those who will make a study of the Bible plan will be fully 
convinced of the conclusive evidence of the credibility of the 
Sacred Scriptures, which is furnished in the purity, harmony and 
grandeur of its teachings. Outside of the Scriptures we have 
nowhere to look for an account of the circumstances and 
motives of the earliest writers: but they furnish these items of 
information themselves, and their integrity and evident 
truthfulness in other matters is a sufficient guarantee of 
truthfulness in these. 

Our first definite information with reference to the Sacred 
Writings is afforded by the direction given to Moses to write the 
law and history in a book, and put it in the side of the ark for 
preservation. (See Exod. 17:14; 34:27; Deut. 31:9-26.) This 
book was left for the guidance of the people. Additions were 
made to it from time to time by subsequent writers, and in the 
days of the kings, scribes appear to have been appointed whose 
business it was to keep a careful record of the important events 
occurring in Jewish history, which records-Samuel, Kings, 
Chronicles -were preserved and subsequently incorporated with 
the Law. The prophets also did not confine themselves to oral 
teaching, but wrote and in some cases had scribes to record their 
teachings. (See, Josh. 1:8; 24:26; 1 Sam. 10:25; 1 Chron. 27:32; 
29:29,30; 2 Chron. 33:18,19; Isa. 30:8; Jer. 30:2; 36:2; 45:1; 
5 1 :60.) As a result we have the Old Testament Scriptures, 
composed of history, prophecy and law, written by divine 
direction, as these citations and also Paul's testimony (2 Tim. 
3:15,16) prove. These writings collectively were termed "The 
Law and The Prophets," and the Hebrews were taught of God to 
esteem them of divine authority and authorship, the writers 
being merely the agents through whom they received them. 
They were so taught to esteem them, by the miraculous dealings 
of God with them as a people, in confirmation of his words to 
them through the prophets, thus endorsing them as his agents 
(See, Exod. 14:30,31; 19:9; 1 Kings 18:21,27,30,36,39); and 
further by the establishment and enforcement of the law as 
proclaimed and recorded by Moses. 

The political interests and the religious veneration of the 
Israelites, under God's immediate overruling and protection, 
combined to preserve and protect these writings from 
contamination. Religiously, they were rightfully regarded with 
the deepest veneration, while politically they were the only 
guarantee which the people possessed against despotism. The 
Jewish copyists regarded these documents with great veneration. 
A very slight error in copying often led them to destroy it and 
begin anew. Josephus says that through all the ages that had 
passed none had ventured to add to, take away from, or 
transpose, aught of the Sacred Writings. 



In the degeneracy of the Jewish nation, under the idolatrous 
administration of the successors of Rehoboam, these Sacred 
Writings fell into disuse and were almost forgotten, though they 
seem never to have been taken from their place. In the 
reformation conducted by Josiah, they were again brought to 
light. Again, in the Babylonish captivity this book was lost sight 
of by the Israelites, though it appears that they were accustomed 
to meet together in little companies in Babylon to be instructed 
by the scribes, who either taught the Law from memory or from 
copies in their possession. On the restoration of the Jews to 
Jerusalem, the Scriptures were again brought out, and Ezra and 
his companions read the law to the people, commenting upon 
and explaining it. (Neh 8:1-8.) This public reading of the 
Scriptures was the only means of keeping them before the 
people, as printing was yet unknown and the cost of a 
manuscript copy was beyond the reach of the people, very few 
of whom could read. At the time of our Lord's first advent, these 
O.T. Scriptures existed substantially as we have them to-day, as 
to matter and arrangement. 

One of the strongest evidences of the authenticity of the O.T. 
Scriptures is found in the fact that the law and the prophets were 
continually referred to by our Lord and the apostles as authority, 
and that while the Lord denounced the corruptions of the Jewish 
Church, and their traditions, by which they made void the Word 
of God, he did not even intimate any corruption in these Sacred 
Writings, but commends them, and refers to and quotes them in 
proof of his claims. 

In fact, the various parts of the entire book are bound together 
by the mutual endorsement of the various writers, so that to 
reject one is to mar the completeness of the whole. Each book 
bears its own witness and stands on its own evidence of 
credibility, and yet each book is linked with all the rest, both by 
their common spirit and harmony and by their mutual 
endorsement. Mark, for instance, the endorsement of the account 
of creation in the commandment of the law concerning the 
Sabbath day.-Exod. 20:11. Also compare Deut. 23:4,5; Joshua 
24:9; Micah. 6:5; 2 Pet. 2:15; Jude 11-13; Isa. 28:21; Hab. 3:11; 
Matt. 12:40. 

THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

The earliest copy of the New Testament known is written in the 
Syriac language. Its date is estimated to be about the year A.D. 
100. And even at that early date it contained the same books as 
at present with the exception of the Second Epistle of Peter, the 
Third Epistle of John, Jude and the Book of Revelation. And 
these omitted books we know were written about the close of the 
first century, and probably had not been widely circulated 
among the Christian congregations at that time. All the books of 
the Old and New Testaments as we now have them appear, 



however, in the Greek, in the Sinaitic Manuscript, the oldest 
known Greek MS., whose date is about A.D. 350. 

The first five books of the N.T. are historical, and present a clear 
and connected account of the life, character, circumstances, 
teachings and doings of Jesus of Nazareth, who claimed to be 
the Messiah promised in the O.T. Scriptures, and who fully 
substantiated his claim. The four accounts of the Evangelists, 
though they differ in phraseology, are in harmony in their 
statements, some important items being recorded by each which 
seem to have been overlooked by the others. These Evangelists 
testified to that of which they had positive knowledge. The 
Apostle John says: That which we have seen and heard declare 
we unto you- "that which was from the beginning (the 
beginning of the Lord's ministry), which we have heard, which 
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and 
our hands have handled of the Word of life; for the life was 
manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness." (1 John 1:1- 
3.) They testify also that they saw Christ after his resurrection. 
The fifth book presents a valuable account of the doings of the 
Apostles after their anointing with the Holy Spirit, of the 
establishment of the Christian Church, and of the first preaching 
of the good news to the Gentiles. 

R1146:page3 

The Apostolic Epistles were written to the various local 
congregations or churches, and were directed to be publicly 
read, and to be exchanged among the churches; and the same 
authority was claimed for them by their writers as that which 
was accorded to the O.T. Scriptures. (1 Thes. 5:27; Col. 4:16; 2 
Pet. 3:2,15,16; Heb. 1:1,2 and 2:1-4.) These letters and the five 
historical books were carefully preserved by the different 
congregations, and were appealed to as authority in matters of 
doctrine. 

The letters of the apostles, claiming, as they did, divine authority 
equal to that of the O.T. Scriptures, were treasured and guarded 
with special care by the various congregations of the early 
church. The New Testament was completed by the Book of The 
Revelation, about the close of the first century A.D., after which, 
these epistles, etc., began to be collected for more permanent 
preservation. 

The original copies of both the Old and New Testaments have, 
of course, long since disappeared, and the oldest manuscript (the 
Sinaitic) is reckoned to have been written about three centuries 
after the death of Christ. Those of earlier date were either 
destroyed in the persecutions under which the church suffered, 
or were worn out by use. These oldest manuscripts are preserved 
with great care in the Museums and Libraries of Europe. During 
the Middle Ages, when ignorance and corruption prevailed and 
the Bible was hidden in monasteries away from the people, God 



was still carrying on his work, preserving the Scriptures from 
destruction even in the midst of Satan's stronghold, the apostate 

R1146 : page 4 

Church of Rome. A favorite occupation of the monks during the 
Middle Ages was the copying of the manuscripts of the N.T., 
which were esteemed as relics more than as God's living 
authoritative Word;— just as you will find in the parlor of very 
many worldly people handsome Bibles, which are seldom 
opened. Of these manuscripts there are said to be now more than 
two thousand, of various dates from the fourth to the fifteenth 
centuries. The quiet seclusion of those monks gave them special 
opportunities for careful copying, and years were sometimes 
spent in the copying of a single manuscript. 

RELIABILITY OF PRESENT TRANSLATIONS. 

The idea exists in some minds that during the lapse of centuries 
the Scriptures have become largely corrupted, and therefore a 
very uncertain foundation for faith. They reason that this is 
surely to be expected of a book which has survived so many 
centuries, and which has been claimed as divine authority by so 
many different factions, and which can be read by the majority 
only from translations, made by somewhat biased translators. 
And the late revisions of the book are supposed to be an 
acknowledgment of the supposed fact. 

Those, however, who are acquainted with the manner in which 
the ancient manuscripts of the Scriptures have been preserved 
for centuries, carefully copied, diligently compared and 
translated by pious and learned linguists, whose work was 
thereafter subjected to the most learned and scrutinizing 
criticism of an age in which scholars are by no means few, are 
prepared to see that such an idea is by no means a correct or 
reasonable one, though to the uninformed it may appear so. 

It is a fact that the Scriptures, as we find them to-day, bear 
internal evidence of their original purity; and ample means, both 
internal and external, are now furnished so that the careful 
student may detect any error which might have crept in either by 
fraud or accident. While there are some errors in translation and 
a few interpolations in our common English translation, on the 
whole it is acknowledged by scholars to be a remarkably good 
transcript of the Sacred Word. 

Before the invention of printing, the copying of the Scriptures, 
being very slow and tedious, involved considerable liability to 
error in transcribing, such as the accidental omission of a word 
or paragraph, the substitution of one word for another, or the 
misunderstanding of a word where the copyist wrote from the 
dictation of another person. And again, sometimes a marginal 
note might be mistaken for a part of the text and copied in as 
such. But while a very few errors have crept in, in such ways, 



and a few others seem to have been designedly inserted, various 
circumstances have been at work, both to preserve the integrity 
of the Sacred Writings, and also to make manifest any errors 
which have crept into them. 

Very early in the Christian Era translations of the New 
Testament Scriptures were made into several languages, and the 
different factions that early developed and continued to exist, 
though they might have been desirous of adding to or taking 
from the original text in order to give their claims a show of 
Scriptural support, were watched by each other to see that they 
did not do so, and had they succeeded in corrupting the text in 
one language, another translation would make it manifest. 

Even the Douay translation, in use in the Romish church, is in 
most respects substantially the same as the King James 
translation. The fact that during the "dark ages" the Scriptures 
were practically cast aside, being supplanted by the decrees of 
popes and councils, so that its teachings had no influence upon 
the masses of the people who did not have copies in their 
possession— nor could they have read them if they had them— 
doubtless made unnecessary the serious alteration of the text, at 
a time when bold, bad men had abundant power to do so. For 
men who would plot treason, incite to wars and commit murders 
for the advancement of the papal hierarchy, as we know was 
done, would have been bold enough for anything. Thus the 
depth of ignorance in the dark ages served to protect and keep 
pure God's Word, so that its clear light has shone specially at the 
two ends of the Gospel age. (1 Cor. 10:11.) The few 
interpolations which were dared, in support of the false claims 
of Papacy, were made just as the gloom of the "dark ages" was 
closing in upon mankind, and are now made glaringly manifest, 
from their lack of harmony with the context, their antagonism 
with other scriptures and from their absence in the oldest and 
most complete and reliable manuscripts. 

RELATIVE VALUES OF ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS. 

As to the relative values of ancient manuscripts, we quote the 
following comments from the pen of that eminent German 
scholar, Constantine Tischendorf, who spent many years of his 
life in diligently searching out and comparing the various 
ancient manuscripts and translations of the Scriptures in many 
languages, and who has furnished to the church the results of his 
investigation in a careful exhibit of the various departures of the 
English Authorized Version of the New Testament from the 
three oldest and most important manuscripts. 

Mr. Tischendorf says: "As early as the reign of Elizabeth the 
English nation possessed an authorized translation, executed by 
the Bishops under the guidance of Archbishop Parker; and this, 
half a century later, in the year 1611, was revised at the 
command of James the First by a body of learned divines, and 



became the present 'Authorized Version.' Founded as it was on 
the Greek text at that time accepted by Protestant theologians, 
and translated with scholarship and conscientious care, this 
version of the New Testament has deservedly become an object 
of great reverence, and a truly national treasure to the English 
Church. The German Church alone possesses in Luther's New 
Testament a treasure of similar value.... 

"The Authorized Version, like Luther's, was made from a Greek 
text which Erasmus in 1516, and Robert Stephens in 1550, had 
formed from manuscripts of later date than the tenth century. 
Whether those manuscripts were thoroughly trustworthy -in 
other words, whether they exhibited the Apostolic original as 
perfectly as possible— has long been matter of diligent and 
learned investigation. Since the sixteenth century Greek 
manuscripts have been discovered of far greater antiquity than 
those of Erasmus and Stephens; as well as others in Latin, 
Syriac, Coptic, and Gothic, into which languages the sacred text 
was translated between the second and fourth centuries; while in 
the works of the Fathers, from the second century downwards, 
many quotations from the New Testament have been found and 
compared.... One thing is agreed upon by the majority of those 
who understand the subject, namely, that the oldest copies 
approach the original text more nearly than the later ones. 

"Providence has ordained for the New Testament more sources 
of the greatest antiquity than are possessed by all the old Greek 
literature put together. And of these, two manuscripts have for 
long been especially esteemed by Christian scholars, since, in 
addition to their great antiquity, they contain very nearly the 
whole of both the Old and New Testaments. Of these two, one is 
deposited in the Vatican, and the other in the British Museum. 
Within the last ten years a third has been added to the number, 
which was found at Mount Sinai, and is now at St. Petersburg. 
These three manuscripts undoubtedly stand at the head of all the 
ancient copies of the New Testament, and it is by their standard 
that both the early editions of the Greek text and the modern 
versions are to be compared and corrected. 

"The effect of comparing the common English text with the 
most ancient authorities will be as often to disclose agreement as 
disagreement. True, the three great manuscripts alluded to differ 
from each other both in age and authority, and no one of them 
can be said to stand so high that its sole verdict is sufficient to 
silence all contradiction. But to treat such ancient authorities 
with neglect would be either unwarrantable arrogance or 
culpable negligence; and it would be indeed a misunderstanding 
of the dealings of Providence, if after these documents had 

R1147 : page 4 

been preserved through all the dangers of fourteen or fifteen 
centuries, and delivered safe into our hands, we were not to 



receive them with thankfulness as the most valuable instruments 
for the elucidation of truth. 

"It may be urged that our undertaking is opposed to true 
reverence; and that by thus exposing the inaccuracies of the 
English Version, we shall bring discredit upon a work which has 
been for centuries the object of love and veneration both in 
public and private. But those who would stigmatize the process 
of scientific criticism and test, which we propose, as irreverent, 
are greatly mistaken. To us the most reverential course appears 
to be, to accept nothing as the Word of God which is not proved 
to be so by the evidence of the oldest, and therefore most 
certain, witnesses that he has put into our hands. With this in 
view, and with this intention, the writer has occupied himself for 
thirty years past, in searching not only the Libraries of Europe, 
but the obscurest convents of the East, both in Africa and Asia, 
for the most ancient manuscript, of the Bible; and has done all in 
his power to collect the most important of such documents, to 
arrange them and to publish them for the benefit both of the 
present age and of posterity, so as to settle the original text of 
the sacred writers on the basis of the most careful investigation. 

"The first of these great manuscripts already referred to which 
came into possession of Europe was the Vatican Codex. Whence 
it was acquired by the Vatican Library is not known; but it 
appears in the first catalogue of that collection which dates from 
the year 1475. The manuscript embraces both the Old and New 
Testaments. Of the later it contains the four Gospels, the Acts, 
the seven Catholic Epistles, nine of the Pauline Epistles, and the 
Epistle to the Hebrews as far as 9:14, from which verse to the 
end of the New Testament it is deficient; so that not only the last 
chapters of Hebrews, but the Epistle to Timothy, Titus and 
Philemon, as well as the Revelation, are missing. The 
peculiarities of the writing, the arrangement of the manuscript, 
and the character of the text— especially certain very remarkable 
readings-all combine to place the execution of the Codex in the 
fourth century, possibly about the middle of it. 

"The Alexandrine Codex was presented to King Charles the 
First in 1 628 by Cyril Lucar, Patriarch of Constantinople, who 
had himself brought it from Alexandria, of which place he was 
formerly Patriarch, and whence it derives its name. It contains 
both the Old and New Testaments. Of the New the following 
passages are wanting: -Matt. 1:1 to 25:6; John 6:50 to 8:52; 2 
Cor. 4:13 to 12:6. ...It would appear to have been written about 
the middle of the fifth century. 

"The Sinaitic Codex I was myself so happy as to discover in 
1844 and 1859, at the convent of St. Catherine, on Mount Sinai, 
in the later of which years I brought it to Russia to the Emperor 
Alexander the Second, at whose instance my second journey to 
the East was undertaken. It contains both Old and New 
Testaments —the latter perfect without the loss of a single 



leaf.... All the considerations which tend to fix the date of 
manuscripts lead to the conclusion that the Sinaitic Codex 
belongs to the middle of the fourth century. Indeed, the evidence 
is clearer in this case than in that of the Vatican Codex; and it is 
not improbable (which cannot be the case with the Vatican MS.) 
that it is one of the fifty copies which the Emperor Constantine 
in the year 33 1 directed to be made for Byzantium, under the 
care of Eusebius of Caesarea. In this case it is a natural inference 
that it was sent from Byzantium to the monks of St. Catherine 
by the Emperor Justinian, the founder of the convent. The entire 
Codex was published by its discoverer, under the orders of the 
Emperor of Russia, in 1862, with the most scrupulous exactness, 
and in a truly magnificent shape, and the New Testament portion 
was issued in a portable form in 1863 and 1865. 

"These considerations seem to show that the first place among 
the three great manuscripts, both for age and extent, is held by 
the Sinaitic Codex, the second by the Vatican, and the third by 
the Alexandrine. And this order is completely confirmed by the 
text they exhibit, which is not merely that which was accepted in 
the East at the time they were copied; but, having been written 
by Alexandrine copyists who knew but little of Greek, and 
therefore had no temptation to make alterations, they remain in a 
high degree faithful to the text which was accepted through a 
large portion of Christendom in the third and second centuries. 
The proof of this is their agreement with the most ancient 
translations— namely, the so-called Italic, made in the second 
century in proconsular Africa; the Syriac Gospels of the same 
date, now transferred from the convents of the Nitrian desert to 
the British Museum; and the Coptic version of the third century. 
It is confirmed also by their agreement with the oldest of the 
Fathers, such as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement and Origen. 

"These remarks apply to the Sinaitic Codex- which is 
remarkably close in its agreement to the 'Italic' version— more 
than they do to the Vatican MS., and still more so than the 
Alexandrine, which, however, is of far more value in the Acts, 
Epistles and Apocalypse than it is in the Gospels.... 

"No single work of ancient Greek classical literature can 
command three such original witnesses as the Sinaitic, Vatican 
and Alexandrine Manuscripts, to 

R1147:page5 

the integrity and accuracy of its text. That they are available in 
the case of a book which is at once the most sacred and the most 
important in the world is surely matter for the deepest 
thankfulness to God. " 

OTHER MEANS OF VERIFICATION. 

Another remarkable means for preserving and verifying the 
New Testament writings is their copious quotation in other 



writings. Origen, who wrote in the early part of the third 
century, quotes 5745 passages from all the books in the New 
Testament; Tertullian (A.D. 200) makes more than 3000 
quotations from the N.T. books; Clement (A.D. 194) quotes 380 
passages; Irenaeus (A.D. 178) quotes 767 passages; Polycarp, 
who was martyred A.D. 165, after serving Christ 86 years, 
quoted 36 passages in a single epistle; Justin Martyr (A.D. 140) 
also quotes from the N.T. These were all Christian writers; and 
in addition to these, the Scriptures were largely quoted by 
heathen and infidel writers, among them Celsus (A.D. 150) and 
Porphyry (A.D. 304). Indeed the entire New Testament, with the 
exception of about a dozen verses, has been found scattered as 
quotations through various writings that are still extant. And if 
every copy of the N.T. had been destroyed by its enemies, the 
book could have been reproduced from these quotations 
contained in the writings of the early Christians and their 
enemies. 

While the means for the preservation of the Scriptures have been 
thus remarkably complete, and in view of the unparalleled 
opposition with which they have met give evidence of Divine 
care in their preservation, the means for their verification, and 
for arriving at an understanding of them in God's due time, are 
found to be none the less remarkable. No other book in the 
world has ever had such attention as this book. The labor that 
has been spent in the preparation of complete concordances, 
indexes, various translations, etc., has been enormous; and the 
results to students of the Bible are of incalculable value. And 
while we recognize the providence of God in all this, we should 
and do appreciate these labors of his children and their great 
service to us, though we utterly repudiate, as useless, the labor 
that has been spent on many so-called theological writings, 
which are nothing more than miserable efforts to support the 
vain traditions of men, the accumulated monstrous volumes of 
which would indeed form a monument of human folly. 

Just in "The Time of the End," when the prophet (Dan. 12:9,10) 
declares that "the wise (the meek and faithful children of God) 
shall understand," we find these wonderful aids coming forward 
to our assistance. And parallel with these has happened the 
general spread of intelligence and education and the placing of 
the Bible in the hands of the people, thus enabling them to use 
the helps provided. 

In view of these things, our only reasonable conclusion must be, 
that this wonderful book has been completely under Divine 
supervision in its preparation, and in its gradual and seasonable 
unfolding to the understanding; and yet it has all been 
accomplished through human agency. Those who are too 
careless, or too indifferent, or who permit themselves to be too 
much engrossed with the cares of this life to give it a studious 
examination, should not be expected to comprehend its weight 



of authority, and its full evidence of credibility. We are aware of 
the fact that in these days when the art of printing has flooded 
the world with literature of every description, good, bad, and 
indifferent, one might reasonably reply, We cannot examine 
everything. Very true, but this book has a claim superior to that 
of any other book in the world, and no man is as justifiable in 
laying it upon the shelf, as he would be in doing with the Koran 
or the Vedas. 

The very existence of such a book, animated with such a spirit 
of justice, wisdom, love and power, and disclosing such good 
tidings of great joy to all people, having such a history and 
authorship, and containing such varied information-historic, 
scientific, and moral; and so remarkably preserved for so many 
centuries, though so violently opposed, is sufficient to awaken at 
least a suspicion of its value, and to claim the attention and 
investigation of every reasoning mind. The claims of this book 
upon our attention are by far superior to those of any other, and 
these reasonable claims appear on its very surface, while every 
systematic and properly directed effort at investigation rewards 
the diligent student with copious and 

R1148:page5 

abundant proof, both of its truthfulness and of its value. 

THE INSPIRATION OF THE BIBLE. 

The Bible claims to be a book written under divine inspiration. 
The word inspire signifies to breathe in, to infuse, to fill, to 
inhale-as to inspire the lungs with air. (See Webster's 
Dictionary.) Hence, when it is said that certain scriptures, or 
writings of godly men, were given by inspiration of God (2 Tim. 
3:16), it signifies that those men were in some way, whether 
through miraculous or natural means, inspired by, or brought 
under the influence of God; so as to be used by him in speaking 
or writing such words as he wished to have expressed. The 
prophets and apostles all claimed such inspiration. Peter says, 
"The prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy 
men of God spake as they were moved by the holy Spirit. "-2 
Pet. 1:21. 

Through Moses we have the law of God and the only existing 
credible history of mankind from the creation of Adam down to 
his own time, covering a period of about 2500 years. While 
Moses and the other Bible writers were holy men, inspired with 
pure motives and holy zeal, and while personal pride, ambition, 
etc., were no part of their spirit, we learn that Moses was 
inspired with the knowledge of God's law, both in its great 
principles and also in the minutiae of its typical ceremonials, by 
direct revelation from God at Mount Sinai, and of some points 
of duty at the burning bush at Horeb, etc. 



As for his historical writings, Moses was evidently guided of 
God in the collation and presentation in its present complete and 
connected form of the history of the world down to his day, 
which was really in great part the history of his own family back 
to Adam with an account of the creation doubtless given by God 
to Adam while he was yet in fellowship in Eden. Nor does a 
correct handing down of family information, covering a period 
of over 2300 years, seem impossible, or liable, as it would now 
be, to have become polluted; for, aside from the fact that it was 
handed down through the God-fearing family line of Seth, it 
should be remembered that at that time the bodies, brains and 
memories of men were not so weak as they are now, and as they 
have been since the flood; and finally, because the long lives of 
two men link Adam with the family of Abraham, the family of 
covenant favor,— with Isaac, the typical seed of promise. These 
two men were Methuselah and Shem. Methuselah was over 200 
years old when Adam died, and had abundant opportunity, 
therefore, for information at first hands; and Shem, the son of 
Noah, lived contemporaneously with Methuselah for 98 years, 
and with Isaac for 50 years. Thus, these two living, God-fearing 
men acted as God's historians to communicate his revelations 
and dealings to the family in whom centered the promises, of 
which Moses was one of the prospective heirs. 

In addition to these facts, we have the statement of Josephus that 
Methuselah, Noah and Shem, the year before the flood, 
inscribed the history and discoveries of the world on two 
monuments of stone and brick which were still standing in 
Moses' time. 

As for the writings of the prophets, their devoted, godly lives 
attest their sincerity; their lives were spent for God and in the 
defense of righteousness, and not for gain and worldly honor. 
And as for proofs that God acted through them and that they 
merely expressed his messages, as Peter declares, it is to be 
found in the fulfillment of their predictions. These we need not 
enumerate here and now, as they are elaborated in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Volumes I. and H; and will be further 
discussed in Vol. III., now in course of preparation. 

This brings us to the examination of the inspiration of the New 
Testament. Of the four gospel narratives and the book of the 
Acts of the Apostles, which are merely historic narratives, it 
might with considerable force be argued that no inspiration was 
necessary. But we must remember that since it was God's will 
that the important doings and teachings of our Lord and his 
disciples should be handed down, for the information and 
guidance of his Church throughout the age, it was necessary that 
God, even while leaving the writers free to record those truths in 
their own several styles of expression and arrangement, should 
nevertheless exercise a supervision of his work. To this end it 
would appear reasonable that he would cause circumstances, 



etc., to call to the memory of one or another of them items and 
details which, otherwise, in so condensed an account of matters 
so important, would have been overlooked. And this was no less 
the work of God's spirit, power, or influence than the more 
noticeable and peculiar manifestations through the prophets. 

The Apostle Peter tells us that the prophets of old time often did 
not understand their own utterances, as they themselves also 
acknowledge (1 Pet. 1:12; Dan. 12:4,8-10); and we should 
remember that the twelve apostles (Paul taking the place of 
Judas-Gal. 1:17; 1 Tim. 2:7) not only filled the office of 
apostles —or specially appointed teachers and expounders of the 
Gospel of the New Covenant-but they also, especially Peter and 
Paul and John, filled the office of prophets, and were not only 
given the spirit of wisdom and understanding by which they 
were enabled to understand and explain the previously dark 
prophecies, but in addition to this we believe that they were 
under the guidance and supervision of the Lord to such an extent 
that their references to things future from their day, things 
therefore not then due to be fully understood, were guided, so as 
to be true to an extent far beyond their comprehension, and such 
consequently were as really prophetic as the utterances of the 
old-time prophets. Illustrations of this are to be found in the 
Revelations of the Apostle John, in Peter's symbolic description 
of the Day of the Lord (2 Pet. 3:10-13), and in numerous 
references to the same period by Paul also, among which were 
some things hard to be understood even by Peter (2 Pet. 3:16) 
and only partially then by Paul himself. The latter, however, was 
permitted to see future things more clearly than others of his 
time, and to that end he was given special visions and 
revelations which he was not allowed to make known to others 
(2 Cor. 12:1-4), but which, nevertheless, influenced and colored 
his subsequent teachings and his epistles. And these very items 
which Peter thought strange of, and called "hard to be 
understood," are the very items which now, in God's due time, 
for which they were intended, so grandly illuminate not only 
Peter's prophecies and John's Revelation, but the entire word and 
plan of God, -that the man of God may be thoroughly 
furnished.-2 Tim. 3:16,17. 

That the early church considered the writings and teachings of 
the apostles different from all others, in authority, is manifest 
from the early arrangement of these writings together and the 
keeping separate from these, as apocryphal, other good writings 
of other good men. And yet there were, even in the days of the 
apostles, ambitious men who taught another gospel and claimed 
for themselves the honors of special revelations and authority as 
apostles and teachers of no less authority than the twelve 
apostles. 

And ambitious men of the same sort have from time to time 
since arisen— Emanuel Swedenborg and many less able and less 



notable— whose claims, if conceded, would not only place them 
in rank far above Paul, the prince of the apostles, but whose 
teachings would tend to discredit entirely, as "old wives' fables," 
the whole story of redemption and remission of sins through the 
blood of the cross. These would-be apostles, boastful, heady, 
high-minded, have "another gospel," a perversion of the gospel 
of Christ; and above all they despise and seek to cast discredit 
upon the words of Paul who so clearly, forcibly and logically 
lifts up the standard of faith and points to the cross— the ransom- 
-as the sure foundation, and who so clearly showed that pseudo- 
apostles, false apostles, would arise and deceive many. 

It not only required an inspiration to write God's plan, but it also 
requires an inspiration of the Almighty to give an understanding 
of that revelation; yet this inspiration is of a different sort. When 
any one has realized himself a sinner, weak, imperfect and 
condemned, and has accepted of Christ as his Redeemer, and 
full of love and appreciation has consecrated his heart (his mind, 
his will) to the Lord, to henceforth please not himself but his 
Redeemer,— God has arranged that such a consecration of the 
natural mind brings a new mind. It opens the way for the holy 
mind or will of God, expressed through his written word, to be 
received; and as it is received into such a good, honest, 
consecrated heart, it in-forms that heart and opens the eyes of 
the understanding, so that from the new standpoint (God's 
standpoint) many things wear a very different aspect, and among 
other things the Scripture teachings, which gradually open up as 
item after item of the divine plan is fulfilled, and new features of 
the unfolding plan become due to be understood, and from the 
new standpoint appreciated and accepted. 

Just as with astronomers, the close observation of facts and 
influences already recognized often leads them to look in certain 
directions for hitherto undiscovered planets, and they find them, 
so with the seekers after spiritual truths; the clear appreciation 
and close study of the known plan lead gradually, step by step, 
to the discovery of other particulars, hitherto unnoticed, 

R1148:page6 

each of which only adds to the beauty and harmony of the truths 
previously seen. Thus it is that "The path of the just is a shining 
light which shineth more and more unto the perfect day. " 

Of course the writings of all such as have their wills fully 
subjected to the mind of God, as revealed in his Word, must be 
also somewhat inspired by God's spirit, received from his Word 
by their complete 

R1149:page6 

subjection to its leading. The spirit of the truth inspires and 
controls to a greater or lesser extent not only their pens but their 
words and thoughts, and even their very looks. Yet such an 



inspiration, common to all the saints, in proportion to their 
development, should be critically distinguished from the special 
and peculiarly guided and guarded inspiration of the twelve 
apostles, whom God specially appointed to be the teachers of the 
church, and who have no successors in this office. Only twelve 
were "chosen," and when one of these, Judas, fell from his 
honorable office, the Lord in due time appointed Paul to the 
place; and he not only has never recognized others, but clearly 
indicates that he never will recognize others in that office. -Rev. 
21:14. 

With the death of the Apostles the canon of Scripture closed, 
because God had there given a full and complete revelation of 
his plan for man's salvation; though some of it was in a 
condensed form which has since expanded and is expanding and 
unfolding and will continue to expand and shine more and more 
until the perfect day— the Millennial Day-has been fully ushered 
in. Paul expresses this thought clearly when he declares that the 
Holy Scriptures are able to make wise unto salvation, and that 
they are sufficient. 

As we consider, then, the completeness, harmony, purity and 
grandeur of the Bible, its age and wonderful preservation 
through the wreck and storms of six thousand years, it must be 
admitted to be a most wonderful book; and those who have 
learned to read it understanding^, who see in it the great plan of 
the ages, cannot doubt that God was its inspiring Author, as well 
as its Preserver. Its only parallel is the book of nature by the 
same great Author. 



R1149:page6 

THE TWO SALVATIONS. 

"That now unto the principalities and powers in the heavenlies 
might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God."~ 
Eph. 3:10. 

"Blind leaders of the blind" in Babylon insist that the "manifold 
wisdom of God" is now apparent, and can be fully appreciated 
by all men, whereas the Lord Jesus, at his first advent, positively 
stated that only his disciples were able to even partially 
understand the truths he set forth. (Matt. 13:11; Mark 4:11; Luke 
8:10.) Before his crucifixion Jesus told his disciples further, that 
the same conditions would continue until the end of the Gospel 
age. (Matt. 24:3,31.) Paul explains that during the Gospel period 
the "manifold wisdom of God" is made known to the 
"principalities and powers in heavenly (not earthly) places, -to 
the church. (Eph. 3:10.) During the present reign of evil the glad 
tidings operate in the world to take out a people for the Lord's 
name. (Acts 15:14.) When these "people for a purpose" shall all 



have been taken out, and "The Christ," head and body, have 
been united (Gal. 3:16 and 29, and Eph. 4:15-16), God will 
inaugurate the work of restoring mankind to soundness of being, 
which is the salvation promised to the people of the world. - 
Acts 3:19-22. 

The instruments to be used in this grand work will be the "new 
creatures" whom God has chosen in Christ, with the Lord Jesus 
as their head, or chief. (Col. 1:18.) Through faith in him these 
"new creatures" have been "born from above, of water and 
spirit" (John 3:3-6, and 1 Peter 1:24), and thus during this life, 
by enduring trial and temptation, have been "translated into the 
kingdom of his dear Son" (Col. 1:13), and thereby they possess 
the promise of the "divine nature" (2 Pet. 1:4), which, until the 
resurrection, they have only in "earthen vessels." (2 Cor. 4:7.) 
When resurrected they will obtain this "divine nature" fully, and 
thus while having borne the "image of the earthy," they will then 
bear the "image of the heavenly." (1 Cor. 15:45,47,48 and 1 
John 3:2.) As above said, their work will be to restore those who 
remain, "of the earth, earthy," to earthy perfection (1 Cor. 
15:45,47,48) as each seed has its own kind of body.- 1 Cor. 
15:38; Acts 3:21; Gen. 1:27-28. 

Thus, when all shall have been raised up to perfection (the "new 
creatures" to the glory of the "divine nature," and the "earthy" to 
the glory of complete human nature), all that was lost in Adam 
will have been restored in Christ. (1 Cor. 15:22.) How luminous 
these truths make Paul's statement that "we trust in the living 
God who is the Savior of all men, specially [chiefly] of them 
that believe. " -1 Tim. 4:10. 

As the "new creatures" prove their love for their Lord by 
suffering with him now, so the "earthy" in their "due time" must 
show their love for and obedience to the same Lord when he is 
reigning with his saints. (Psa. 2:9; 49:14; Dan. 7:22; Rev. 2:27; 
12:5; 19:15.) Should any creature sin willfully after having 
received full light, and been given ability to live up to it, he will 
be "destroyed from among the people. "-Acts 3:23; Heb. 10:26; 
Jer. 31:29-31. 

Peter argues (1 Pet. 1:3-13): Blessed is the God and Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, who in his great mercy has begotten us to 
a hope of life by the resurrection of Jesus from the dead, into an 
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled and unfading, kept in the 
heavens for us, who are guided by the power of God, through 
faith, for a salvation prepared to be disclosed in the last season 
(Greek, kairos— fixed time). In which we rejoice, though now 
for a little while (it being necessary) we are distressed by 
manifold trials, in order that the proof of our faith, which is 
more precious than gold that perishes, even though tested by 
fire, may be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the 
revelation of Jesus Christ; whom, not having seen, we love: on 
whom, not now looking, but [on whom] believing, we rejoice 



with joy unspeakable and full of glory, receiving [Gr. komizo— to 
bring- hence to receive with the added sense of bringing along 
with] the end of our faith -salvation [soundness] of souls 
[beings]. Concerning which salvation prophets, who prophesied 
concerning this favor toward us, sought out and investigated, 
searching as to what things, or what seasons, the spirit that was 
in them was pointing out, when it testified beforehand the 
sufferings of Christ, and the glories to follow: to whom it was 
revealed, that not for themselves but for us they ministered those 
things, which are now declared through those who deliver the 
joyful message with the Holy Spirit sent from heaven: into 
which things angels earnestly desire to look. Wherefore, girding 
up the loins of our mind and being vigilant, let us hope perfectly 
for the gift to be brought to us at the revelation of Jesus Christ. 

How plainly this teaching of the Spirit sets forth the future for 
the "little flock," who are a "Chosen Race, a Royal Priesthood, a 
Holy Nation, a People for a Purpose." — 1 Pet. 2:9, Diaglott. 

W. E. P. 



R1149:page6 

AN EMINENT BAPTIST'S AVOWAL. 

John Foster, the eminent Baptist minister of long ago, wrote to 
a young minister (See, his Life and Correspondence,- London 
edition) thus:— 

"Endless punishment! I acknowledge my inability (I would say 
it reverently) to admit this belief, together with a belief in the 
divine goodness-the belief that "God is love; " that "his tender 
mercies are over all his works." Goodness, benevolence, charity 
ascribed in supreme perfection to him, cannot mean a quality 
foreign to all human conception of goodness; it must be 
something analogous in principle to what he himself has defined 
and required as goodness in his moral creatures, that in adoring 
the divine goodness we may not be worshiping an "unknown 
God. " But if so, how would all our ideas be confounded, while 
contemplating him bringing, of his own sovereign will, a race of 
creatures into existence in such a condition that they certainly 
will and must,— by their nature and circumstances, go wrong and 
be miserable, unless prevented by especial grace,— which is the 
privilege of only a small proportion of them; and at the same 
time affixing on their delinquency a doom of which it is 
infinitely beyond the highest archangel's faculty to apprehend a 
thousandth part of the horror.... 

"A number (not large, but of great piety and intelligence) of 
ministers within my acquaintance, several now dead, have been 
disbelievers of the doctrine in question; at the same time not 
feeling themselves imperatively called upon to make a public 



disavowal; content with employing in their ministrations strong 
general terms in denouncing the doom of impenitent sinners. 

"For one thing, a consideration of the unendurable imputations 
and unmeasured suspicions apt to be cast on any publicly 
declared practical defection from rigid "orthodoxy" has made 
them think they would better consult their usefulness by not 
giving prominence to this dissentient point while yet they make 
no concealment of it in private communications and in answers 
to serious inquiries. When, besides, they have considered how 
strangely defective and feeble is the efficacy of the terrible 
doctrine itself, to alarm and deter careless, irreligious minds, 
they have 

R1150:page6 

thought themselves the less required to propound one that so 
greatly qualifies the blackness of the prospect. They could not 
be unaware of the grievous truth of what is so strongly insisted 
on as an argument by the defenders of the tenet- that 
thoughtless and wicked men would be sure to seize on the 
mitigated doctrine to encourage themselves in their impenitence. 
But this is only the same perverse and fatal use that they make 
of the doctrine of grace and mercy through Jesus Christ. If they 
will so abuse the truth we cannot help it. But methinks even this 
fact tells against the doctrine in question. If in the very nature of 
man as created, every individual, by the Sovereign Power, be in 
such desperate disorder that there is no possibility of conversion 
and salvation in the instances where that power interposes with a 
special and redeeming efficacy, how can we conceive that the 
main proportion of the race thus morally impotent (that is really 
and absolutely impotent) will be eternally punished for the 
inevitable result of this moral impotence?" 

Probably some excuse should be made for such uncandid 
conduct as this frank avowal indicates, because the morning had 
not yet begun to dawn; yet we cannot hold a Christian minister 
blameless in preaching and outwardly supporting a doctrine, 
which at heart, and in private, he denied as unreasonable, and a 
calumny against God's character. Years ago the light upon God's 
Word and the helps in its study were much less than now, when 
surely no one is very excusable for lacking a knowledge of the 
clear, reasonable and consistent teaching of the Bible on this 
subject-one in which every text, parable, symbol and dark 
saying finds a reasonable solution. 

Though John Foster lacked the "helps" and felt that some of the 
passages of the Bible (especially the modern translations, made 
by men who held this popular error) seemed, in symbolic 
language, to favor the popular theory of the eternal torment of 
all mankind except the saints, he should have been true to his 
own convictions; he should not have professed to believe, nor 



have attempted to teach, to any extent whatever, what he 
affirmed he did not and could not force himself to believe. 

He should have avowed candidly and publicly his disbelief and 
taken the consequences. And he should have begun a thorough 
and systematic study of the subject, from the Bible standpoint; 
seeking for the light necessary to harmonize the figurative and 
symbolic and parabolic passages with the plain and reasonable 
revelation of God's character. Had he thus hungered and thirsted 
after righteousness [after right-truth,] who will say that he 
would have been turned away empty and uncertain, when the 
Lord declares that such "shall be filled." Had he thus sought and 
knocked at the Lord's treasury of wisdom, who will affirm that it 
would have remained a "sealed" book (Isa. 29:1 1-14) to him, 
when the Lord declares that he that seeketh findeth, and to him 
that knocketh it shall be opened.— Matt. 7:7. 

Yes, "blessed are they" who are thus honest and earnest;-they 
shall be filled, and the treasure house shall be opened to them: 
but those not thus disposed, lose a great blessing from God 
while keeping the favor and honor of men and holding 
comfortable situations. 

John Foster says that he and others feared loss of influence, 
"usefulness," and the addition of "unendurable imputations." It 
is the old story: They had consecrated their lives (as every true 
Christian has done) to God's service, agreeing to be "living 
sacrifices;" yet, when the time came, when there was an 
opportunity to suffer for Christ's sake, they feared the suffering- 
the dying daily. These are evidently of the class mentioned by 
Paul, "who through fear of death [the sacrificial dying, as living 
sacrifices] are all their life-time subject to bondage." Such will 
be saved so as by fire; they will be part of the Second Company 
who will serve before the throne with palm branches (Rev. 
7:14,15); but they are not, so far as we may judge from their 
own profession, worthy of a place in that "little flock" of 
overcomers who shall reign with Christ. 

We may draw some of our most useful lessons from the failure 
and confessions of others, if careful to gauge our lessons by 
God's testimony, the Bible. This lesson to each one seeking to 
please God and to be blessed and honored of Him (now with a 
knowledge of His plan and by and by with a share in the 
Kingdom which will execute that plan) is, Be honest toward 
God, toward yourself and toward your fellow-creatures; profess 
and teach only what you fully believe; and hunger, thirst, 

R1150:page7 

seek, and knock for the truth at God's great store-house-the 
Bible. If God does not send the key to you direct, he will at least 
put you in contact with some of the servants who have the keys, 
and who, as his and your servants, are engaged in bringing forth 



things new and old— meat in due season for the household of 
faith. -Matt. 24:45; 13:52. 



R1150:page7 

NATURE'S TESTIMONY. 

I have just been feeding my stock— horses and colts, cows and 
calves, hogs and pigs. I feed them all with hay. They all ate it 
greedily, for it was good hay; and they all seemed to be doing 
well. While they were eating I was thinking. And as it is too wet 
to plow this morning, I will write my thoughts. These colts are 
growing. Growing means more bone, more muscle, more fat, 
more teeth enameled, more hoof, more hide, more hair, more 
mane, more tail, larger eyes, more tendons, lengthened arteries 
and veins, a proportional enlargement of the heart, the lungs, the 
digestive organs, the viscera, etc., etc. It takes a thousand things 
to make a colt, and there must be something added to each of 
these thousand things every day, as the colt increases in size, 
and becomes a horse. Now where does the colt get a little more 
all the time to add to these thousand things? All out of the hay. 
The dried grass that I feed him furnishes him bone and flesh and 
skin and hair; and it goes just where it is needed. It goes to the 
different parts of the animal in just the right proportions. It does 
not make too much of any one thing, or fail to make enough of 
any. 

Now take the dried grass to the most skillful chemist. Tell him 
to analyze it, and see if he can get flesh and bone and hair out of 
it as the colt does, and he will tell you that he cannot do any 
such thing. The wonder to me is that my colts, and every body 
else's colts the world over, can do what these men of science 
can't do. 

But there is something stranger yet: The calves eat the same hay, 
and they make out of it differently shaped bones and hoofs, 
different flesh and fat, from that which the colts make. They 
make horns, too, and the colts don't; and the cows, feeding 
beside the horses, make milk out of the hay, and milk is a very 
curious liquid. It contains caseine and albumen, and ever so 
many other ingredients, all of which come from the hay. Isn't 
there something strange about this? It seems to me that if I had 
in my barn at feeding-time one of the wise men who think they 
can explain everything; that we don't need any God; that their 
theory of evolution, and their laws of nature, are sufficient for 
making the world and for keeping it a-going,— it seems to me 
that I could puzzle him by just pointing to my horses and cattle. 

Now suppose I had three machines; that when I put hay into one 
of them and turned the crank awhile, out would come carpet of 
perfect texture and beautiful colors. Then, if I put the same kind 



of hay into another machine, and turned the crank awhile, out 
would come sets of porcelain, plates, cups, saucers, etc.,— all 
perfectly shaped, enameled, and painted. And, finally, if I 
should put hay into a third machine, the result would be books, 
well printed, elegantly bound, and profusely illustrated. What 
would the scientists who know all about making worlds say to 
my machines? Wouldn't they think there was something about 
them that was never dreamed of in their philosophy? 

But I have in my barn yard a score or more of machines fully as 
wonderful. They are working up the hay into hundreds of 
different things, and into just the right proportion of each, while 
I write. Did a law of nature make these machines? and do the 
laws of nature keep them a-going! Yea, verily, and herein is 
proof that a great First Cause, a wise and powerful Being, 
established these laws and superintends all their operations. 

It is said that Robespierre, when he saw the effects of atheism in 
France, exclaimed: "If there is no God, we must make one; for 
we cannot get along without him. " So must every man feel who 
has not permitted that "dangerous thing," a "little learning," to 
magnify his self-conceit and minify his common sense. 

The tendency of positivism, and of all the infidel philosophy of 
our day, is to sheer atheism. Men want to get rid of the idea of a 
personal God— a great, wise, and good Being who made, 
upholds, and governs all things. But grand, solemn and 
mysterious as that idea is, it is the simplest explanation of the 
wonders that we see around us. The grass is growing now all 
over our hills and plains. Why? The soil was full of seeds, we 
are told, and the rain has made them germinate. But water can't 
make grass out of seeds. Here is a chair factory all complete, 
and lumber piled up in it. And now fire is kindled 

R1151 : page 7 

under the boiler, and the wheels revolve; but no chairs are 
turned out. Why? The chair-maker has not come to put the 
lumber into the lathes. Nature during winter or a drouth is like 
that factory, full of lumber but without steam. Nature, when the 
sun shines and the rain falls, is like that factory when the steam 
is up, and the wheels are in motion. Nature is God's workshop. It 
is the grand factory in which he is making all the while the 
many, the numberless things that we speak of as growing. In 
everything that lives, and moves, and grows, and blooms, we see 
proof of the wisdom and the power of an omnipotent God.- 
Selected. 



R1151 : page 7 



WE SHOULD SAVE OURSELVES. 

"Save yourselves from this untoward generation." -Acts 2:40. 

While Orthodoxy and Rome make strong and plain pleadings 
with mankind to save themselves from "Hell" and never-ending 
torture, the thinking Christian must have been struck with the 
fact that our Savior never made such plain entreaty. Jesus taught 
a punishment and trouble now, and in the future, for the wicked, 
but it was always by parable. The world misunderstood his 
teachings and continues to, but it was the blessed privilege of his 
disciples to understand. (Luke 8:10.) Those wholly consecrated 
now, and gladly following the "Lamb whithersoever he goeth," 
know that their Master will continue to give them "meat in due 
season," both in "things new and old," as they are "able to bear 
it "-John 14:26; Matt. 24:45; 13:52. 

While the apostles followed the Lord's injunction and preached 
the glad tidings of a coming kingdom in which would "dwell 
righteousness," they made no plain statement regarding an 
endless condition of conscious misery. Yet Paul assures us that 
he did not shrink from making known the whole counsel (will) 
of God. (Acts 20:27.) Peter, in the text quoted at the beginning 
of this article, exhorts, "Be saved from this perverse generation." 
(Rotherham's translation.) Not one word about being saved from 
a future, never ending misery, though the time was wondrously 
propitious for such a message, if such a doom awaits those 
refusing to be guided by the call. The Pentecostal blessing had 
just been received, and the Holy Spirit was present with gifts of 
power to aid in promulgating a gospel of fear, if there were need 
of preaching such a gospel. Peter, under the guidance of the 
Holy Spirit, simply pleads, "Save yourselves from this untoward 
generation." Will it not be wise for us to go to the Bible and ask 
our Master to free us from all prejudice and tradition, and give 
us the "pure milk of the word" in this matter? Many earnest 
lovers of the Lord, whose greatest desire is to "spend and be 
spent" in his service, so agonize in the thoughts of the future 
torture of those not now reached by the "Glad Tidings," that 
they cannot "be anxious about nothing," but in nervous dread 
spend days and months in distressing labor to "save souls," and 
find no rest. Others grow indifferent at the continued and 
growing apathy with which their message is received, and 
become lukewarm. A true understanding of the proclamation 
entrusted to them would enable all true Christians to more fully 
and joyously fulfill their service. 

Let us try to find in the Scriptures what there was "untoward" or 
"perverse" about the generation of Peter's day, and see if the 
same conditions yet prevail. In Eph. 2:2, Paul says, "Wherein in 
times past ye walked according to the course of this world, 
according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that 
now worketh in the children of disobedience." Do we not find 
here the cause for the "perverse generation" of Peter's time, and 



while we now have different manifestations, does not the same 
spirit work in the present "children of disobedience?" In the 
same epistle (6:12), Paul further explains that the spirit is due, 
not only to depraved human nature, but also to the influence of 
the devil and his angels. The work of this spirit in the flesh is 
clearly set forth in Gal. 5:19-21, and in verses 22-23 is 
contrasted the fruits of the new spirit in those who have been 
saved from this "untoward generation. " In this connection also 
study carefully Eph. 4:17-32 and Col. 3:1-17. These Bible 
teachings set forth grandly what message of salvation the 
Christian is to proclaim, and give us an incentive to walk 
humbly in love before our God now, knowing He will exalt us 
"in due time. " 

Those who have been "delivered from the power of darkness, 
and translated into the kingdom of his dear Son" (Col. 1:13), do 
not "commit (practice) sin, but purify themselves, even as he is 
pure" (1 John 3:3-8), and thus are saved from this evil 
generation now. While they may be "overtaken in a fault," or 
through the wiles of the devil be led for a while to wander, their 
Lord will watch and discipline them, to lead them back into the 
fold, and if they heed his leadings, they will overcome these evil 
influences, because "greater is he who is in them, than he who is 
in the world. "-1 John 4:4. 

To be "saved" is to have all the desires of the flesh (those proper 
and right, as well as the sinful ones) under subjection, and laid 
daily on God's altar, a willing sacrifice (Rom. 12:1), that we 
may make up in the flesh that which is "behind in the sufferings 
of Christ. "-Col. 1:24. 

With this Scriptural teaching showing salvation to be a present 
condition, which reaches into the age to come, how the mist 
clears, and how precious becomes our privilege to be "new 
creatures in Christ Jesus." Becoming associates of the Lord 
Jesus, and "followers of God, as dear children," we come into a 
perfect love which casts out all fear, for fear has torment (1 John 
4:18), and we find ourselves possessed, not of a spirit of 
bondage again to fear, but we receive a spirit of adoption 
whereby we cry "Abba, Father." (Rom. 8:15.) No necessity now 
for going along fearfully, wondering if we are saved: we have 
His spirit "witnessing with ours that we are the children of 
God." We know daily that it is our meat and drink to do our 
Master's will. Every day's experience demonstrates that we are 
saved from the spirit that "now worketh in the children of 
disobedience. " We long to be perfectly obedient, and but for our 
realization that Christ is our "wisdom and righteousness and 
sanctification and redemption" (1 Cor. 1:30), the sense of our 
shortcomings would be unbearable. Our Master gives us his 
peace, which the world can "neither give nor take away," and 
thus takes the burden of our frailty and incompetency from us, 
and we are able to stand complete in him. 



We thus rest in Him in the present and for the future, knowing 
that He has "all power in heaven and on earth." Believing that 
while we were "without strength, in due time Christ died for the 
ungodly," so too do we believe that "in due time" his ransom 
will be testified unto all men. (1 Tim. 2:6.) He is not dependent 
on sinful flesh and blood to perfectly carry out the divine plan of 
"Justification of Life" for all men. (Rom. 5:18.) 

As our Lord Jesus offered himself a sacrifice first, and was then 
exalted, so now, during this Gospel age, he permits the "called" 
who fulfil their consecration and become the "chosen" (Matt. 
22:14) to suffer with him, that they may reign with him, when 
he has established his kingdom on earth. (2 Tim. 2:12.) During 
this present evil age only those who "love righteousness and 
hate wickedness" (Heb. 1:9) receive the spirit of God, and only 
those who have this spirit can understand the things we speak, 
for "the natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of God, 
for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, 
because they are spiritually discerned. Now, we have received 
not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we 
might know the things that are freely given to us of God. Which 
things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom 
teacheth, but which the Holy Spirit teacheth; comparing spiritual 
things with spiritual. Howbeit we speak wisdom among them 
that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the 
princes of this world, that come to nought; but we speak the 
wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which 
God ordained before the world unto our glory, which none of 
the princes of this world knew, for had they known it, they 
would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. But he that is 
spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged of no man. 
For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct 
him? But we have the mind of Christ.- 1 Cor. 
2:14,12,13,6,7,15,16. W. E. P. 


