
CHAPTER 3
Coordinators’ Committee



CORRESPONDENCE AND COMMUNICATION

1. This section provides direction for handling correspondence and communication between branch offices and with world headquarters. For guidelines on the handling of correspondence with congregations and individuals in the field, see Chapter 6.
2. Branch Committee’s Role: A Branch Committee should feel free to ask the Governing Body or one of its committees any question related to the Kingdom work in the territory under the oversight of the branch office. It is best that such questions be expressed clearly and carefully in writing rather than by telephone. The Branch Committee should ensure that it has an arrangement for handling correspondence efficiently.
3. Branch Committee Coordinator: The Branch Committee coordinator should be especially attentive to matters sent to and from the Governing Body and its committees. Good communication between the coordinator and other Branch Committee members is essential so that all are involved and are aware of direction being provided. Numbered letters sent to the Governing Body or its committees should be signed by the coordinator on behalf of the Branch Committee. (See 2:20-21.) Correspondence should not be delayed unnecessarily. The urgency of some matters may require that another committee member sign the letter if the Branch Committee coordinator is not available. See Chapter 2 for more information regarding correspondence sent to the Governing Body and its committees.
4. Branch offices are authorized to write to other branch offices and to headquarters. However, branch offices should not write to offices under the oversight of another Branch Committee, such as country offices, translation offices, literature depots, and so forth. In such cases, the correspondence should be sent to the branch office that has oversight. Country offices are authorized to write to the branch office that oversees their work.
5. Desk Symbols: If many people in the branch or country office prepare correspondence to be sent to other branch offices or to headquarters, it may be practical for the branch office to use desk symbols. The use of desk symbols serves to help the branch office identify the author and/​or his secretary. When a reply is received that refers to the correspondence by desk symbols and date, the reply can be promptly routed to the appropriate desk. The Branch Committee may determine the desk symbol system that works best locally. No more than three letters should be combined to form each desk symbol, such as ABA, SCA, HID. The Branch or Country committee should see that a confidential listing of the branch office’s desk symbols is kept up-to-date. The desk symbol list is to be provided only to those who need to consult the listing for their Bethel work. It is not to be distributed to anyone outside of Bethel.
6. Correspondence Standards: All correspondence should be dated and include the desk symbols as well as a subject or a regarding (“Re:”) line. If it is necessary to send the correspondence by more than one means, this should be indicated at the top, for example, “Via Hard Copy and HuB.” (See 3:12.) If the correspondence is truly urgent or time-sensitive, this should be clearly indicated under the date. If the subject involves another country or geographic location, this should be indicated at the beginning of the subject line. For example, if the Central America branch office writes about a matter in Guatemala, the subject line should commence with “Guatemala—” followed by the subject.
7. Notes: When only a very brief reply to correspondence is needed, it is appropriate to reply using a brief note at the top of the received correspondence. This note could convey an approval, a confirmation, or other minor detail. If the note is truly urgent or time-sensitive, this should be clearly indicated above the date. The note should also show the intended recipient, those being copied, the number of attachments (if any), and the sender, as well as the desk symbols and date.
8. Numbered Letters: All correspondence between a Branch Committee and the Governing Body or one of the Governing Body committees should be sent by means of numbered letters. [See Chart 3.1.] Branch Committees should address a numbered letter to one Governing Body committee only. The letter number, letter date, and desk symbols serve as a helpful reference to specific correspondence. For numbered letters sent to the Governing Body and its committees, each branch office uses a number series that starts at 101 and continues sequentially until 9999. The letter number series is not reset or restarted each year. It is reset to 101 after letter number 9999 has been used. Unique letter numbers will be used on letters sent to Branch Committees but will not necessarily be sequential. When the Governing Body or one of the Governing Body committees sends the same letter (a circular letter) to various branch offices, the same letter number will be used. Additionally, to identify easily circular letters from headquarters, the letter number will begin with a “C-” prefix, such as “No. C-1234P.”
9. Memorandums: Correspondence between branch offices is sent by means of memorandums, not numbered letters. Memorandums are also used for correspondence between branch offices and headquarters departments. [See Chart 3.1.] The word “MEMORANDUM” needs to be shown above the name of the sending branch. In addition, for the recipient, the department should be specified under the name of the branch, for example, “Attention: Shipping Office.” A memorandum does not need to be signed by the Branch Committee coordinator.
10. E-Mail: In addition to the use of numbered letters and memorandums, departments at headquarters and at the branch offices may be approved by oversight to use e-mail to communicate directly with departments or individuals in other lands about technical and routine matters. However, e-mail does not replace numbered letters or memorandums. Recommendations, direction, and decisions are to be communicated through numbered letters or memorandums, as explained above. In most cases, authorized e-mail communications between departments or individuals serve the purpose of expediting the clear communication of technical and routine details having to do with previously approved projects. If such e-mail communication is approved between a department at headquarters and at the branch offices or between branch offices, oversight should ensure that such e-mail communications are limited to their authorized technical purpose. E-mail should not be used by anyone to bypass official communication. A department overseer should be sure that his oversight on the Branch Committee is kept aware of the nature of work-related e-mail communications that he or others in the department send to anyone outside the branch office or to those at other branch offices or at headquarters.​—See 6:45.
11. Telephone Calls: The telephone may be used to communicate with headquarters or with another branch office if necessary. This is especially true when a sudden emergency or other urgent matter arises. Usually, urgent matters handled over the telephone should be followed up with official communication in a numbered letter or a memorandum. For technical and routine matters, the guidelines outlined above with regard to the use of e-mail also apply to telephone calls. Department overseers should authorize any international phone calls before they are made.
12. Hard-Copy Mail: It is preferred that hard-copy correspondence be scanned and then sent electronically via HuB. If a matter must be sent by hard copy and HuB, please indicate this at the top of the correspondence as described in 3:6. Whenever possible, correspondence and attachments should be sent electronically using HuB, as this expedites the handling and assists in the tracking and routing of items once they have been received. If HuB is temporarily unavailable and emergency communication is needed, e-mail may be used.



DISASTER RELIEF AND EMERGENCIES

13. From time to time, emergency situations arise throughout the world. Sometimes there are violent storms, damaging floods, or strong earthquakes. At other times brothers may be forced to flee from their homes because of warfare or mob violence. When such problems occur, the Branch Committee should write to the Coordinators’ Committee as soon as possible (usually within two days) to explain what is happening and how our brothers are being affected. This initial contact may include any recommendations to provide assistance. On occasion, it may not be possible for the branch office to communicate with the Coordinators’ Committee. Or a need may suddenly arise to do something for brothers affected by a disaster. In such circumstances, the branch office is permitted to spend up to USD 5,000 immediately to provide temporary relief and assistance to brothers involved in a major disaster. When funds are spent, an explanation should be included in the letter sent to the Coordinators’ Committee. The letter should state what the local brothers are able to do and what materials or facilities are available to take care of the immediate needs of the brothers affected. Further instructions are found in the Disaster Relief Guidelines (S-180).​—See 2:47.



LEGAL DEPARTMENT

14. Official opposition to the advancement of Kingdom interests, particularly the preaching of the good news, is to be expected. As foretold, there are those who ‘frame trouble in the name of the law’ and who resort to the courts in an effort to silence the spread of the Bible’s lifesaving message. (Ps. 94:20; Matt. 10:16-19) While the theocratic organization does not need legal status to form congregations or engage in the field ministry, being legally recognized affords a degree of protection, which is why efforts are made to ‘defend and legally establish the good news.’​—Phil. 1:7.
15. The Branch Committee should promptly inform the Coordinators’ Committee of serious legal challenges, providing dates and times of occurrences, names of individuals involved, and a thorough but concise explanation. This includes outlining what the charges against the brothers may be and sending a copy of the laws involved, translated into English. The Branch Committee should not assume that the Coordinators’ Committee is up-to-date on the situation in a given country just because there was correspondence with world headquarters about the situation in the past. All correspondence relating to child abuse should be sent directly to WHQ Legal without copying any other office at headquarters or at the branch.​—See form S-66, paragraph 36.
16. It is advisable to have a Legal Department in larger branch offices, particularly where there is significant ongoing legal opposition to theocratic activities. If possible, it is good to have a licensed attorney serving with the department. It is the responsibility of the entire Branch Committee to be aware of legal challenges to our worship.​—Esther 3:5-15.
17. When legal controversies arise, the branch Legal Department may consult, if necessary, with a lawyer who is not serving at Bethel. The lawyer’s opinion and recommendation should be included in the letter sent to the Coordinators’ Committee. If it seems necessary to hire a lawyer, the lawyer should explain the legal remedies available, the likelihood of a favorable result, how long it will take, and an estimate of his costs. In explaining matters to the Coordinators’ Committee, the Branch Committee should outline the lawyer’s opinion on whether a favorable outcome will be achieved, his reasoning, and the recommendation of the Branch Committee.
18. To minimize the use of non-Witness attorneys, it is beneficial to maintain a list of brothers and sisters in the field who are lawyers. Legal matters can periodically be referred to spiritually qualified attorneys who are willing and feel privileged to help. They are generally pleased to assist without charge.
19. Action against Jehovah’s Witnesses is often preceded by negative propaganda in the media and derogatory statements by government officials. The Branch Committee should promptly inform the Coordinators’ Committee if events indicate that the authorities are considering the imposition of restrictions or an outright ban on true worship. With comments from the branch office and the help of the WHQ Legal Department, the Coordinators’ Committee will prepare an approach to the appropriate officials. Written materials explaining our activities and refuting falsehoods may be prepared. The objective is to inform responsible officials of the true position of Jehovah’s Witnesses. To ensure that the best approach is made, the branch office should always communicate with the Coordinators’ Committee before setting up such meetings. Any meetings that are approved to be held with officials should be cared for by a member of the Branch Committee and, if available, someone from the branch Legal Department.
20. Most governments have committed themselves to respecting human rights, including freedom of worship. (Rev. 12:16) National and international organizations monitor governmental compliance with these commitments. It may be helpful to inform such agencies about the arrests of publishers, lawsuits, or proposed legislation against true worship. The Branch Committee should communicate with the Coordinators’ Committee before doing so, explaining which organization is to be approached. A draft of what the branch office wishes to submit should be sent to the Coordinators’ Committee. The Coordinators’ Committee will then decide whether the approach should be made.
21. The branch office should always ask for any court action to be delayed or adjourned to allow ample time for a complete report to be sent to the Coordinators’ Committee and to allow time to receive instructions from headquarters. If possible, a two-month delay or extension should be requested.
22. In the event of an adverse ruling or decision, the Branch Committee should immediately inform the Coordinators’ Committee and specify the time limit for making an appeal. The Coordinators’ Committee will want to know the opinion of the branch Legal Department about the advisability of appealing, the reasons for or against making an appeal, as well as the costs. The letter to the Coordinators’ Committee should also state any possible negative effects on the legal status of the Kingdom work if the matter is not appealed or if the appeal is lost.
23. If the Branch Committee does not have time to write to the Coordinators’ Committee to receive instructions because of a deadline that cannot be extended, a legal update should be provided as soon as possible. If necessary, the Branch Committee coordinator or another member of the Branch Committee may telephone headquarters about the matter.
24. If the Branch Committee believes that an action taken against true worship should be publicized, the branch office should write to the Coordinators’ Committee with a recommendation of what could be prepared, making sure that all of the facts are fully substantiated.
25. Legal Status: Obtaining legal status or registration facilitates the entry of missionaries, the organization of assemblies, the importation of literature, the entitlement to tax exemptions, and other benefits. The Branch Committee should give careful attention to obtaining and maintaining legal registration. Of course, the organization will never compromise principles of pure worship merely to obtain legal status. Attention should be given to the type of legal status being sought. Some religions have a very favorable status, whereas others are merely tolerated. It is necessary to examine carefully the law in each country to determine which form of legal status would be most beneficial for theocratic purposes.
26. Legal Entities and the Worldwide Order: Branch Committee members should have a clear understanding of the relationship among the Governing Body, the Branch Committee, the legal entities used by branch offices, and the Worldwide Order of Special Full-Time Servants of Jehovah’s Witnesses (“Worldwide Order”).
27. The Governing Body has delegated a measure of oversight of the spiritual and material welfare of “the flock of God” to Branch Committees throughout the world. These Branch Committees also oversee administrative and legal activities of the organization in their designated territories. Of course, all Branch Committees serve under the spiritual direction of the Governing Body.​—See w01 1/15 pp. 28-31.
28. Branch Committees are encouraged to register and use a recognized legal entity to carry on the legal affairs of the branch office. Depending on the local laws and circumstances, a branch office may need to use more than one legal entity to further the work in its territory. Any recommended adjustments in the use of legal entities are to be presented to the Coordinators’ Committee. This would include recommendations for the appointment or deletion of directors or officers of legal entities. If recommending an officer or director who is not a member of a Branch or Country committee, the Branch Committee should provide the following information with the recommendation: The brother’s present assignment, date of birth, date of baptism, full-time service start date, special full-time service start date, and a short description of his spiritual qualifications and theocratic responsibilities. Some countries do not allow the registration of religions or the formation of a legal entity of a religious nature. In such countries, it may be necessary to use a legal entity that is of a general nonprofit nature or, in a rare instance, a for-profit nature. In either case, the Branch Committee must not lose sight of the primary objective to spread the good news of God’s Kingdom under Christ Jesus. Our principal activities as an organization are religious even though some aspects may be viewed as educational or charitable in nature.
29. Members of the Worldwide Order serve at all branch offices. The Worldwide Order provides ministers for the legal entity or entities used by the branch offices to carry out the spiritual activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20; Acts 1:8; Rom. 12:1) For this reason, it is important that Branch Committees understand what the Worldwide Order is and the relationship between it and the legal entities branch offices may use.
30. The Worldwide Order is an unincorporated association made up of all those in special full-time service throughout the world. Members of the Worldwide Order are baptized ministers in special full-time service who perform whatever assignment they receive from the Worldwide Order. Each member of the Worldwide Order signs a Vow of Obedience and Poverty (“Vow”), which is a voluntary commitment made by each member.
31. Members of the Worldwide Order are not compensated and do not receive in-kind benefits for any services they perform. The support a member receives is based on the member’s commitment to the Order and is not related to any service performed or the nature of any assignment. Members of the Worldwide Order receive food, shelter, and other basic necessities. Regardless of the nature of their privilege of service, all receive modest, yet appropriate, support. In view of the foregoing, the activities of any legal entity used by the Branch Committee are not to be viewed or regulated as a “commercial” enterprise or as involving an employer/​employee relationship between any legal entity and members of the Worldwide Order.
32. At times, authorities attempt to categorize the endeavors of those in special full-time service as ‘secular work.’ As Christians, we do have a “work” commissioned to us. (John 4:34; 5:17; Acts 13:2; 1 Cor. 15:58; 16:10; 2 Tim. 4:5) However, members of the Worldwide Order are motivated, not by financial gain, but by the desire to accomplish the will of Jehovah and Jesus Christ in helping all “to attain to repentance.” (2 Pet. 3:9) Even so, in keeping with Jesus’ admonition, Branch Committee members and those who serve under their oversight need to exercise caution when asked to describe the nature of our activities. (Matt. 10:16) While we do engage in “work,” even as Jesus and his first-century disciples did, we are certainly not secularly employed or motivated.
33. If a Branch Committee feels that it should describe itself, its legal entities, or the Worldwide Order differently than set forth above, it must first provide details of the proposed adjustment to the Governing Body in order to receive direction.​—See 6:51; 9:1.
34. The Branch Committee should consider whether to register Jehovah’s Witnesses as a local entity. However, registration as a local branch of the Pennsylvania corporation may be preferable. Regimes in developing countries are less likely to expropriate property belonging to an American corporation. In other countries, having legal ties to an American legal entity is not desirable. If the Branch Committee recommends pursuing legal registration in a particular country, the details should be sent to the Coordinators’ Committee. The WHQ Legal Department will provide assistance in preparing a charter and bylaws needed for registration.
35. There may be other laws in the country regulating those who transact business on behalf of local or foreign corporations. To ensure that the branch office is operating legally, a lawyer should be consulted so that the legal requirements are known. Each member of the Branch Committee should be familiar with the laws of the country as they pertain to corporations or business matters.
36. Power of Attorney: This is a legal document authorizing an individual to act as a legal agent or representative of another person or legal entity (such as the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania). The Power of Attorney names an individual to handle ‘necessary business matters.’ (Acts 6:3) The Branch Committee may write to the Coordinators’ Committee if a Power of Attorney is needed to conduct corporation business, to register the corporation, or to obtain legal recognition as a branch of a foreign corporation.
37. In some countries, the law requires anyone holding a Power of Attorney to register it with the government. If that is the case, it should be done, thus avoiding the severe complications for not complying with such laws. Each member of a Branch Committee should be aware of the legal requirements regarding Powers of Attorney, including time periods for renewal or expiration.
38. Lawsuits for Libel, Damages, or Injunctive Relief: Before initiating any such legal actions, the Branch Committee must receive approval from the Coordinators’ Committee. The recommendation from the Branch Committee should include a description of available legal remedies, the cost for such legal action (including estimated attorney’s fees), an estimate of the likely time from the initiation of the action to the conclusion, and the likelihood of success and the recovery of an award. In libel actions, the Branch Committee should consider whether the suit will further advertise the false accusations. If it is believed that failure to initiate a lawsuit will lead to other difficulties, these concerns should be explained.
39. Printed Matter Against Jehovah’s Witnesses: As a general policy, the organization does not publish responses or retaliate legally if another organization or individual circulates printed matter that contains falsehoods about Jehovah’s Witnesses. It is usually best to concentrate on the positive activity of Kingdom preaching. If the Branch Committee thinks that the wise course is to take steps to counteract negative reports that may adversely affect our activities, the committee should set forth recommendations to the Coordinators’ Committee.​—See 6:23.
40. Refusal of Blood Transfusions: If our brothers’ refusal of blood transfusions is being disregarded or overridden by health-care providers, legal action may be warranted. If the Branch Committee recommends such, a complete overview of the matter should be presented to the Coordinators’ Committee. The recommendation should clearly state what is hoped to be accomplished by taking legal action. We are not inclined to get involved if a favorable result will not help the brotherhood in general.
41. Child-Custody and Visitation Disputes: At times, publishers are involved in child-custody or visitation disputes in which our beliefs are attacked. Unfavorable child-custody decisions in which our beliefs and activities are misrepresented can adversely affect our reputation in the community, even our legal status. With prior approval of and subsequent review by the Coordinators’ Committee, some branch offices have prepared and made available information to assist publishers whose beliefs are attacked in such disputes.
42. Personal Decisions: The Legal Department at the branch office is set up to assist the Branch Committee in “the defending and legally establishing of the good news.” It is inappropriate for the Legal Department to take time from these “more important things” to assist individuals with their personal legal matters. (Phil. 1:7, 10) The Legal Department should limit its work to legal matters affecting the advancement of Kingdom interests rather than personal requests for legal advice or services.
43. Protecting the Organization’s Copyrights: The organization has a long-standing policy of copyrighting its publications. Copyright is a tool that can be used to protect dedicated materials from being misused, such as by apostates or false religious organizations as well as by those who attempt to commercialize our artwork, photographs, or text. We do permit some uses of our copyrighted material, such as use or reproduction by Jehovah’s Witnesses for the personal use of family members, use of the organization’s artwork by the congregation at a Kingdom Hall, and use by authors and others for educational purposes with specific permission granted on a case-by-case basis. However, approval is not given for the general or widespread distribution of our publications, including artwork, photographs, and text, for posting on the Internet or any other electronic network or for reproduction or distribution in exchange for money. If the branch office learns that the organization’s copyrighted material is being misused, the Branch Committee should write to the Coordinators’ Committee, providing full details, including the action that the committee recommends be taken against the violator.
44. Tax Matters: Although many countries provide tax exemptions for religious entities, some countries do not. Tax exemptions are generally created by law and are usually not a legal right. Where required to do so by Caesar, legal entities used by branch offices should pay the taxes legally required of them, even if other religious entities do not follow the law. Conversely, legal entities used by branch offices should not pay taxes where there is an accepted legal basis for not doing so. Every Branch Committee should take full advantage of any legal exemption from taxation. Branch Committees should keep in mind that how they handle tax and legal matters (including the tax or legal status of those in the Worldwide Order) could have implications for other branch offices, the worldwide organization, and the Worldwide Order. In addition, individuals engaged full-time in religious activities may be entitled to tax exemptions. Such exemptions relieve the branch offices of some financial obligations and indirectly constitute legal recognition of our activities. The Branch Committee should keep the Coordinators’ Committee informed when exemptions currently enjoyed by the organization or members of the Worldwide Order may be in danger of being lost.
45. To respond effectively in times of emergency or war, Branch Committee members should be familiar with all decrees affecting our work and the operation of the branch office. The Branch Committee should watch carefully so that the work will be protected and the brothers will be given necessary direction. The Branch Committee should be alert as to what is going on in the country and keep the Coordinators’ Committee duly informed.
46. Keep Proclaiming the Good News: In some places, opposers make every effort to stop the Kingdom work. Nevertheless, true Christians continue preaching, even if this means doing so in a quiet manner. If literature is not available, the brothers can talk about the truth using only the Bible. Dedicated servants of Jehovah should be thoroughly acquainted with the Word of God so that they can continue to preach no matter what circumstances might arise.
47. Data Protection: The organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses respects individuals’ rights of privacy, based on principles set forth in the Bible. The organization recognizes the necessity for open and frank communication and the collection of personal and sensitive personal data in order to administer to the needs of Jehovah’s Witnesses and accomplish its religious and charitable activity. The organization also recognizes the corresponding necessity to maintain confidentiality and ensure that information is adequately protected. (Prov. 15:22; 25:9) Confidentiality is highly valued.​—Prov. 20:19.
48. Various countries have enacted data protection laws to ensure individuals’ rights of privacy. The organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses has a long-standing history of respecting privacy rights and maintaining confidentiality, even before the enactment of such data protection laws. The organization will continue to protect information disclosed to it in harmony with its long-standing practice, now recorded in this policy.
49. Scope of Application: This policy applies to the entire organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses, as represented by branch offices located throughout the world.​—See 6:23.
50. Data Protection Policy: The organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses handles all personal data in accordance with the following principles:
a.Personal data will be processed in a fair and lawful manner.

b.Personal data will be collected, processed, and used only to the extent necessary to fulfill Jehovah’s Witnesses’ religious and charitable purposes.

c.Personal data will be accurate and kept up-to-date. Any error will be corrected as soon as possible after the organization becomes aware of it.

d.Personal data will be kept only for as long as is necessary for the legitimate purpose(s) of the organization.

e.Due consideration will be given to respecting the rights of data subjects.

f.Appropriate technical and organizational measures will be taken to prevent unauthorized or unlawful disclosure of personal data. All computer-held personal data is held on password protected computers to which only authorized users hold passwords. Offices are locked after office hours and only authorized staff may gain entry.

g.Personal data will not be transferred between branches unless necessary to accomplish the religious or charitable purposes of the organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses, to which all of Jehovah’s Witnesses have consented by virtue of their free and willing decision to become Jehovah’s Witnesses and identify themselves as such.


51. Rights of the Data Subject:
a.A data subject’s right to the protection of personal and sensitive personal data and to the correction or deletion of personal and sensitive personal data is to be granted according to the practice of Jehovah’s Witnesses as set forth in this policy.

b.Whoever makes a request according to this section must provide sufficient evidence of his identity.

c.If a data subject requests access to, correction of, or deletion of personal data or sensitive personal data about himself, the organization will fairly consider granting the request by balancing the interests of the individual in gaining access or correcting or deleting data against the legitimate religious interests of the organization, including whether granting the request would endanger the organization’s right to religious freedom and practice.

d.The organization has an interest in permanently maintaining data regarding an individual’s status as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Deleting such information would unduly infringe on the organization’s religious beliefs and practices.


52. Right of Appeal: If a person believes that his rights have been infringed, he can appeal to the Branch Committee by means of a written personal letter. The letter must be sent within two weeks of the action that forms the basis of the appeal.



NEWS AND PUBLIC INFORMATION

53. Office of Public Information (OPI): This office at world headquarters works under the direction of the Coordinators’ Committee to represent Jehovah’s Witnesses to the media, academia, and other nongovernment organizations. To this end, OPI publicizes accurate information about Jehovah’s Witnesses and to correct misconceptions and prejudices about our organization and work. OPI provides training to the Public Information Desks (PIDs) and coordinates their participation in global media strategies and information campaigns. This office is also responsible for informing the brotherhood of significant events related to our worldwide activities in the form of news items published in the Newsroom section of jw.org.
54. OPI prepares and distributes information that highlights developments or initiatives of Jehovah’s Witnesses that are of special interest to specific representatives of the media, academia, and other public-facing organizations with international influence. A few examples include significant building projects, disaster relief work, translation initiatives, the use of advanced technologies in our Bible educational work, or special witnessing campaigns on subjects such as education, health, and social issues. This office maintains a list of internationally recognized journalists, academics, and other non-Witness experts and, where appropriate, takes the initiative to provide updates on Jehovah’s Witnesses relevant to the work of these professionals.
55. OPI also provides assistance to the Coordinators’ Committee in addressing situations or topics covered by the media that may significantly impact our activities. If a branch office needs help with media-related issues, the Branch Committee may submit the details of the situation to the Coordinators’ Committee for direction. If there is a major development or a fast-breaking news item in the branch territory (particularly in the case of a disaster or other emergency), the branch should communicate confirmed and relevant details directly to OPI through the PID via the Public Communications Resource intranet site (http://​www.bethel.jw.org/​WHQ/​OPI/​PID) or by e-mail (opi@jw.org) as soon as possible for a potential news item for the Newsroom section of jw.org. The Branch Committee should also submit a more comprehensive report to the Coordinators’ Committee.​—See 6:23.
56. Public Information Desk (PID): It is beneficial for the branch office to establish good relations with the public news media wherever possible. To this end, the PID should regularly provide representatives of credible media outlets, journalists, and academics in the branch territory with accurate and newsworthy information about our activities and beliefs. (Col. 4:5, 6) This may include preparing media-specific material on topics and events of local interest involving Jehovah’s Witnesses. The PID may also direct these professionals to the resources and other official information available on the Newsroom page of jw.org.
57. When the branch receives requests for information from the media, discernment should be used in deciding whether inquiries should be answered and, if so, to what extent. Each situation is unique and should be evaluated based on the subject matter as well as the reputation of the outlet and the reporter. Any requests from media or academic professionals involving the republishing of material that is not from the Newsroom should be referred to the Coordinators’ Committee for consideration. Additional support information, procedural guides, and communication tools are available to the PID through the Public Communications Resource intranet site administered by OPI.
58. The PID should be alert to positive news stories related to Jehovah’s Witnesses in the branch territory and, after obtaining approval from the Branch Committee, provide this information and related source materials to OPI. OPI will then determine if the recommended story qualifies to be developed into a news item. If so, OPI will develop the material with the assistance of the branch and forward the item to the Coordinators’ Committee for consideration. News releases and news alerts currently appearing in the Newsroom can serve as a guide to the PID for ideas on positive news stories. Once a branch-related news item is posted to the Newsroom, the PID should immediately inform appropriate media and/​or academic contacts within the branch territory. Please keep OPI informed of any resulting news coverage.
59. Public Information Desk Overseer: Each Branch Committee should appoint a brother at the branch to oversee the activities of the PID. The Branch Committee should also consult Country Committees under its supervision to appoint a media contact for each country in the branch territory. (Please review our letter dated HCA:NB June 4, 2015, No. C-38278C.) Those assigned to the PID, particularly the PID overseer, should have a working knowledge of both English and the language used by local media, so as to assist those who translate materials appearing in the Newsroom and to facilitate communication with OPI. The brother overseeing such media-related functions should be humble, capable, and tactful. He should be able to articulate our beliefs clearly in a personable yet professional manner, particularly when dealing with non-Witnesses. The brother should be prepared to care for news interviews and other inquiries from media outlets, serving as the official spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in the branch territory. He will also serve as the permanent branch media contact for news releases prepared by OPI. Please keep OPI informed of the current staffing of the PID and the media contacts working in countries under the oversight of the Branch Committee.
60. Appointing Additional Organizational Spokesmen: Along with the use of the PID overseer as a spokesman for Jehovah’s Witnesses in your branch territory, there may be times when other individuals are selected to assist with media inquiries on specialized topics because of their background in that field. For example, a member of the Legal Department at the branch may be used to handle media inquiries related to ongoing court cases or major legal issues involving Jehovah’s Witnesses. Such appointments should be determined on a case-by-case basis after evaluating the specific nature of the media request. However, in all cases, the PID would coordinate the arrangements made between the media professional and the assigned spokesman as well as assist the spokesman in preparing for any interviews.
61. The Teaching Committee provides an annual convention media guide to branch offices for use in connection with regional, national, special, and international conventions. A representative from the Media Services Department may be assigned as a convention spokesman by the local Convention Committee in harmony with direction from the branch office. Following the instructions in the media guide, it is appropriate for this brother to invite the local media to report on the convention each year. Ordinarily, no newspaper, radio, or television advertising is used for conventions unless it is free.
62. Correcting Misinformation: As a general rule, we avoid controversy when it comes to minor misconceptions that appear in the media. However, if some in the media spread false information of a serious nature about Jehovah’s organization, what can be done? The Branch Committee generally knows the situation in the country and will often be able to judge whether it would be wiser to contact the media and attempt to correct the misinformation or to ignore the matter. There is “a time to be silent and a time to speak.” (Eccl. 3:7) Please write to the Coordinators’ Committee if further direction is needed.​—See w98 12/1, pp. 17-18, pars. 15-18.
63. Handling Media-Related Emergencies: In a media-related emergency, such as criminal activity involving Jehovah’s Witnesses or a slanderous campaign that could have repercussions on our preaching work, the Branch Committee has the responsibility to handle the matter quickly. The committee should communicate with the Coordinators’ Committee for direction, particularly if it is anticipated that problems will quickly spread to other countries because of media reports. If slanderous or lying reports appear in the media, it may be appropriate for the PID, in consultation with the branch Legal Department, to review these reports and submit a recommendation to the Branch Committee. The Branch Committee may write to the Coordinators’ Committee to provide details on the matter or to request additional direction on pursuing the matter legally.​—See 6:23.



COMPUTER DEPARTMENT

64. The WHQ Computer Department oversees the work of all branch Computer Departments worldwide, under the supervision of the Coordinators’ Committee. This includes setting standards, providing global shared services, specifying new equipment, designing and maintaining computer networks, and supporting commercial enterprise software and software developed by headquarters.
65. The WHQ Computer Department has technicians working under its direction in various branches in order to provide timely assistance to branches around the world. These technicians closely follow the standards and policies that apply to all areas under the supervision of the WHQ Computer Department, such as networking, servers, and software.
66. For detailed information on organizing local computer operations, the Branch Committee and the branch Computer Department should consult Computer Department Guidelines.
67. Branch Computer Department Responsibilities: The Branch Committee should appoint a capable, trustworthy brother and perhaps an assistant to oversee the Computer Department. The principal responsibility of the Computer Department is to supply branch departments with computers, servers, software, telephones, radio communication, data communication, telecommunication, and related technologies. In addition, this department provides helpful support to keep equipment in good working order. Most important, it ensures that all the electronic data belonging to the branch is available only to those authorized to use it and is protected against tampering or accidental loss.
68. Standards and Guidelines: In order to maintain reasonable uniformity among branches, headquarters provides standards and technical guidelines. The branch Computer Department should endeavor to keep up-to-date with such information as provided in correspondence to the branches, Computer Department Guidelines, and the Technical Support Library located on the Extranet. There is usually no need for branch members to experiment with or pioneer the use of the latest technologies available; rather, they should concentrate on using what has been approved.
69. If the branch Computer Department feels that it needs assistance in evaluating whether to replace equipment, in using new software, or in similar matters, the branch office may submit a request for help and direction to the WHQ Computer Department.
70. Data Backups and Disaster Recovery: Ensuring good data backups and having a disaster recovery plan are extremely important and should be viewed as one of the priorities of the Computer Department. Backup procedures should be performed, monitored, and verified at the frequency and in the manner directed in Computer Department Guidelines. Unless an exception has been granted by the WHQ Computer Department, backup data should be kept in or moved weekly to a secure location that is not in the same building as the primary server being backed up. This increases the possibility that, in the event of a localized accident or a disaster affecting the main servers, branch data could be restored and reinstalled on new equipment.
71. The Computer Department is responsible for having basic recovery procedures in place in case critical equipment, such as a server, fails. The procedure will vary according to the amount of computer equipment used throughout the branch territory and the availability of local vendor support. It may include having a limited supply of spare equipment readily available. The readiness to respond to potential issues should be thoroughly validated at least once a year.
72. Approvals: Any purchase of new computer hardware or software that goes beyond normal supplies, such as printer cartridges, and small items, such as memory sticks, needs approval from headquarters. This includes replacements for equipment that is taken out of service because of failure or because of the need for upgrading. Approval is obtained by submitting a Nonliterature Branch Request. For a list of recommended equipment, consult the Technical Support Library.
73. Security: Much of the information that is stored electronically is of a confidential nature. The Branch Committee should have an up-to-date list of all brothers who have access to such data. A meeting at which the importance of confidentiality is emphasized should be attended by each brother who is given such rights. A branch member may lose his Bethel service privilege if confidential data is accessed or copied without authorization. All users accessing branch data should first sign the Watchtower Information Resources Confidentiality Affirmation (available in the Technical Support Library). If changes are needed for legal reasons, this document may be adjusted by the Branch Committee.
74. The Computer Department is responsible for regular server and network administration tasks, such as software installation, data backup, user and group maintenance, file permissions, and monitoring. Some of these tasks require “system administrator” permission to accomplish the work. This type of network permission should be limited to a small number of trusted brothers. For the protection of the branch, local laws may require that such brothers sign a specific nondisclosure agreement. An up-to-date list of all administrative passwords, along with the document outlining the disaster recovery procedure for the branch, should be maintained in a secure location on the network, and a hard copy or soft copy on a USB key in a sealed envelope should be given to the coordinator of the Branch Committee. For additional information relating to the security and management of confidential data, see the Information Security and Acceptable Use Policy and the Records Management Policy, both available in the Technical Support Library.
75. Infrastructure: The Computer Department would generally specify, install, and maintain the cabling and infrastructure for the branch network. When planning network improvements, WHQ Computer Department should be contacted. It will work along with the local Computer Department and the supervising Regional Design/​Construction Department (RDC) to prepare designs and budgets for the improvements at the branch facility or remote translation office (RTO). The Branch Committee may decide that another department, such as Maintenance, will install the new infrastructure according to the WHQ Computer Department’s approved design and budget.
76. An air-conditioned and secure room should be designated where network equipment and servers containing the branch data can be installed. The telephone system would usually also be installed in this room, along with all the communications equipment needed to connect the branch to the outside telephone system and to the Internet. Access to this room should be limited to those who have been authorized by the Computer Department overseer and the Branch Committee. Anyone authorized should be well-trained and familiarized with the operation of the room prior to being allowed to have access.
77. Training and Support: The Computer Department must be service-oriented. Its goal is not only to provide computer equipment and software but also to help branch members make good use of the equipment and software that have been approved and provided for translation, publishing, and administration.
78. The complexity of the technology in use today makes it very important that thorough training be provided for those working in the Computer Department. This includes understanding the office productivity software and server products currently being used. It is also necessary to train backup people. When a computer system is installed, training is often provided. Ongoing training is required to get the most benefit from the computer equipment and to reduce the frustration that results from members not knowing how to use the equipment or software.
79. Depending on the size of the branch, the Computer Department might choose to establish a help desk that brothers can contact to receive help with using computer equipment and software. The brothers or sisters assigned to the help desk should be well-trained so that they can resolve the majority of problems without involving other technicians. In addition, those working on the help desk should be patient and kind with those needing assistance, showing a willing spirit. In most cases, it is good for those who support the hardware and software to deal directly with the brothers using the hardware and software. This promotes good understanding and cooperation and usually leads to better support. The help desk is not to provide assistance for or to repair personally owned computers.
80. HuB: The WHQ Computer Department is responsible for the development and support of the HuB software, the standard administrative software used by all branch offices worldwide. Branch offices should use existing HuB features or request enhancements to meet additional requirements. The HuB program is kept up-to-date with organizational procedures as these are adjusted from time to time. The branch should not develop other administrative software locally without written approval from the WHQ Computer Department.​—See 3:86-87.
81. HuB is a large program with thousands of features. Since it is used by both large and small branch offices, not all features are appropriate for each branch office. Simplification in branch operations also means simplifying our use of computers wherever possible. The Branch Committee in each branch is responsible for deciding which features of HuB should be used. Balance is required to ensure that the features of the software being used contribute to productivity and accuracy without placing a burden of unnecessary work on those using it. If a Branch Committee is unsure about using a particular feature of the program, it should consult with the WHQ Computer Department.
82. Selected brothers in various branches serve on the Applications Regional Support Team. In this assignment, these brothers make sure to follow direction from the WHQ Computer Department when providing support to the branches. Therefore, branches should e-mail the WHQ Computer Department or use the online support forum to request HuB support. The WHQ Computer Department may then assign a Regional Support Team member to assist. If a branch office needs assistance to implement a new feature in HuB, the requesting branch office should send a memorandum to the WHQ Computer Department, outlining the need.
83. The Branch Committee should organize HuB support. The branch Computer Department will maintain the HuB server and database, make regular backups, apply necessary updates, and administer user security. The Branch Committee is responsible for determining which users are granted various HuB permissions. However, it is not necessary for HuB administrators to be members of the Branch Committee, as this is a technical role.
84. User training is best done by the most experienced HuB users in the branch. In many branches, this will be experienced users within a department. In branches that do not have experienced users within a department, a department overseer may ask the branch Computer Department for such training. Those assigned to support HuB should be alert to new features as described in the HuB documentation and should make sure that new features are made available to software users after discussing these features with the Branch Committee and the respective department overseers.
85. The WHQ Computer Department provides the branch offices with resources to assist in training and support. In addition, the HuB support site on the Global Bethel Intranet contains helpful information, training material, and program updates. Branch offices can also e-mail the WHQ Computer Department or use the online support forum for technical assistance or to report bugs in the program.
86. Programming: Computer software can be a valuable tool in getting our work done. However, simplification in our operations includes simplifying our software requirements where possible. Standard software packages are developed and maintained under the direction of headquarters, and as far as possible, branches should work with the standard software tools provided, such as HuB, apps.jw.org, MEPS, and the Watchtower Translation System (WTS). This software should be kept up-to-date as directed by headquarters.​—See 3:80.
87. It is generally not necessary for a branch to develop custom software, and most branches do not require a separate programming group in the Computer Department. Before they are started, all software projects must be approved by the Branch Committee and the WHQ Computer Department, even if the project is to be done by remote volunteers or a resource outside of Bethel. When the Branch Committee recommends a local programming project, it should write to the WHQ Computer Department for approval. The WHQ Computer Department will consult with other headquarters departments and seek approval from the appropriate Governing Body committee as needed.
88. Where a local need is not addressed by a standard software package, such as HuB, apps.jw.org, Builder Assistant, Watchtower CAD, MEPS, or WTS, it is best in most cases to request an enhancement to the existing software. In this way, other branches with the same needs may benefit. Enhancement requests for existing software should be submitted in writing to the headquarters department or Governing Body committee that cares for the software package.​—See 8:1.
89. At times, because of some specific local situation, a department at the branch office might not be able to care for its assigned work exactly as desired using the HuB program. In such cases, the Branch Committee should usually adjust the way the department does its work. If it is believed necessary, the Branch Committee may send an enhancement request to the WHQ Computer Department. If it is not possible for a department to use the standard software because of local legal requirements or other unique circumstances, the Branch Committee should write to the WHQ Computer Department for direction.
90. Although branches were previously able to make customizations to the Admin program, this is not possible with the HuB program. If there is a local requirement not addressed by existing HuB features, the Branch Committee should write to the WHQ Computer Department for direction. Branches should not submit enhancement requests and then do local software development to address what they requested while waiting for the enhancement to be programmed. HuB reports may be customized or translated to meet local requirements without seeking additional permission.
91. HuB enhancement requests should always be entered on the appropriate document template, approved by a Branch Committee member, and then sent to the WHQ Computer Department. If the benefit of an enhancement request justifies the amount of work required, it will be approved by the WHQ Computer Department after consulting with the appropriate headquarters department or Governing Body committee. Enhancement requests that would involve significant work or would change an organizational procedure will have to be carefully analyzed.
92. Commercial Software: The Computer Department is responsible for making sure that commercial software is not used without proper licensing. Personally owned software should not be used on branch computers. If software is needed, it should be properly purchased and licensed by the branch. This means that records have to be kept to show clearly all available licenses at the branch and who is using them. Discrepancies must be resolved either by removing the program or by obtaining a proper license. Software should not be obtained without approval from the WHQ Computer Department and should not be installed on any branch equipment without prior approval from the Computer Department.
93. Use of the Internet: All security policies from the WHQ Computer Department should be carefully followed. These provide essential protection from cyberattacks, malicious software, and viruses from the Internet. Internet access should be monitored and filtered. Since access to the Internet is automatically granted to most users, reminders should be periodically given about using this access during work hours for work-related matters only.



AUDITING/​RECORDS MANAGEMENT

94. Auditing/​Records Management Department: Under the oversight of the Coordinators’ Committee, the Auditing/​Records Management Department at world headquarters assists with coordinating and reviewing the audits of all branches and works along with the appropriate world headquarters department(s) as it pertains to audit findings. For information regarding the records management aspect of the work, see the Records Management Policy Guidelines document on MDS. Please review and become familiar with the principles contained in these guidelines. However, do not begin implementing these guidelines until you are contacted by the Coordinators’ Committee.
95. Local Auditors: The Branch Committee should appoint one qualified elder from outside of the branch Accounting or Purchasing departments to serve as the branch auditor. Generally, it should not be a member of the Local Design/​Construction Department (LDC). However, if an exception is approved, someone from a different department should be assigned to work with the local auditor on any aspects of the audit that pertain to LDC. A member of the Branch Committee would not normally be appointed to serve as the branch auditor. The auditor should not be the Branch Committee coordinator or the Branch Committee contact that oversees the Accounting or Purchasing departments. However, if it is believed that an exception is required, please write to the Coordinators’ Committee. The local auditor will generally be a part-time responsibility. He does not need to have extensive accounting experience. But he should be trustworthy, conscientious, have good judgment, and be able to interact well with people.
96. If the local auditor or any assistant auditor is different from the previous year and already in some form of special full-time service, a memorandum should be sent to the Auditing/​Records Management Department with the name of the brother, his Member ID number, and his jw.org field domain user name. This should be done as soon as possible. Thereafter, the Auditing/​Records Management Department will send him additional information.
97. If the local auditor or any assistant auditor is different from last year and is not a Bethelite or in some form of special full-time service, he should complete an Application for Volunteer Program (A-19) before being invited to assist the organization. (See Guidelines for Those Who Assist With Bethel Work From a Remote Location, A-102.) If it is decided that he qualifies, he may be invited to serve as a Bethel consultant (BOC). Upon his acceptance, he should be assigned to the Branch Committee Office, and his name, Member ID number, and jw.org field domain user name should be sent to the Auditing/​Records Management Department. Thereafter, the Auditing/​Records Management Department will send him additional information. Because of the nature of his work, he may be given temporary access to the Bethel network and an internal Bethel e-mail account. Anyone who is granted access to the Bethel network should sign the Watchtower Information Resources Confidentiality Affirmation.​—See the Personnel Committee’s letter to all branches, dated HLA:HLB September 23, 2016, No. C-48547L.
98. Assistant Auditors: A ministerial servant may be trained as an assistant auditor. However, please keep in mind that the brother should be mature, trustworthy, able to keep things confidential, and have a good reputation within the branch. Additionally, he should not be used to lead meetings with department overseers or the Branch Committee and would not be used to investigate serious issues, such as fraud, should they be discovered as a result of the branch audit. Likewise, sisters could be used in a secretarial or support role but would not meet with department overseers or Branch Committee members.
99. World Headquarters Auditors: If no qualified brothers are available in the country, a memorandum should be sent to the Auditing/​Records Management Department to request that a world headquarters auditor should be assigned to perform the branch audit. Additionally, it is the goal that each branch receives an audit by a world headquarters auditor at least once every five years, even if the branch has a local auditor. This will enable world headquarters auditors to learn and understand the unique circumstances of each branch, to work with the local auditor where applicable, and to provide feedback to the Coordinators’ Committee. If the Branch Committee feels that an auditor from another branch is required, the Coordinators’ Committee would need to give approval for such a request. The Coordinators’ Committee may also initiate a branch audit and assign the auditors according to the need. When an auditor is assigned by the Coordinators’ Committee and there is no local auditor, other brothers may be assigned to assist him, but the headquarters auditor will serve as the lead auditor.
100. If you feel that a brother in your branch has the qualifications and ability to serve as a world headquarters auditor and to audit another branch, please write to the Coordinators’ Committee explaining the qualifications of the brother. If there are brothers in your branch who are currently used as world headquarters auditors, you do not need to write about them unless they are no longer able to serve in this capacity.
101. Scheduling the Audit: Branches with a local auditor can begin performing the audit as early as February 1, testing financial activity within that service year. It is not necessary to wait until all financial activity for the branch is completed for a service year. The auditor may submit the questionnaires and his report as early as June 1, but no later than November 30. When a branch receives a world headquarters auditor, he may begin performing the audit as early as June 1 but should submit the questionnaires and his report no later than November 30. The world headquarters auditor and the Branch Committee should determine the dates for the audit. Additionally, since an audit by a world headquarters auditor is usually performed in a condensed time frame, it is imperative that the audit be given priority. Representatives from the branch Accounting, Local Design/​Construction, and Purchasing departments should be assigned and available to answer questions that may arise during the audit.
102. Branch Audit Report (A-21): The Branch Audit Report is comprised of questionnaires that will be used on a rotational basis. Each year, one of the audit questionnaires will focus on internal controls for all financial areas of branch activity. The other questionnaires will provide an in-depth audit of specific areas of the financial activity of a branch. The audit includes references to organizational guidelines, such as Branch Organization (bo), Branch Accounting Department Guidelines (badg), Purchasing Guidelines (PD-1), and Local/​Design Construction Department Guidelines (DC-3). Since one purpose of the branch audit is to provide an independent review, the Coordinators’ Committee does not provide copies of the audit questionnaires to Branch Committees before or during the audit. However, after the auditor submits the Branch Audit Report and his comments directly to the Coordinators’ Committee, he will provide a copy to the Branch Committee.
103. Use of HuB: Some of the questions state that specific reports or searches must be run within HuB. If the auditor is not familiar with these programs, someone who is familiar with them should be made available to assist him. For auditors that are familiar with using HuB, create a user for the auditor and assign him to the financial auditing feature group.
104. Branch Committee’s Comments on Report: Within 30 days after the auditor submits the branch audit, the Branch Committee should send the Coordinators’ Committee a numbered letter explaining how each finding will be addressed. Below are questions that should guide your explanations.
            What steps do you plan to use to correct the finding, and when will the steps be completed?

            Are you unsure of how to correct the finding and therefore are in need of assistance regarding how to do so?

            Was the finding a misunderstanding? If so, what is the correct situation and what led to the misunderstanding?

            Do you need more time to identify how to correct the finding? If so, when can we expect to receive an update?

            Do you feel that you cannot correct this finding and that an exception should be granted? If so, why do you feel this way?


For each finding, answers should be provided to the set of questions that best fits the situation at the branch. These clear explanations for each finding will enable the Coordinators’ Committee and the appropriate world headquarters department(s) to see what steps are being taken to address the finding and if any additional help or direction should be provided.
105. In addition to the annual branch audit, local circumstances may at times require other audits. An external audit is done whenever local legislation requires it or it seems otherwise prudent. This is usually done by a government-registered auditor. His report, together with the audited financial statements, may be submitted to the government agency stipulated in the legislation. Wherever possible, a qualified brother should perform this type of audit. There is generally no need to provide information related to entities that are not subject to the audit. Notify the Coordinators’ and Publishing committees if an external audit will be conducted on a branch for the first time.
106. At times, authorities will require an audit of a specific aspect of branch activity. Although it is necessary to comply with legal requests, there is no need to volunteer information that is neither requested nor required by law. Identify which documents are part of the official accounting system, hence subject to audit, and which documents are strictly of an internal nature and therefore not required for the audit. Notify the Coordinators’ and Publishing committees as soon as you become aware that this type of audit will be performed on a specific aspect of your branch activity.
MUSEUM DEPARTMENT
107. The Museum Department works under the direction of the Coordinators’ Committee to care for the Warwick museums and the Watch Tower Society’s Bible collection and to provide assistance to branches in developing the content of exhibits and Bible displays. Requests for new exhibits or displays should be sent to the Coordinators’ Committee for content approval. If approved by the Coordinators’ Committee, the Museum Department will work with the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department to confirm the budget for the proposed exhibit. The Museum Department will then work with the branch in preparing a proposal within the allotted budget for submittal to the Coordinators’ Committee. After the exhibit content has been approved, the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department will take the lead in coordinating the installation of the approved exhibit.



CHART 3.1
CORRESPONDENCE FORMATS FOR COMMITTEES AND DEPARTMENTS AT WORLD HEADQUARTERS

Governing Body and Committees

Correspondence Format


Governing Body
Coordinators’ Committee
Personnel Committee
Publishing Committee
Service Committee
Teaching Committee
Writing Committee

Numbered Letter


Headquarters Departments

 

Art Department
Audio/​Video Services
Auditing/​Records Management Department
Global Health Care Office
Global Purchasing Department
Hospital Information Services
International Printing Department
MEPS Programming
Museum Department
Office of Public Information
Text Processing Services
Theocratic Schools Department
Translation Services
Treasurer’s Office
Web Publishing
WHQ Broadcasting Department
  Regional Broadcasting Department–Europe
WHQ Computer Department
WHQ Legal Department
WHQ Travel Department
Worldwide Design/​Construction Department
  Regional Design/​Construction Department–Africa
  Regional Design/​Construction Department–Americas
  Regional Design/​Construction Department–Asia/​Pacific
  Regional Design/​Construction Department–Europe
Writing Correspondence
Writing Department

Memorandum




