
CHAPTER 4
Personnel Committee



BETHEL FAMILY

1. The Branch Committee, acting representatively for the Governing Body, is to be keenly interested in the spiritual welfare of the Bethel family. An effort should be made to maintain a wholesome atmosphere among all in the family. Members of the family should feel that the Branch Committee is ready to help and, of course, committee members should be approachable at all times. Suggestions should be welcomed and used if advisable.
2. It is proper to commend the brothers and sisters and express appreciation for their work, assuring them that they are needed. This will contribute to their contentment and happiness. In turn, a happy family will be a productive family.​—1 Cor. 12:25, 26.
3. Avoiding Partiality: All members of the Branch Committee must give careful and prayerful consideration to avoiding partiality in dealing with those at Bethel and those in the field. (Rom. 2:11; Jas. 3:17, 18) When there is reason to provide something extra for someone in the spirit of 1 Timothy 5:17, 18, the matter should be handled openly and in a manner that all will appreciate and understand. This will eliminate any appearance of secrecy or favoritism. Thus, whether receiving extra help or doing any work in connection with it, individuals who may be involved in such matters will understand the situation, giving no cause for gossip or hurt feelings.
4. Overcoming Problems: Individuals often encounter personal problems and may want to talk to someone to ask questions and receive Scriptural counsel and guidance. Branch Committee members need to be good listeners and show kindness and patience.
5. Some have problems because they try to impose their conscience on others and insist that everyone see things their way. (Rom. 14:1-4) Or a person may look for something to criticize and then build up a list of complaints, perhaps eliciting support from others. (Rom. 12:17, 18) Older brothers may use 1 Timothy 5:17 to suggest that as an exception, they should have special privileges. How much better it is to take to heart Luke 22:25, 26, for we all are brothers! If a sister, especially the wife of an overseer, feels that she deserves special privileges or insists on saying how things should operate, there will be problems. (1 Tim. 2:11, 12) Some kind, understanding counsel will usually correct such trends before they become deeply rooted.​—Gal. 6:1.
6. The Branch Committee should calmly and Scripturally help the brothers to keep balanced and find joy in working together. Most personal problems can be handled locally at Bethel, but major questions and problems may be referred to the Personnel Committee. Fine direction is provided in Dwelling Together in Unity, in the section entitled “Resolving Problems.”
7. Application Process: An application form, Application to Become a Member of the Worldwide Order (A-8), should be submitted to the Branch Committee and kept on file. This application is first reviewed by the Branch Committee, which determines (1) if the individual qualifies for Bethel service and (2) if there is a need for him at Bethel. If there is a need, the Branch Committee will send a recommendation to the Personnel Committee for final approval, providing such essential information as the applicant’s full name, gender, age, years baptized, marital status, whether anointed or other sheep, years in full-time service, current assignment, the Bethel assignment he is recommended for, and the reason why he is needed at Bethel.​—See 6:12.
8. When recommendations of new ones for Bethel service are made, the age requirements, from 19 to 35 years, should be kept in mind. Those under 19 years of age should not be recommended. Each one invited to Bethel should be a productive worker. Special circumstances may at times require recommending a mature brother with a special skill to serve at Bethel, even though he may be a little over 35 years of age. But this should be the exception. If such a recommendation is made, the Branch Committee should explain why the brother is needed and what efforts have been made to find someone else who meets the basic requirements for Bethel service. Although the older brother may be an excellent worker and would fill a need, his wife may find it difficult to adjust to Bethel or may have health problems that make her a below-average Bethel worker. In such a case, one department may benefit while another would not.
9. Without consulting with the Personnel Committee, the Branch Committee is authorized to approve:
            A new Bethel family member (BBR), provided that the person is within the standard age requirement and will be replacing someone who has departed or will soon depart Bethel service. However, if the addition of the new Bethel family member will increase the overall size of the Bethel family, or if the person is over the usual age requirement, the Branch Committee will send a recommendation to the Personnel Committee for final approval.

            A temporary Bethel family member (BBT) for up to one year who is a replacement for a regular Bethel family member or a temporary Bethel family member and is within the standard age requirement. If it is desired to retain the services of a temporary Bethel family member after the initial one-year period, the Branch Committee should submit its recommendation to the Personnel Committee in the usual manner near the completion of the person’s temporary assignment. Temporary Bethel family members should be provided with a specific end date for their temporary service.​—See 4:27.


10. There is no need to consult with the Service Committee before recommending for regular Bethel service (BBR, BBT, or BBF) those who are graduates of the Bible schools or who are temporary special pioneers, special pioneers, or substitute circuit overseers. However, if the Branch Committee wishes to transfer to Bethel a field instructor, a field missionary, and/​or a circuit overseer for a period of more than three months, the committee should send a numbered letter to the Service Committee explaining the need and a proposal for caring for the need in the field if the transfer is approved by the Service and Personnel committees. Along with the numbered letter, the usual recommendation form that is used when making recommendations for Bethel service should be attached, which will be forwarded to the Personnel Committee for further handling if approved.​—See 6:38.
11. All who work at Bethel should have meaningful work to do. If there is not enough work for a person to do at Bethel, it would be better for him to be assigned to the field. The Branch Committee should always make sure that Bethel is neither overstaffed nor understaffed. A formal review of all Bethel personnel should be performed on a yearly basis to determine who may be better suited for an assignment in a different Bethel department or in the field. Newer members of the Bethel family gradually gain proficiency and, in time, can easily shoulder a greater workload. Experience has shown that when many young people are assigned to work together, some are inclined to waste time, especially without an overseer present to see that the work gets done.
12. New Members: When new members arrive at Bethel, a member or a representative of the Branch Committee should speak to them about the importance of working whole-souled and putting Kingdom interests first. Also, the arrangement for providing spiritual assistance needs to be explained to them. Encouragement should be given them to discuss personal problems with any of the experienced elders at Bethel. Every help should be offered to aid new members in adjusting to life at Bethel.
13. The new member is shown to his room and given the opportunity to read the Dwelling manual and any other material provided. Any forms that are required by the branch office will be filled out. A program of orientation is arranged so that he will become familiar with the layout of the buildings and see the work being done in various departments, such as the kitchen, dining room, laundry, and housekeeping. Working for a day and a half with a housekeeper has proved to be very helpful for new ones. It is better that a member of the Branch Committee or a brother or brothers appointed by such committee introduce the orientation program for any of these departments, although a sister may be assigned to demonstrate certain procedures.
14. For new members of the family, the first year is a year of training. Elders working closely with the new brothers should endeavor to help them appreciate their privilege of sacred service at Bethel. It is hoped that well-qualified ones will continue to serve at Bethel for as long as they may be needed. However, if an individual does not seem well-suited for Bethel service, he should be given appropriate counsel as soon as this is observed. It would be unkind and unscriptural simply to tell a person at the end of the year that he has not proved satisfactory. Counsel and help should be given throughout the year. Of course, anyone may be dismissed or directed to leave at any time for improper conduct or for any other circumstance that may interfere with his Bethel service. In any case, matters should be explained to him in a kind manner and in a way that may help him to progress whether he stays at Bethel or not. We want to help new Bethel family members make a success of their service at Bethel with the goal of making spiritual advancement.
15. First Five Years at Bethel: A person who comes to Bethel should be in good health. He should have his personal affairs arranged so that he is able to devote himself to his Bethel service within the framework of the established arrangement for support of members of the Worldwide Order, such as personal time away, health care, and so forth. He should be physically, mentally, and circumstantially able to adjust to Bethel and to give consistent attention to his work assignment. In the case of a married couple, the above would apply to each mate individually. Each should enjoy good health and be able to shoulder his or her own responsibility as a member of the Bethel family.
16. If a member of the Bethel family misses an unusually high number of workdays, perhaps 15 to 20 days in a year’s time, the Branch Committee needs to be aware of this. Was it the result of an unusually prolonged illness, an accident, or an operation? Is it expected that he will miss a similar number of workdays each year because he has generally poor health? Was it necessary to care for an unusual family emergency that is not likely to be repeated? Such matters were considered when a new one was being trained during his first year, and they should continue to be given careful consideration during the first five years of his Bethel service, particularly during his three year tested-as-to-fitness period. There is no need for individuals to lose any of their personal time away because they missed a certain amount of work. The real issue is whether Bethel is the place for them. The goal is to keep the organization strong and, at the same time, to give consideration to the needs of individuals. The Personnel Committee may be consulted in unusual cases.
17. Even though a person who is still relatively young may have been at Bethel for more than five years, he should be able to do his work without missing a great number of workdays. If he consistently misses work because of poor health or other personal problems, the Branch Committee will consider what can best be done to help him. In some cases, it may be that he should leave Bethel if there is no reason to believe that there will be improvement. Of course, if a person has spent a good portion of his life at Bethel and works diligently to the extent that his health permits, we certainly want to look after him and not in any way make him feel that he is a burden to Bethel. When members of the Bethel family have spent many years in special full-time service, perhaps 25 or more, and some disabilities arise, the branch will make some provision for them and arrange for them to serve according to their physical ability.
18. Seniority: Years of seniority are determined by adding up the time a person has been in full-time and special full-time service assignments. Seniority includes time spent in all avenues of full-time service. It does not include time spent as a congregation publisher or an auxiliary pioneer. A person’s seniority is used to determine such things as the number of additional days of personal time away that are credited to him each year on September 1 and the amount credited to his Personal Expense Account. Seniority is also helpful to the branch office in handling such matters as the assignment of Bethel rooms in a fair and impartial way. (See 4:20.) At times, two or more Bethel family members may have similar seniority. To help resolve matters involving seniority-based assignments or other privileges, seniority is determined in the following order: (1) full-time service, (2) special full-time service, (3) date of baptism, (4) age.
19. If a person has had a break or breaks in his full-time service, his seniority is the combined total of days he has spent in full-time service assignments. Thus, if an individual has to leave full-time service to care for aging parents or some other responsibility and is thereafter able to resume full-time service, his seniority is based on the entire period or periods he was previously in full-time service. Those leaving special full-time service assignments (special pioneer, member of the Bethel family, circuit overseer, missionary, construction servant, or any other special full-time service assignment) to enter the regular pioneer service will not experience an interruption in their full-time service record if they are appointed as regular pioneers within three months of leaving their previous assignment. Brothers and sisters in full-time service who are sentenced to prison because of their Christian neutrality will similarly have their full-time service record recorded as uninterrupted if they resume serving in the full-time ministry within three months of their release from prison.​—See 6:94.
20. Rooming: Only regular Bethel family members (BBR), temporary Bethel family members (BBT), and expatriate Bethel family members (BBF) are provided permanent housing accommodations in buildings owned or rented by the branch. Rooms are assigned according to the individual seniority, based on time spent in full-time service, of the senior roommate. (See 4:18-19.) When the one who obtained the room leaves Bethel, it is put up for bid. As a general policy, two people are assigned to each room. The Branch Committee should take into consideration the number of rooms available and the number of people to be housed, the size of the rooms, the age, health, and years of service of the occupants, and other factors. In some isolated instances involving elderly ones or other extenuating circumstances, adherence to the policy of two people to a room may result in distress and hardship for one or both roommates. If a problem arises that the Branch Committee is not able to resolve, it may be necessary to write to the Personnel Committee to explain the problem and make recommendations. Single Branch Committee members may be accommodated in a modest room without a roommate, provided there are sufficient rooms available. If a Bethel family member loses his or her marriage mate in death and the surviving mate has 40 or more years of full-time service and is living in a large double room, he or she should move to a smaller double room after a reasonable amount of time has elapsed. For widows or widowers advanced in age, the Branch Committee may make an exception for them to remain in their current room. In either case, a roommate will not be assigned. If the surviving mate has less than 40 years seniority, he or she may remain in his or her current room alone for one year and then be given the option of being assigned to a one-person room of up to 350 square feet (33 sq m) that is not a double room or choosing a roommate and remaining in the current room.
21. Transfers Within Bethel: When any worker is transferred from one assignment to another, he should be told why. Thus, he will not wonder if the change is because of a failure on his part or if there is something that he should try to improve.
22. Transfers to Other Countries: A branch may assign Bethel members to offices under its supervision in other countries without consulting the Personnel Committee. Additionally, a branch may move personnel within its branch territory, such as to or from a remote translation office, without seeking approval from the Personnel Committee. This is the case whether the remote office is within or outside of the country where the branch is located. All other requests to transfer branch personnel, such as transfers between two branch offices, should continue to be forwarded to the Personnel Committee for consideration and approval.
23. The cost of obtaining or renewing a passport is ordinarily the responsibility of the individual. However, if a special full-time servant is transferred to another country at the direction of the organization and he needs a passport to care for his assignment abroad (whether in the field or at Bethel), the branch office may pay for the passport (either a new one or a renewal) if the special full-time servant requests such financial assistance. Any unusual cases should be submitted for consideration to the appropriate Governing Body committee along with the pertinent details and your recommendation.
24. Training: Bethel family members who travel to another country at their own expense during their personal time away may at times request to receive some practical training during their visit to the foreign Bethel. In other instances, the branch may recommend that a member of its Bethel family temporarily be sent to another Bethel to receive some necessary training. In either case, a written recommendation should be submitted to the Personnel Committee using the Bethel Department Training Request form (A-97). Training will be provided only to fill a definite need that exists at Bethel. Approval will not be given to training requests submitted for individuals who simply wish to extend their stay in a foreign country.
25. Time Away for Mates During Branch Work Assignments: See 9:88.
26. Departures: If a member of the family desires to leave Bethel service, he should submit a written notice to the Branch Committee at least 30 working days in advance, if at all possible. In this way, arrangements can be made for someone to replace him in the work assignment. A person leaving special full-time service cannot use more than 24 working days of accumulated personal time away to extend his departure from special full-time service, even if he may have accumulated more unused days. (See 9:75.) If an individual has been directed to leave Bethel for nonjudicial reasons but disagrees with the direction, he may appeal to the Branch Committee. If upon hearing the appeal, the Branch Committee decides that he should leave Bethel but the person strongly disagrees with the decision, the Branch Committee should advise him that he may ask the Personnel Committee in writing to review the matter if he wishes to do so. If this is the case, his letter of appeal should be sent along with the comments of the Branch Committee.
27. When a person leaves Bethel service, it would be good to review carefully the appropriate staffing guidelines to determine if a replacement is needed. If a replacement is needed, the Branch Committee is authorized to invite someone without consulting with the Personnel Committee.​—See 4:9.
28. Elders at Bethel: All elders should be available to members of the family who have problems. Elders should be observant of any difficulties or discouragement on the part of a Bethel family member and be ready to offer personal counsel and help. The Branch Committee should explain clearly to all elders what their responsibilities are and what is expected of them. Serious problems should be reported to the Branch Committee. Elders should see the value of giving encouragement to fellow workers and commendation for things well done. They should help all in the family to maintain a good attitude toward their service privileges, reassuring each one that his services are needed and appreciated.​—Matt. 11:28-30.
29. In some larger branches, it may be advantageous to have small elder groups made up of elders at Bethel to share in the responsibility of assisting the Branch Committee in taking care of the Bethel family. (Titus 2:6, 7) The elder groups may help in making recommendations or in dealing with problems that individuals have. They do not decide on the everyday operation of the branch or on changes that are to be made. They assist principally in giving commendation and in caring for personal problems. Of course, the Branch Committee is free to seek information or suggestions from such elder groups.
30. Once a year, branches should arrange to have an elders’ meeting with all appointed elders serving with the following enrollments: regular, expatriate, and temporary Bethel family members, full-time and part-time commuters, remote servants, construction servants, expatriate construction servants, full-time and part-time construction commuters, and Assembly Hall and Bible school facility servants. Those who are serving in the field should watch the meeting the same way they receive other spiritual programs. This would preferably be streamed live. If this is not practical, a recording can be made available for 30 days on JW Stream. Responsible elders may be asked for their suggestions on subjects to be discussed. Thereafter, the Branch Committee can assign committee members or selected elders to develop outlines and present these in brief talks to the assembled elders. This regular communication with the elders is helpful in keeping them well-informed. It provides an opportunity to encourage them and assists them to fulfill their responsibilities as elders. The Personnel Committee will prepare and forward to all branches one outline that may be used by the Branch Committee for the elders’ meeting.



JUDICIAL COMMITTEES

31. Anyone coming to know of serious misconduct on the part of a member of the Bethel family should advise the offender of his obligation to bring this to the attention of a member of the Branch Committee or another elder. The one having knowledge of the offense should also make a report to the Branch Committee so that the organization will be kept clean. (Lev. 5:1) This should be done whether the offender reports the matter or not. The judicial procedures outlined in this section apply equally to full-time and part-time commuters.
32. Investigation Procedure: If the elders of the congregation that a Bethel family member attends become aware of an accusation against the Bethelite, they should immediately contact the branch office for direction. Except for regular pioneers, this direction applies equally to all full-time service enrollments listed in Chart 9.2, Full-Time Servants Enrollments. If the accusation involves the Bethelite’s conduct with someone in his congregation or if the offense was committed in his congregation environment, the Branch Committee may determine that it will be most practical to have the local elders investigate and handle the case to the extent necessary. Otherwise, the matter will be handled at Bethel. In either case, two elders will investigate the allegation. If the accused is under consideration for a theocratic assignment, it should be held in abeyance pending resolution of the case. If upon investigation the elders determine that the charges have no substance or that no further action is needed, they should inform the Branch Committee in writing of their findings. If the elders determine that a disfellowshipping offense has been committed, the Branch Committee will appoint a judicial committee.
33. Judicial Committees Involving Bethelites in the Congregation: If it has been established that a Bethel family member has committed a disfellowshipping offense involving his congregation, the congregation body of elders should inquire of the branch office immediately as to how to proceed. The branch office will determine whether the local body of elders should convene a judicial committee or whether the case should be handled by a judicial committee at Bethel. If the local elders are directed to appoint the judicial committee, the case will be handled in an expeditious manner, just as a judicial case would be handled for any publisher in the local congregation. The judicial committee should immediately advise the branch office of the final decision.
34. Judicial Committees at Bethel: These are appointed to handle offenses that are the basis for disfellowshipping, just as they would be handled in the congregation. The judicial committee and its chairman are appointed by the Branch Committee. Qualified elders who are in a good position to render a balanced and just decision should be appointed. Though the judicial committee is usually made up of three elders, it could include four or five because of the gravity of the offense and other factors. Branch Committee members should not serve on judicial committees if other qualified brothers are available to do so. Thus, if needed, some Branch Committee members would be available to serve on an appeal committee. Although the judicial committee may want to consult with members of the Branch Committee before reaching a conclusion, the judicial committee alone should make the decision. The report to the Branch Committee will be made out using the form Judicial Committee Summary at Bethel (A-7).
35. Appeal Committees: If the judicial committee (either at Bethel or in the congregation) decides that the Bethel family member should be disfellowshipped, he may make an appeal in writing to the Branch Committee. The Branch Committee will select an appeal committee of qualified elders at Bethel, one of whom will be appointed to serve as chairman. The appeal should be heard in an expeditious manner even if the basis for the appeal does not appear to be sound. In the case of disfellowshipping, the wrongdoer should be given the usual seven days to make this appeal, even though he would normally leave Bethel on the day the original judicial committee advises him of the decision to disfellowship. No announcement of the disfellowshipping should be made until seven days have elapsed since the appeal was handled.​—ks10 8:1-20.
36. When the disfellowshipping is upheld, there is no further arrangement for appeal. However, if an individual persists in believing a serious error in judgment has occurred, the appeal committee should inform him that he may submit his allegations in writing to the appeal committee within seven days for transmittal to the Branch Committee. The appeal committee should not mention this provision unless the individual indicates that he believes a serious error in judgment has occurred. If he indicates a desire to submit a letter of appeal to the Branch Committee, the announcement of disfellowshipping should be delayed. The appeal committee should submit the wrongdoer’s letter, the report from the judicial committee, and a report from the appeal committee to the Branch Committee. No announcement should be made until a reply is received from the Branch Committee.​—ks10 8:14-15.
37. If someone is judicially reproved and therefore must leave Bethel, a letter should be sent to the body of elders of the congregation that he will attend so that the elders may be able to assist him to regain his spirituality. A copy of the judicial committee’s report (either from Bethel or from the congregation) should be sent to the Service Department, which will write the letter to the body of elders. In the case of disfellowshipping, the form Notification of Disfellowshipping or Disassociation (S-77) should also be included in the report to the Service Department. If the person is reinstated, the S-77 form should be signed and returned to the Service Department. An announcement should be made to the Bethel family in the case of a disfellowshipping. (ks10 7:31) In the case of someone who is judicially reproved, the Branch Committee should use good judgment in determining whether an announcement should be made or not.​—ks10 7:21.
38. Judicial Matters Involving Those With a Design/​Construction Enrollment: Similar to the arrangements for handling a judicial matter involving a member of the Bethel family, the Branch Committee should be informed whenever a construction servant, Assembly Hall servant, or Bible school facility servant serving under its supervision becomes involved in serious misconduct. The Branch Committee will be responsible for determining if local elders, elders in the servant’s home congregation, or other elders selected by the Branch Committee or circuit overseer should be assigned to handle the matter. The Service Department will serve as the correspondence conduit between the branch office and the elders assigned to handle the matter.



EXPATRIATE BETHEL FAMILY MEMBERS

39. A person may decide on his own to move from his homeland to another country. Although he was not assigned by the organization to serve in a foreign country, he may eventually be approved to serve as a regular member of the Bethel family (BBR) in that country and may continue serving indefinitely as such.
40. The designation “expatriate Bethel family members” (BBF) includes:
  Individuals who have moved on their own to the country and who after being invited to Bethel are recommended to the Personnel Committee as expatriate Bethel family members

  Bethelites in foreign service

Foreigners serving at Bethel who are not recommended for expatriate Bethel family member status will continue to serve as regular members of the Bethel family (BBR).


41. If a foreign brother is especially valued for his experience and maturity and has served at Bethel for a period of time, the Branch Committee may recommend to the Personnel Committee that he serve as an expatriate Bethel family member.
42. Some Bethel family members are sent by the Personnel Committee to a Bethel in another country to fill a particular need or to provide training for a period of no less than three years. In correspondence, these expatriate Bethel family members will continue to be referred to as “Bethelites in foreign service.”
43. An expatriate Bethel family member would not lose his status if he is approved for continued Bethel service following his marriage to either a local sister or a sister from another country. He would remain an expatriate Bethel family member and his wife would be appointed as an expatriate Bethel family member regardless of her country of birth.
44. The personal time away arrangement for expatriate Bethel family members is the same as that outlined in the Dwelling manual, paragraphs 30-37.



BETHELITES IN FOREIGN SERVICE

45. Bethelites in foreign service are expatriate Bethel family members sent by the Personnel Committee to fill a need for skilled workers or to train local brothers to become skilled and to equip them to take on more responsibility. The goal is for a branch to become self-sufficient as far as workers are concerned.
46. Bethelites in foreign service are expected to remain in their assignment for at least three years. If there is still a need for their help and they are willing to remain in the assignment after three years, they may continue in foreign service. The Worldwide Order will cover the cost of transportation to the foreign assignment as well as the cost of shipping necessary personal belongings. See Branch Instructions for Shipping Personal Belongings and Packing and Shipping Instructions for Special Full-Time Servant Transfers (A-98).
47. If a Bethelite in foreign service wishes to return to his home branch after completing at least three years in foreign service, he should write to the Personnel Committee, expressing his desire. The Branch Committee should receive a copy of the letter and provide the Personnel Committee with its recommendation. He may request to return to Bethel service in his home branch if he previously served at Bethel. If, as an exception, the Personnel Committee sent a well-qualified brother from the field to serve as a Bethelite in foreign service and the brother wishes to return to his home branch, he may ask to return to the field. The Branch Committee should forward all such written requests along with its observations to the Personnel Committee. The Worldwide Order will pay for the return trip. In all cases, the Personnel Committee should be advised when a Bethelite in foreign service discontinues his foreign service assignment.​—See Guidelines for Bethelites in Foreign Service (A-69).



TEMPORARY VOLUNTEERS

48. At times, a need may arise for additional help at Bethel for a short period of time. When such needs exist, Branch Committees have the authority to invite brothers and sisters who have an approved Application for Volunteer Program (A-19) on file to volunteer at Bethel for periods of six months or less. However, when temporary volunteers are needed for more than six months, the Branch Committee should obtain approval from the Personnel Committee. If there is a need for the volunteer to serve at Bethel on a full-time basis, the recommendation for him to serve as a regular member of the Bethel family should be handled in the usual way. When a temporary assignment exceeds a full calendar month, the volunteer may automatically receive a monthly reimbursement that is equivalent to the monthly allowance that is given to Bethel family members in that country (unless the temporary volunteer specifically mentions that no reimbursement will be needed).



COMMUTERS

49. Part-time commuters (BBV) and a limited number of full-time commuters (BBL) may be invited to supplement the need for additional workers. They are not members of the Bethel family and are not housed at a Bethel-owned property. Full-time commuters are members of the Worldwide Order of Special Full-Time Servants of Jehovah’s Witnesses and therefore receive the usual provisions given to those in special full-time service. They may attend the Morning Worship program and the Bethel family Watchtower Study, as well as be assigned to participate in these spiritual programs as commenters. Whenever a recommendation is made to the Personnel Committee for someone to serve as a full-time commuter, the branch should include a recommendation for an appropriate allowance to cover housing, transportation, and personal expenses. Part-time commuters are not members of the Worldwide Order. Regular pioneers who are part-time commuters may count up to 70 hours a month and have a reduced requirement of 780 hours per year. The 780 hours would be the total of all hours worked at Bethel and those spent in the field ministry. Branch Committees are authorized to approve a new part-time commuter without consulting with the Personnel Committee if the applicant will be replacing a part-time commuter who has left or will soon leave this form of service. Part-time commuter quotas have been established for each branch. Recommendations to increase such quotas should be sent to the Personnel Committee for approval. Part-time commuters may attend the Morning Worship program on the days that they work at Bethel. They may also attend the Bethel family Watchtower Study even if they do not work on that day.​—See 7:109-110.



REMOTE VOLUNTEERS AND SERVANTS

50. Qualified brothers and sisters who desire to serve as remote volunteers should submit, through his or her congregation, an Application for Volunteer Program (A-19). Branch Committees are authorized to approve a new remote volunteer without consulting with the Personnel Committee if the applicant will be replacing a remote volunteer who has left or will soon leave this form of service. Remote volunteer quotas have been established for each branch. Recommendations to increase such quotas should be sent to the Personnel Committee for approval. Remote volunteers would initially be invited to serve for one year. Remote volunteers who are granted access to the Bethel computer network should be asked to sign the Watchtower Information Resources Confidentiality Affirmation. Approved remote volunteers who are serving as regular pioneers may receive hour credits each month for the time they spend as remote volunteers, similar to the arrangement for regular pioneers who serve as part-time commuters. They may be granted up to 70 hours a month and have a reduced requirement of 780 hours per year.
51. Similar to remote volunteers (BRV), remote servants (BRS) are those selected from among individuals who possess needed skills of a specialized nature but whose personal circumstances do not allow them to serve physically at Bethel. They provide a valuable full-time contribution to the work of a Bethel department from their private homes. However, unlike remote volunteers, remote servants are members of the Worldwide Order. Therefore, they receive benefits similar to what are provided to other members of the Worldwide Order, such as personal time away and health care. These special full-time servants may receive access to the Bethel spiritual programs. Recommendations for remote servants should be limited to very skilled individuals whom a Branch Committee considers to be especially valuable to the work. Applicants should be between 19 and 55 years of age, in good health, and considered spiritually mature. Anyone who is recommended as such should have already been tested first as a remote volunteer or as a temporary volunteer. A remote servant should submit, through his or her congregation, an Application to Become a Member of the Worldwide Order (A-8). Using the Remote Servant (BRS) recommendation form (A-95), a recommendation including a recommended allowance should be sent to the Personnel Committee for its consideration. Remote servants should be reviewed annually by the Branch Committee to determine whether they continue to qualify and whether their services continue to be needed. It is not necessary to submit a new recommendation to the Personnel Committee every year unless there are specific concerns that merit consideration. Remote servants may supplement their monthly allowance by engaging in some limited secular work as long as it does not interfere with their meeting the weekly 40-hour requirement for their Bethel work and fulfilling their congregation responsibilities. They are not required to use personal time away in order to perform some limited secular work.



BETHEL CONSULTANTS

52. Brothers or sisters who assist the branch from their private residences when a particular need or a project arises are enrolled as Bethel consultants (BOC). Typically, these volunteers provide limited assistance with purchasing, real estate, translation work, special conventions, tax or legal matters. Generally, they do not receive access to the Bethel network or any of its data, such as correspondence, file directories, or HuB data. These outside volunteers should complete an Application for Volunteer Program (A-19) before being invited to assist the organization. Approved Bethel consultants who serve as regular pioneers may receive hour credits monthly for the time they spend on branch work, similar to the arrangement for pioneers approved to work with Kingdom Hall and Assembly Hall construction projects.



USE OF SPECIAL PIONEERS FOR BETHEL WORK

53. It is preferred that special pioneers focus their time and energy on their assignment in the field rather than on Bethel work. With this in mind, before submitting a recommendation to the Personnel Committee to use a special pioneer for Bethel work, the Branch Committee should determine if a Bethel family member could fill the need. Alternatively, it may be possible to recommend that a regular pioneer or an exemplary publisher be enrolled to serve as a part-time commuter (BBV) or remote volunteer (BRV). (See 4:49-50.) Because of the temporary nature of a temporary special pioneer assignment (FTS), there is no provision for such ones to be used for Bethel work. If such an individual is needed for Bethel work, he should discontinue his temporary special pioneer service so that he may accept the part-time or full-time Bethel assignment. In this way, another qualified pioneer could be used in the field as a temporary special pioneer.
54. Requests to use skilled special pioneers to handle Bethel work part-time will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Only when there is an exceptional need that cannot be filled by a Bethel family member, a part-time commuter, or a remote volunteer will approval be given to use a special pioneer to do Bethel work on a part-time basis. If the Personnel Committee approves such a request, the special pioneer should spend no more than half of his monthly hour quota doing Bethel work. Additionally, the Branch Committee should remember that priority should be given to training a replacement to do the Bethel work as soon as possible. In this way, the special pioneer can eventually refocus his full time and energy on his assignment in the field.
55. On the other hand, if a highly skilled special pioneer is needed to do Bethel work on a full-time basis, consideration should be given to recommending to the Personnel Committee that he serve as a remote servant (BRS) or, if he lives near the main Bethel facility or a remote Bethel facility, as a full-time commuter (BBL). Moreover, there is no objection if an individual chooses to discontinue serving as a special pioneer in order to make himself available for Bethel work. If a need for his services exists, the Branch Committee should make an appropriate recommendation to the Personnel Committee in the usual manner.
56. If approval is given to use a skilled special pioneer to assist part-time with Bethel work, he should retain his primary enrollment. However, he should likewise be enrolled concurrently in HuB either as a part-time commuter or as a remote volunteer, which will serve as his secondary enrollment.
57. Occasionally, the Service and Personnel committees also receive recommendations that certain infirm special pioneers or special pioneers who have a reduced hour requirement serve simultaneously as part-time commuters or as remote volunteers. In cases where the field activity of a special pioneer is severely limited because of age or health, perhaps he is still able to do some Bethel work, such as translation. In situations like these, he should spend no more than half of his monthly hour quota doing Bethel work. This may allow the individual to enjoy productive work and a sense of accomplishment.



BETHEL HOME ORGANIZATION

58. The Bethel Home encompasses most matters pertaining to the daily needs of the Bethel family. This includes reasonable provisions for such things as cleaning, laundry, meals, medical care, security, safety, and the general welfare of the family. (Luke 10:7; 1 Tim. 6:8) While the entire Branch Committee should be familiar with the work done in the Bethel Home, one committee member or someone assigned by the Branch Committee should oversee this work.​—dw par. 29.
59. Although many helpful services may be provided to the Bethel family, care should be exercised to make wise use of dedicated resources. All Bethel family members should be conservation-minded regarding utilities and equipment. (dw pars. 75-78) The Branch Committee should provide reminders to the family as needed.
60. All assignments in the Bethel Home are important and necessary. Performing domestic tasks, even those considered menial by some, is sacred service to Jehovah. (dw par. 23) Depending on the workload, an individual may be able to care for work in more than one department. Good planning and proper organization are essential for smooth and efficient operation. (1 Cor. 14:40) Additionally, it may be necessary to assign members of the family to care for various duties during nonworking hours.​—dw par. 27.
61. Housekeeping and Cleaning: “A good model for all Christian homes is Bethel.” (w89 6/1 p. 16 par. 7) Not only does the cleanliness of Bethel contribute to the good reputation of Jehovah and his name people but it is also essential to maintaining good health. (Deut. 23:13, 14) Therefore, Bethel life requires that a high standard of physical cleanliness be maintained. (dw par. 59) To keep up this high standard, every area at Bethel should be cleaned according to a set schedule or as needed.
62. Bethel family members have the primary responsibility to care for their own room. Occupants should not expect the housekeeper to put things away for them. They should try to lighten the housekeeper’s workload as much as possible.​—dw pars. 57-60.
63. A Branch Committee member or another responsible brother assigned by the Branch Committee should oversee the housekeeping and cleaning operations, ensuring that good-quality training is provided and that the approved standards are being consistently maintained. When giving housekeeping assignments, responsible brothers should take into consideration such things as room sizes and types and the age of the housekeepers, as well as other circumstances.
64. Cleaning principles, examples of housekeeping routines and cleaning schedules, and departmental guidelines can be found in the Housekeeping Information manual. Actual cleaning procedures, available equipment, and chemicals will vary according to local circumstances. Consistent routines ensure that no areas are overlooked and that a high standard of cleanliness is always maintained. (Lev. 11:44, 45) Housekeepers should be flexible and take the initiative in caring for their individual assignments.
65. It may be advantageous to assign brothers to do some of the more physically demanding cleaning tasks.​—1 Pet. 3:7.
66. In the spring of the year, Bethel family members spend a Saturday morning cleaning their entire room and any personal storage areas assigned to them. This is an assigned work period for everyone in the Bethel family. The objective of spring cleaning is to care for areas that are not scheduled to be cleaned by the housekeeper, as well as to give the family an opportunity to dispose of all unwanted personal items. Bethel family members may be given a list of tasks that they should accomplish. If the Branch Committee feels that it is necessary, in addition to Saturday the preceding Friday afternoon may also be used to do spring cleaning. Brothers 60 years of age and older and sisters 40 years of age and older may use all day Friday. Those who are assigned to care for duties during spring cleaning or those who are away for any reason may do their spring cleaning at a later time.
67. Larger branches may decide to use a specific workday each year for annual office cleaning. In such cases, Bethel family members may be allowed to spend up to one workday each year to clean their offices and work areas thoroughly. As in the case of spring cleaning, this cleaning period is not considered time away from work. Rather, it is part of the Bethel work assignment.
68. Laundry: The Bethel family is expected to wear neat, clean clothes that befit Christian ministers. The laundry assists the family in maintaining a good appearance so as to serve as a model to all those visiting Bethel and to enhance the organization’s reputation in the local community. In addition, the laundry cares for all Bethel linens, which contributes to the good health of the family.​—dw par. 63.
69. The Branch Committee will determine the size of the laundry staff, taking into account the size of the Bethel family, the number of sisters working in the department, the age of the workers, the type of laundry equipment that is being used, the type of clothing and linens used locally, and so forth. Good training is essential to ensure that the personal garments of the Bethel family and Bethel linens are cleaned properly.
70. All members of the family should be instructed on how to organize personal items before sending them to be laundered. On designated days of the week, members of the family bring or send their items to the laundry. Clean laundry should be returned to occupant rooms or made available for pickup as soon as possible.
71. All Bethel linens should be regularly inspected and repaired. At times, it is more cost-effective to replace an item than to repair it.
72. Arrangements should be made for basic garment repairs, such as for rips and tears, on personal items. Depending on the condition of the item and the needed repairs, the overseer will determine whether the repair will be made and will communicate with the owner of the garment as needed. Where possible, a limited service for altering clothing for the family may be provided.
73. Meals: Mealtimes should be pleasant and enjoyable occasions for all. Meals that are nutritious and tasty contribute to the overall happiness and well-being of the Bethel family.​—Eccl. 2:24.
74. The Branch Committee should make sure that wholesome food is served. Fresh food in season is usually less expensive and more nutritious. Extravagance and the purchase of specialty items should be avoided. (Luke 10:41, 42) Additionally, by planning ahead and buying certain items in bulk, the branch may realize a cost savings.
75. Sufficient amounts of food should be served at each meal. No Bethel family member should leave the table hungry because of a lack of food. (Mark 8:3, 8) Food that is left on the table after a meal may be taken away by members of the family for their personal use.​—dw par. 73.
76. Meals should always be served on time. The time for meals may be determined locally.
77. The cook or a designated brother working with the kitchen should create the menus and submit them for approval to the Branch Committee member assigned to oversee the kitchen. If the committee member feels that a change is needed, he should first consult with the cook or the designated brother working with the kitchen.
78. Everyone assigned to handle food must be given thorough training in food safety, and these principles should be strictly followed. Specific guidelines can be found in the Food Safety Training manual.
79. The kitchen is not available for private use unless approved by the Branch Committee.
80. The size of the kitchen and dining-room staff will vary according to the size of the Bethel family and the types of meals served. Cooks and dining-room workers will generally start work early to prepare the breakfast meal. Their work schedule for the rest of the day is adjusted accordingly.
81. Weekend meals and mealtimes vary according to the local circumstances and the size of the branch and will be determined by the Branch Committee. Serious consideration should be given to the needs of both the older and the younger members of the family. If no one from food service is working on a weekend, food may be provided in advance or individuals may be assigned to prepare meals.
82. During the evening and weekend meals, members of the family may be assigned to kitchen or dining-room duties. If local circumstances allow, brothers and sisters 50 years of age and older may be excluded from receiving these assignments.
83. A reasonable supply of nonperishable staple foods should be maintained for emergencies. Such supplies should be used and replenished on a regular basis to ensure that these foods do not deteriorate.
84. Health Care: When individuals are invited to Bethel, it is with the understanding that they are in good health. Sufficient rest, sleep, proper hygiene, moderation in entertainment, moderation in eating and drinking habits, and balanced exercise are essential to maintaining good health.​—dw pars. 63-67.
85. Arrangements should be made for a capable, sympathetic, experienced brother to oversee health care. It may be that a doctor, a nurse, or another qualified medical professional is available to assist with such care.​—See 9:40-49.
86. At the beginning of each workday and, if practical, at the beginning of each afternoon work period, housekeepers will check each room. Any who are in sick should be reported to the health-care overseer or department. Arrangements should be made to care for the needs of those who are ill. This would include making sure that sufficient healthful food is available for their use.
87. Security: Constant attention should be given to the protection of the Bethel family. Additionally, the branch property, which includes money, vehicles, and equipment, needs to be kept secure.​—dw par. 98.
88. Each Bethel family member should feel a personal responsibility for security as well as for any keys and identification entrusted to him.​—dw pars. 96-102.
89. A review of the effectiveness of branch security measures should be made periodically. To reduce the risk of criminal activity, practical measures should be implemented. Some examples are noted as follows:
            Accessible doors and windows should be appropriately secured.

            All entrance and exit door locks should receive regular inspection and maintenance.

            Security lighting should be installed at appropriate locations.

            Proper choice and placement of shrubbery can enhance security.

            Valuables should not be displayed in public view.


90. Each night, periodic security checks of the branch property should be performed. In addition to ensuring that the property is secure, inspections should be made of each building, to check for gas leaks, windows left open, water running, drains clogged, unnecessary lights left on, and so forth.
91. It is usually advisable to install antitheft devices on branch vehicles. Such devices may include bars attached to the steering wheel, chain locks for the engine hood, and cut-off switches that interrupt the starter circuit.
92. Safety and Accident Prevention: Imitating Jehovah, the Branch Committee places a high value on human life. (Ps. 36:9) The most valuable assets to Bethel are people. Therefore, the safety of the Bethel family is never compromised for the sake of speed, cost, or convenience.​—dw par. 69.
93. The safety of the Bethel family continues to be a concern of the Personnel Committee. The Branch Committee should review carefully what is being done in a practical way to educate the brothers and sisters at the branch about the importance of accident prevention. Accident-prevention instructions can include matters involving the safe operation of motor vehicles, proper work habits, the use of machinery and tools, and so forth. All these areas should be examined to see if common-sense precautions are being taken to prevent accidents. Members of the family can be trained to evaluate the potential hazards of a work site or assignment prior to starting work.
94. Each department overseer should consider safety procedures and fire prevention to be an important part of his responsibility. Brief, regular safety talks should be integrated into the work schedule of appropriate departments. These discussions should be positive; they emphasize the Branch Committee’s concern for the welfare of the family and the improved efficiency that results from following safety procedures consistently.
95. Overseers of departments that care for work that is potentially dangerous should ensure that all safety hazards have been explained to those working on such assignments and that safety procedures are being carefully followed. Bethel family members selected to serve in such assignments should be mature and safety-conscious.
96. All legal requirements regarding chemicals should be met. Training should be given to ensure the proper handling and storage of all chemicals. For example, mixing such chemicals as bleach and ammonia can be toxic.
97. A definite procedure should be established in advance that would be implemented in the event of an accident or emergency. Such an action plan would require someone to be available to perform the following essential functions:
            Administer first aid.

            Notify overseers.

            Provide emergency transportation to a nearby hospital or doctor.

            Call the fire or police department.


98. Each branch should have a program for training the drivers of branch vehicles. Only those who are qualified and well-trained should be used to drive. The following points should be applied:
            Vehicles must be properly maintained.

            Trucks should not be overloaded.

            Seat belts should be used by drivers and passengers.

            Drivers who are overly tired or otherwise impaired should not operate vehicles.

            All drivers should drive at a reasonable speed, according to local regulations and road conditions.


99. When losses, damage, or accidents occur involving branch property or individuals, responsible brothers will need to investigate the incident. Those having oversight should take steps to make needed changes and give appropriate counsel so as to prevent similar accidents in the future. (Ex. 21:29) Additionally, an incident wherein there was no loss, damage, or accident (a near miss) should also be investigated. A full report of the accident or near miss should be made to the Branch Committee.​—dw par. 68.
100. Accidents involving serious injury or major property damage should be reported to the Publishing Committee immediately. If a major injury to a Bethel family member results, the Personnel Committee should also be notified of the incident.
101. Visitors to the Branch: The branch offices of Jehovah’s Witnesses are recognized by our brothers and sisters as centers of theocratic activity. Motivated by strong faith, Jehovah’s people make special arrangements to visit Bethel to be encouraged and to see what is being accomplished. We do not want to make these visitors feel that they are imposing on us and on the work being done at Bethel. Good arrangements should be in place to welcome visitors in a warm way and to have well-prepared tour guides, who will enthusiastically show them the Bethel facilities.​—Rom. 12:13.
102. During regular working hours, someone should be assigned as a receptionist to greet visitors in a warm manner. The receptionist will also respond to phone calls and handle incoming inquiries, such as Kingdom Hall locations or items of local interest. However, it is the responsibility of the visitors to arrange for their own transportation and accommodations.
103. Depending on local circumstances, Bethel family members may host visitors for a meal. Additionally, they may make arrangements to have their parents, relatives, or friends in the truth stay as overnight guests for one or two nights in a guest room. Their stay may be extended for a night or two beyond that if circumstances allow. Whether coming for a meal or staying overnight, guests should be advised ahead of time to dress modestly, in line with Bethel standards.​—dw pars. 103-112.
104. Special attention should be given to caring for the needs of visiting missionaries, expatriate Bethel family members, and other special full-time servants. They should feel comfortable and welcome. At times, this includes providing transportation, food items, and so forth.



ASSEMBLY HALL AND BIBLE SCHOOL FACILITY SERVANTS

105. Where the size of an Assembly Hall or a Bible school facility warrants it, one or more Assembly Hall or Bible school facility servants may be assigned to oversee the normal operations, building maintenance, grounds maintenance, and cleaning of the facility. These are special full-time servants who work under the direction of the Local Design/​Construction Department (LDC). These are qualified individuals who have already proved their skills and organizational abilities in some form of full-time service as Bethelites, temporary volunteers, construction volunteers, construction servants, or special pioneers. They are members of the Worldwide Order who generally live on site and work a schedule similar to that of the Bethel workweek. The general age limit for those who are enrolled as Assembly Hall or Bible school facility servants is 70 years. Where warranted, a branch may request approval from the Personnel Committee for an exception.
106. The LDC or others designated by the Branch Committee may give well-qualified single brothers or married couples an Application to Become a Member of the Worldwide Order (A-8). The Branch Committee will review the application and determine if the applicant qualifies to be recommended either as an Assembly Hall servant (BAS) or as a Bible school facility servant (BSS). When there is a need for additional servants, the Branch Committee will submit the appropriate recommendation form (A-72 or A-91) to the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department which, in turn, will make a recommendation to the Personnel Committee for approval. Since the majority of the work should be done by local volunteers and groups from nearby congregations, the number of Assembly Hall and Bible school facility servants can be kept to a minimum.
107. If Assembly Hall or Bible school facility servants have health problems, appropriate care is provided. (See 9:40-49.) Additionally, although these servants work under the direction of the Local Design/​Construction Department, it is the responsibility of the Branch Committee, under the direction of the Personnel Committee, to oversee the spiritual welfare of these individuals serving in their branch territory.



CONSTRUCTION SERVANTS

108. At times, brothers and sisters are assigned to assist with building and maintaining facilities used in connection with our Kingdom work. Those who qualify and who serve for more than three months may receive the privilege of becoming members of the Worldwide Order. These brothers and sisters are assigned to work on building projects and to assist with disaster relief. The Personnel Committee oversees the personal and spiritual needs of construction servants worldwide. Construction servants may have various schedules, according to the need. They attend local congregations and share in the preaching work.



CONSTRUCTION VOLUNTEERS

109. In addition to construction servants (BCS), qualified brothers and sisters may be assigned by the Branch Committee as construction volunteers (BCV) to assist with building and maintaining facilities and to assist with disaster relief. Assignment duration may vary from two weeks to three months with a possible extension of up to three additional months for a maximum length of six months. If it is felt that a longer extension is needed, the Branch Committee will provide a recommendation to the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department which, in turn, will forward it to the Personnel Committee for approval.
             When assignments exceed a full calendar month, the volunteer receives the same monthly allowance that Bethel family members in that country receive. If needed, the branch makes practical living and food-service arrangements for the duration of the volunteer’s assignment.

             Construction volunteers are not full-time servants unless they are already regular pioneers. Regular pioneers may be credited up to 70 hours per month while serving as construction volunteers. Construction volunteers receive one day of personal time away for each full calendar month of their assignment.





CONSTRUCTION COMMUTERS

110. Those who serve full-time on theocratic construction projects and who provide their own accommodations are enrolled as full-time construction commuters (BCL). These are special full-time servants who arrange for their own accommodations and regularly assist five days a week (or 40 hours per week) on a construction project, whether at a branch office or at Kingdom Halls, Assembly Halls, remote translation offices, Bible school facilities, or other theocratic construction projects. BCLs include those who work on the construction site or those who support construction activities (such as by working on project development, in the construction office, in the kitchen, or by doing cleaning or purchasing) and whose assignments will end at the completion of the construction project in their area. Approval by the Personnel Committee is required for these servants, for which the branch will submit a Full-Time Construction Commuter (BCL) recommendation form (A-73).
111. Those who serve part-time on a construction project one or more days each week on a continual basis, who commute to the project from their own accommodations, and who may need access to the Bethel computer network are referred to as part-time construction commuters (BCC). Included are those on the construction site and those supporting the construction activities (e.g., project development, construction office, kitchen, cleaning, purchasing, and so forth) whose assignments will end at the completion of the project. Such ones should complete an Application for Volunteer Program (A-19). If a part-time construction commuter is needed for more than six months, the Branch Committee should send a recommendation form (A-90) to the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department, which will in turn forward its recommendation to the Personnel Committee. Volunteers who work part-time on Kingdom Hall projects and who do not need access to the Bethel computer network should not receive this enrollment. Rather, they should be designated as Local Design/​Construction volunteers.



DWELLING TOGETHER IN UNITY

112. The Dwelling manual is considered a part of Branch Organization. However, if there has been a change to what is printed in Dwelling regarding a procedure or a policy, the newly approved instruction should be followed. Regular and temporary Bethel family members may receive a paper or electronic copy of the Dwelling manual. Full-time and part-time commuters may receive a copy of the Dwelling manual during the time they are commuting to Bethel. Temporary volunteers​—more than three months (BBW)—​may also receive a copy of the Dwelling manual during the time they are working at Bethel. Additionally, all construction servants, all construction commuters, or construction volunteers who assist with the work at Bethel for a period longer than three months may receive a copy of the Dwelling manual for their use while they serve at Bethel. The manual should be returned to the Bethel Office when a person discontinues his Bethel service. If he received an electronic copy of the manual, he should be directed to destroy the file.



MICROSOFT OFFICE 365

113. In order to have access to Office 365 or other software used by the branch office, Bethel consultants, remote volunteers, or others caring for assignments from the branch office should be added to the congregation domain. The overseeing department should contact the individual’s congregation, requesting that he or she be added to the congregation domain. At that time, the following should be conveyed to the congregation: (1) No jw.org roles should be added solely because the individual has been added to the domain. (2) If the individual moves to a new congregation or no longer qualifies, he or she should be removed from the congregation domain.




