
CHAPTER 9
Provisions for Members of the Worldwide Order




1. This chapter outlines for Branch Committees the arrangements that should be followed in caring for the needs of special full-time servants, all of whom are members of the Worldwide Order. (See 3:26-33.) In this chapter, reference to Bethel family members includes regular, temporary, and expatriate members of the Bethel family. This also includes full-time commuters and remote servants, even though they are not considered to be members of the Bethel family. Reference to circuit overseers includes their wives and field instructors. Reference to field missionaries includes temporary field missionaries. Reference to special pioneers includes temporary and infirm special pioneers. For a listing of full-time service enrollments, see Chart 9.2.



AGED AND INFIRM

2. General Guidelines: The Branch Committee is to be concerned with those who are aged and infirm and have served for decades in special full-time service. Therefore, practical arrangements are made to care for the physical needs of these brothers and sisters who are members of the Worldwide Order. The goal is, not to provide the same services for the care of elderly special full-time servants in every country, but to ensure that appropriate arrangements are in place to provide them with reasonable care.​—Ps. 71:9.
3. Assembly Hall Servants and Bible School Facility Servants: These servants will discontinue their assignment on August 31 of the service year during which they reach 70 years of age. The brother and his wife, if married, may be transferred to serve as special pioneers. (See 6:113.) In an exceptional circumstance, a servant who is over this age may still have the experience, skills, and strength to continue caring properly for the heavy load of responsibility that goes with operating and maintaining a theocratic facility. Therefore, where warranted, you may request approval from the Personnel Committee for an exception.
4. Bethel Family Members: Members of the Bethel family should be given meaningful work assignments according to their abilities and individual circumstances. They should not be given work to do that does not really need to be done. All Bethel family members who are 70 years of age or older may take up to one day off each week for the field ministry or for personal use, if they desire to do so. The time may be taken as one full day or as two half days within the week and may be used in conjunction with personal time away. The Bethel family member should notify his overseer when he will be away, but no permission is needed from oversight for this arrangement. Moreover, there is no objection to a married Bethel family member who is 70 years of age or older sharing half of his day off with his mate who is younger than 70 years of age. In that case, the married couple should use the half day off work during the same time period. For example, a husband who is 72 years of age may choose to give half of his day off to his wife who is 68 years of age. However, the couple’s time off from work must coincide, whether it is taken on a weekday morning or a weekday afternoon. It is not permissible for a married Bethel family member who is 70 years of age or older to give the entire day off to his mate who is younger than 70 years of age.
5. If they feel it necessary, brothers who are 70 years of age and older and sisters 50 years of age and older serving either as Bethel family members or as full-time commuters may leave their place of work before the Bethel workday officially ends in order to rest or to care for other personal matters. Or such older members may prefer to rest or care for personal matters after the noon meal before returning to work. It is left to the individual to determine how this personal time is used. This is done in the spirit of 1 Thessalonians 5:12, 13.
6. Circuit Overseers: Circuit overseers will discontinue their assignment on August 31 of the service year during which they reach 70 years of age. Consideration may be given to transferring the brother and his wife, if married, to serve as special pioneers.​—See 6:113.
7. If a circuit overseer who is not yet 70 years of age is experiencing challenges because of age, chronic health problems, or other circumstances, the Service Department should review the situation. If he is a longtime special full-time servant, an encouraging letter can be sent acknowledging his challenges along with the assurance that he will be assisted with his needs if he transfers from the circuit work. This may move him to request an adjustment in his service. He should be invited to contact the Service Department for direction. If the circuit overseer is not inclined to discontinue, it may be good to address the matter during the next scheduled shepherding visit by an experienced circuit overseer or by a branch representative. If the circuit overseer accedes and decides to discontinue, he should submit his decision in writing. The Branch Committee will review any recommendation from the Service Department regarding his future service, including possible appointment as a special pioneer. If the Branch Committee approves the recommendation, the Service Department will write the circuit overseer a warm, encouraging letter acknowledging his many years of faithful service and outlining any arrangements that have been made for him and his wife.​—See 2:30.
8. In cases where the circuit overseer feels strongly about remaining in the work even though this would prove detrimental to his health, the Service Department should present the matter to the Branch Committee. If it agrees, the Branch Committee should submit its recommendation for deletion to the Governing Body. (See 2:30.) If the Governing Body determines that the circuit overseer should discontinue, the Branch Committee may direct that the Service Department draft a letter for the Branch Committee’s review, empathizing with his struggles and informing him of the decision made that is in his best interests and those of the congregations. The letter would provide information about a new assignment and arrangements in place that will help him and his wife in connection with the transition.
9. When a circuit overseer with less than 25 years of special full-time service needs to discontinue his service, perhaps to care for parents or because of a health problem afflicting him or his wife or because of pregnancy, he should notify the Service Department. The Service Department could recommend to the Branch Committee that the circuit overseer and his wife, if married, be encouraged to serve as regular pioneers and that consideration be given to offering them some transitional financial assistance.​—See 9:37.
10. Construction Servants: The general age limit for construction servants is 55 years of age. To assist with larger organizational construction projects, consideration may also be given to having those who are over the age of 55 serve for one or more years or for the duration of the project. Due to the nature of construction, servants who are no longer able to perform the work should be reassigned to another avenue of service or to the field. At the latest, these servants will discontinue their assignment on August 31 of the service year during which they reach 70 years of age.
11. Field Missionaries and Special Pioneers: At times, field missionaries and special pioneers who have served faithfully for decades begin to experience chronic health problems or the limitations of old age or disease. While there is no arrangement to provide housing and long-term care for such individuals at Bethel, the Branch Committee will take the lead in thoroughly investigating other options with the objective of providing an individual with personal and/​or medical care while he remains in his field assignment. For example, could the local congregation provide needed assistance? (Mark 10:28-30) Are qualified local publishers or pioneers with medical training and experience available to assist? (1 Thess. 5:14) In some cases, consideration could be given to hiring a publisher or a pioneer to care for the long-term needs of the brother or sister. If a pioneer is involved, the branch may direct the congregation elders to show the pioneer consideration regarding his or her annual hour requirement. Consideration could be given to hiring nurse’s aides to care for the person in his field assignment. Such aides do not have to be Jehovah’s Witnesses. Simply put, the Branch Committee should consider what can be done locally, in the field, to meet the long-term needs of the elderly field missionaries and special pioneers in the best way possible. (Eccl. 5:18) Each case needs to be carefully reviewed and investigated before a recommendation to hire supplemental nursing care is sent to the Service Committee.​—See 9:41, 54b.
12. In some cases, a longtime field missionary may request to live closer to fleshly or to spiritual family members who are eager to care for his physical or medical needs; this is appropriate and appreciated. (1 Tim. 5:3, 4) However, what if long-term specialized health care cannot be provided in the foreign assignment and the field missionary has no family members available to assist him? In such cases, thorough consideration will be given by the Service Committee to transferring the field missionary to another country, such as his home country, where health care can be provided while he serves in the field. As noted above, it may be possible to utilize the services of qualified brothers and sisters in the field who can provide the personal assistance that is needed. In an exceptional case that seems to necessitate transferring a field missionary to Bethel for long-term health care, the Governing Body will need to be consulted.



ALLOWANCES

13. General Guidelines: A person should be provided with his monthly allowance regardless of the time spent in the field service month by month and even when he takes personal time away, is on an approved leave of absence, or is sick, as long as he continues as a special full-time servant. Based on recommendations from the Branch Committee, the Publishing Committee approves the maximum amounts outlined on the Record of Allowances (A-29) form. One A-29 form is completed for each country where there are special full-time servants. The monthly allowances shown on the A-29 form include a personal and travel portion and, if applicable, a housing portion. The housing portion is based on two persons sharing housing and utility costs. Any adjustments to the rates, based on local circumstances and information in the Cost of Living Chart (A-40) or exceptions for high-rent areas, must be approved by the Publishing Committee. The Publishing Committee should be informed if local regulations require payment for social insurance, government pension payments, or personal tax. As an exception, recommendations for remote servants (BRS), full-time commuters (BBL), and full-time construction commuters (BCL) are approved by the Personnel Committee, using specific forms. Once approved, allowance amounts for each of these individuals, broken down into personal allowance, travel allowance, and housing allowance, should be added to the A-29 for reference only.
14. When someone from a branch is assigned to serve at another branch for longer than one full month, he may (if that is his desire) receive the allowance that is given in the branch where he is temporarily assigned. Otherwise, he may continue to receive for the first three months of his temporary stay the allowance he would be entitled to in his home country. After that, he should receive the allowance of the country where he is temporarily serving. His PEA would also be adjusted to the rate of the new branch beginning with the fourth month of his stay. There is generally no need to provide any AEA allowance to a visiting special full-time servant. This does not apply to a circuit overseer who visits congregations in countries other than his home country. He would continue to receive the allowance rates of his home country regardless of how much time he may spend in another branch territory.
15. In some countries, there are full-time members in a branch office who live outside with their families. Usually, these are translators, and special arrangements are made for them. They do not come under all the guidelines for full-time members of the Bethel family who live in the Bethel home. Their provisions are specially arranged by the branch with approval from the Publishing Committee.
16. Assembly Hall Servants: The branch should give special full-time servants who live and serve at an Assembly Hall an allowance equivalent to that received by members of the Bethel family in the branch territory where they are serving. Since most Assembly Hall servants must also prepare most of their meals for themselves and care for personal needs (haircuts, dry cleaning, alterations, and so forth), the branch will provide an appropriate amount for these expenses, based on local circumstances.
17. Bethel Family Members: The basic Bethel monthly allowance is to help care for travel to meetings and for the ministry and to assist with basic living necessities that are not provided by the branch. It is calculated based on local circumstances and information in the Cost of Living Chart (A-40).
18. Bible School Facility Servants and Construction Servants: These servants receive an allowance equivalent to the allowance of Bethel family members in the country where they are assigned. Depending on local circumstances, reimbursements for expenses not typically accrued by Bethel family members may be provided. In addition to a monthly allowance, full-time construction commuters (BCL) may receive a travel and housing allowance similar to full-time Bethel commuters (BBL).
19. Circuit Overseers: The monthly allowance generally includes only the personal allowance for the circuit overseer and his wife, if married. The travel and housing portions are covered by the congregations if they are able to do so. If not, the circuit overseer can submit to the branch office whatever portion cannot be covered by the congregations.​—tg chap. 9.
20. If a newly appointed circuit overseer needs additional financial support while waiting for a permanent circuit assignment, the Branch Committee may increase his allowance to assist with necessary living expenses. The total amount should not exceed the maximum monthly allowance provided to special pioneers in that country.​—See 6:133.
21. If the branch office has an arrangement to assist circuit overseers with transportation, such as by providing a motorcycle or a vehicle, this provision would be available from the time that the circuit overseer takes up a permanent circuit assignment.
22. Field Missionaries: In addition to the monthly personal allowance, field missionaries may be given a travel allowance. Please see 9:54 to determine if a housing allowance is needed to cover the cost of rental and utilities.
23. Special Pioneers: In addition to the monthly personal allowance, special pioneers may be given a travel and housing allowance. The housing allowance may be given according to the average of the actual amount they pay for housing and utilities up to the maximum shown on the Record of Allowances (A-29) form. Any exceptions for high-rent areas should be referred to the Publishing Committee. If local laws permit, special pioneers may supplement their monthly allowance by engaging in some limited secular work as long as it does not interfere with their meeting the monthly hour requirement and fulfilling their congregation responsibilities. Allowance amounts are given regardless of the time spent in the field service each month and should be distributed at the end of each month without waiting for the monthly service report.



AUTOMOBILE EXPENSE ACCOUNT (AEA)

24. General Guidelines: When a Branch Committee sees the need, it can request approval from the Publishing Committee to set up an Automobile Expense Account (AEA). This is an additional travel allowance for qualifying vehicle or motorcycle owners serving as Assembly Hall servants, Bethel family members, Bible school facility servants, construction servants, field missionaries, or special pioneers. Approval from the Publishing Committee is required before granting any other financial assistance for travel to meet a local need.​—See 9:38.
25. To qualify for AEA, an individual must have a properly licensed vehicle or motorcycle and a valid driver’s license. Requests for credit to attend meetings should be based on the distance to the individual’s assigned congregation. Other requests may include miles (or kilometers) traveled to elders’ meetings, field service, shepherding calls, and assigned circuit assemblies with his congregation. Special full-time servants may request credit for the mileage involved for travel to attend one of the organization’s schools. Privately arranged travel to give talks in other congregations or to assist other congregations with Kingdom Hall maintenance or construction or to attend regional conventions or to shop or visit friends would not be covered. AEA should not be requested for a special full-time servant to attend a regional convention except in the case of missionaries and special pioneers.​—See 9:28.
26. Each individual will need to keep a daily and monthly record of congregation mileage activity in order to submit periodic requests for a credit of the AEA mileage provision. AEA requests should be submitted for the month that the congregation activity occurred instead of grouping multiple months together on one request. December’s AEA request should be submitted no later than January 25 of the following year. AEA allowances may not be carried over from one calendar year to the next. The credit is based on current fuel prices in various regions or countries under the branch as determined by the Branch Committee. A separate rate is generally needed for different fuel types, such as diesel and regular grade gasoline. The formula for calculating the AEA credit is as follows: qualifying miles (or kilometers) driven multiplied by the current fuel price (as determined by the Branch Committee), divided by the average miles per gallon (or average kilometers per liter) of the registered vehicle. A reasonable annual limit should be established by each branch for various categories of service. Requests for AEA credit may be submitted by filling out the Personal Financial Request (TO-4) or using electronic methods supported by headquarters.
27. Bethel Family Members: For Bethel family members, the cost of operating a vehicle is often supported by contributions from passengers. Those who do not have vehicles should use the portion of their basic monthly allowance that is designated for travel to help cover transportation costs by contributing to the owner of the vehicle in which they ride. Therefore, Bethel family members will need to be informed if the travel portion of the allowance is adjusted. To reduce costs, Bethel family members are encouraged to carpool wherever possible.
28. Missionaries and Special Pioneers: The AEA provision may also be requested by missionaries and special pioneers to cover fuel costs for travel to their assigned regional convention.​—See 9:25.



EXPENSES

29. Circuit Overseer’s Vehicle: Congregations and circuits are encouraged to care for the expense of obtaining and maintaining vehicles for the circuit overseers, which would include tires, repairs, insurance, license, and so forth. In some branches, the Publishing Committee approves a branch-managed Circuit Overseer Vehicle Arrangement (COVA) that is funded by congregations passing monthly resolutions to the Circuit Overseer Assistance Arrangement (COAA). Where the COVA is not approved, a local circuit may choose to provide a vehicle. Usually, major expenses for such a vehicle would be submitted to the circuit when convenient rather than to an individual congregation. However, if some congregations and circuits do not have the resources to cover such expenses, the branch may be asked to assist with these. This applies to any personally owned vehicle used in the circuit work if the brother is in need of assistance to keep his vehicle operating. Requests to the branch for expenses over USD 1,000 should be submitted to the Publishing Committee on a Nonliterature Branch Request with an explanation for consideration. (Some branches were given a higher figure.) If a circuit overseer eventually needs a replacement vehicle, perhaps the circuit will be in a position to help in this regard.​—See 9:36.
30. Funeral: The Branch Committee may approve the cost of a modest funeral, according to local circumstances, for a special full-time servant. Please write to the Publishing Committee for additional approval if the cost will exceed the local approval threshold. The branch office should take a special interest in comforting the surviving mate and seeing to his or her needs. If the Branch Committee has questions regarding the future service assignment for a special full-time servant who has been recently widowed, a recommendation should be sent to the appropriate Governing Body committee.
31. Personal Taxes and Insurance: Individual income taxes collected by the government on income as well as any kind of compulsory insurance (except for health) that applies to members of the Bethel family and others in special full-time service in the country should be included in the calculation of allowances. However, the individuals are responsible to make the actual payments.
32. We do not generally carry insurance on personal cars or property for members of the Bethel family or others in special full-time service. Any cost for such insurance is covered by the individuals. The organization does not accept responsibility for the loss of personal things kept by members of the Bethel family. However, exceptions may be made on the recommendation of the Branch Committee to help those in special full-time service cover losses of essential personal items because of robbery, warfare, or natural disasters. It is appropriate to counsel those serving in potentially dangerous areas not to keep unnecessary items of value in the home, apart from what is needed for the ministry or what makes them feel at home in their assignment. Missionaries should not expect compensation for the loss of vehicles, jewelry, and other such items. Additionally, the branch is encouraged to instruct the missionaries to be modest in what replacement items they obtain.
33. Shipping and Moving: When a special full-time servant is approved to transfer to a new or temporary assignment, the branch office is authorized to spend up to USD 3,000 per person to cover shipping expenses (including import duties) associated with shipping his basic personal belongings. In most lands, such expenses would normally be far less than USD 3,000 per person. (With regard to construction servants, see the brochure Continue to Put Your Heart Into the Work.) Any request that exceeds this spending limit or any request to ship a personal motorized vehicle should be referred to the appropriate Governing Body committee for approval. If approval is given to ship a personal vehicle, the special full-time servant will generally be responsible for paying any import duty fees related to the vehicle shipment. Please see the Branch Accounting Department Guidelines (badg) to confirm when assistance can be provided for losses related to shipments of personal items in connection with theocratic assignments.
34. Since many countries have additional requirements for exporting and importing personal effects, the exporting branch should notify the importing branch before the effects are shipped and request its comments and direction.
35. If it is necessary for the branch office to move a field missionary or special pioneer to a new congregation assignment, the branch should cover the travel expenses involved. It is usually best to select a territory that is not too distant from his current assignment in order to avoid unnecessary expenses. The branch is also authorized to assist a departing missionary with the travel and shipping expenses involved in his departure. In exceptional cases and if requested, there may be a need for newly appointed temporary special pioneers to be assisted with their travel expenses. For example, such an individual may be assigned to another country in the branch territory. However, keep in mind that applicants to the School for Kingdom Evangelizers who indicate their willingness to accept an assignment in another country are often prepared to cover the costs associated with accepting such an assignment.​—Luke 14:28.
36. As outlined in Circuit Overseer Guidelines (tg), a circuit overseer is welcome to submit to the branch office reasonable travel expenses associated with moving for reimbursement if the elders in the circuit do not offer to assist. (See 9:29, 39.) Since circumstances may vary in each country and region within the branch territory, the Branch Committee should provide guidelines for the Service Department so that these matters are handled kindly and reasonably. For example, in lands where the circuit overseer uses a vehicle to move to his new assignment, the organization is pleased to cover the cost of fuel and tolls. If food and lodging expenses are incurred during the move, these may be covered. In some lands, air travel may be required if other modes of travel are not practical. If legal documentation will be needed for the circuit overseer and his wife to take up a new assignment, the branch should assist the circuit overseer with such matters. Consideration should always be given to each circuit overseer’s circumstances, including age, health, marital status, and years in full-time service. (Gen. 33:14; Phil. 2:4) In all cases, the brothers at the branch should be kind, practical, reasonable, and as helpful as possible, especially when the move involves travel to a distant assignment.​—Prov. 3:27; Phil. 4:5.
37. Transitional Financial Assistance: At the time that it is determined that an individual will discontinue special full-time service, the Branch Committee may see a need to provide the person, depending on his circumstances, with some transitional financial assistance. The amount is not to exceed the equivalent of a special pioneer’s monthly allowance including the amount allowed for housing. The Branch Committee is authorized to grant up to three months of such transitional financial assistance. The funds may be given in one lump sum before the person’s departure date from full-time service in order to avoid any legal issues. This arrangement is confidential and is not for the general information of those in special full-time service. It is not expected that the Branch Committee would need to extend this provision to every person departing special full-time service. If at the end of the three-month period there is an urgent need for transitional assistance to continue, the Branch Committee may consider approving up to three additional months. Beyond these two periods, the Branch Committee would need to provide a recommendation and detailed explanation to the appropriate Governing Body committee if further assistance were deemed necessary. If the branch office has an arrangement to provide basic health-care support to those in the Worldwide Order, the Branch Committee may feel that it is appropriate to allow the person to benefit from this arrangement also during the same period of time that he or she is granted the transitional financial assistance. A person is not expected to meet an hour requirement in the ministry in order to receive transitional financial assistance.​—See 6:113; 9:9, 49, 111-112.
38. Travel: A special full-time servant may inquire about the possibility of receiving some financial assistance to cover unusually high travel expenses (such as travel by bus or airplane) to attend his assigned circuit assembly, regional convention, or Kingdom Ministry School. (See 9:24-28.) Since video streaming and video recordings are practical alternatives, it would be a rare exception for the Branch Committee to approve such requests. Any unusual situations and recommendations should be submitted to the Publishing Committee. To benefit Bethel family members who are serving as translators but who are not living in an area where their language is regularly spoken, such as in the branch facility, the Branch Committee may approve up to USD 50 as an annual supplemental allowance to assist the translators to attend a convention in their language. Branch Committees should inform the Writing Committee of the total annual cost of this arrangement along with their comments and observations. To assist Bethel family members to attend their regional convention, the Branch Committee may recommend a modest supplemental allowance to the Publishing Committee. The amount would assist the individuals to get to the closest convention. If a Bethel family member chooses to travel to a farther regional convention, the difference would be at his own expense.
39. A circuit overseer is welcome to submit to the branch office reasonable travel expenses for reimbursement if the elders in the circuit do not offer to assist.​—See 9:36.



HEALTH CARE

40. General Guidelines: While caring for personal health is primarily the responsibility of each member of the Worldwide Order, the Branch Committee should feel a keen desire to assist. Arrangements should be made for members to receive good-quality health care as close as possible to their assignment. This includes those with foreign enrollments. However, if good-quality care is not available locally or the cost is high, a special full-time servant may be approved for treatment in another country. Additionally, if an expatriate special full-time servant requests health care during a visit to his or her country of origin, this may be approved when the cost is reasonable. These requests and all exceptions to this policy should be submitted to the Global Health Care Office and will be considered on a case-by-case basis. For more information regarding health-care requests, see 5:37-38 and Health Care Guidelines (A-110).
41. Branch Committees should regularly evaluate local health-care arrangements to ensure that they are practical, reasonable, and considerate. Providing such care needs to be balanced with making wise use of dedicated funds.​—See 9:11.
42. Local arrangements should be clearly communicated to all members who qualify for health-care assistance. The Global Health Care Office is available at any time to assist branches in developing or implementing local health-care arrangements.
43. Branch Committees should not discourage necessary spending for health care in an effort to stay within the branch’s yearly operating budget. While members may choose to contribute to the worldwide work, in most cases they should not be expected to pay for health care.
44. Provisional Members of the Order: Provisional members may receive assistance from the branch to care for periodic health evaluations, diagnostic evaluations, minor illnesses, and medical emergencies.
45. Since provisional members of the Order serve on a trial basis, any serious health problems or preexisting conditions that prevent them from fulfilling the requirements of their assignment may result in the discontinuation of their membership in the Order.
46. Volunteer Members: Volunteer members are responsible for their own nonemergent health-care needs as well as expenses for treating preexisting conditions (e.g., prescription medication that they were previously taking, dental work, eye exams, surgery, and so forth).
47. Branch Committees may care for unforeseen health-care needs that arise during the course of the volunteer member’s assignment (e.g., medication for malaria, antibiotics, and so forth), especially when they are work-related (e.g., emergency surgery because of an accident while working on branch property, and so forth). If the volunteer member has health insurance or if there are available government programs, it may be possible to recover some of the costs.
48. Transitioning Out of Special Full-Time Service: If there is a need, the branch may provide basic health care to an individual during the period of time that he is receiving some transitional financial assistance.
49. When appropriate, assistance may be provided to help a person who is transitioning out of special full-time service to apply for government health-care programs. Any health-care support provided during this time is subject to the same approvals as that provided for those in special full-time service.​—See 9:37.



SAFETY DURING EMERGENCIES

50. General Guidelines: The Branch Committee must take a special interest in the welfare of all those who are members of the Worldwide Order. If such emergencies as civil unrest, acts of terrorism, or war threaten their safety and well-being, the Branch Committee must be alert and quick to provide practical assistance and clear direction. If the Branch Committee determines that there is an urgent need to evacuate special full-time servants in foreign service to a safer location or to relocate them, the branch office should immediately contact the Coordinators’ Committee by letter or by telephone and explain the situation, setting forth specific recommendations. The Coordinators’ Committee will consult with the Personnel and Service committees and provide further direction. If it is not possible for the Branch Committee to communicate with the Coordinators’ Committee, then the Branch Committee should do what is needed to protect the lives and safety of those in foreign service. A report on what transpired should be provided to the Coordinators’ Committee as soon as possible. For these reasons, each branch office should have and periodically review an emergency action plan. (Prov. 21:5) The branch should maintain up-to-date contact information for all of those in special full-time service so that they can be reached quickly in an emergency. While some in foreign service may feel either that they should or that they should not relocate or evacuate, ultimately the decision is a personal one. No one should judge others in this regard. (Matt. 7:1; 10:23; Rom. 14:10, 19; Gal. 6:5) Nevertheless, in most cases, it is best that Christians quickly heed the warnings and direction issued by the secular authorities and the responsible elders during times of civil unrest or emergency.​—Rom. 13:1; Heb. 13:17.



HOUSING

51. General Guidelines: Accommodations that are rented, purchased, or constructed for special full-time servants in the field should be modest while not compromising the health and safety of the occupants. When considering options, Branch Committees will need to take into account the standard of living in the area and not give the appearance of luxury or of special treatment. If it is determined that housing will be needed in a specific area for at least 10 to 15 years, and renting is not a viable option, the Branch Committee may request approval to purchase an existing residence or to build the needed accommodations. Branch Committees in developing lands may consider the construction of Kingdom Hall apartments with a maximum size of 32 to 42 square meters (350 to 450 sq ft). In other lands, Branch Committees may consider the construction of Kingdom Hall apartments with a maximum size of 32 to 60 square meters (350 to 650 sq ft). The layout should be based on standard plans provided by the Publishing Committee. When the branch office is considering renting or purchasing apartments, these maximum sizes should be used as a guideline instead of being applied as a rule.​—See Field Residence Design/​Construction Guidelines (DC-16) for additional direction.
52. Circuit Overseers: Accommodations for circuit overseers should be arranged by each circuit. (tg chap. 1) However, where the living conditions of the publishers are unsuitable to accommodate the circuit overseer and his wife, Branch Committees may arrange for a modest apartment to be rented, purchased, or constructed as noted in 9:51, 54.
53. Construction Servants: Modest and appropriate residences should be provided by staying with local brothers in their homes, in residences owned by the organization, in mobile accommodations (caravans and tents), or possibly in a rented home or apartment. Accommodations should be clean and provide privacy for study. For a married couple, additional privacy is needed.
54. Field Missionaries: Generally, branches should endeavor to house a field missionary couple or two single field missionaries in a modest apartment or house. (See 9:22.) Branch Committees will follow the guidelines and options below:
a.Field missionaries should be assigned to densely populated areas where their efforts may have a profound impact in stabilizing and strengthening preaching and congregation activities. (See 6:7.) After the Branch Committee has identified an area where field missionaries can be used effectively, a qualified brother should be assigned to research available housing options and the costs involved. This could include identifying Kingdom Hall apartments or apartments that local brothers are renting out. The Branch Committee should guide those who are assigned to research the matter so that the needs of the missionaries, such as safety, the distance to the territory, and the availability of public transportation, are kept in mind. Have in mind that some locations may be a little more costly but would allow the field missionaries to be more centrally located in their assigned territory. The Branch Committee, not the field missionaries, will make the final decision as to which accommodations should be rented.

b.Consider the health and safety of the field missionaries. Are apartments or small dwellings suitable for a couple available in a reasonably safe location? A larger apartment or home to house more than one couple would be recommended only when safety and/​or health issues require it or when providing separate housing is considerably more costly. For example, an older single or widowed missionary sister may not need to be assisted by local publishers as outlined in 9:11. However, for her safety and peace of mind, it may be advisable for her to share accommodations with a younger missionary couple. Additionally, in some lands it would be very expensive to set up smaller missionary homes in areas where electricity, water, and other basic utilities are not available. Therefore, the Branch Committee should exercise good judgment when considering these factors.

c.The Branch Committee is authorized to spend up to USD 1,000 per month per couple for missionary accommodations. Please note that this approval limit includes the monthly cost of utilities. In most lands, a suitable apartment and utilities for two people would cost USD 200 to 500 per month. Higher expenditures would be viewed as quite exceptional and possibly extravagant in developing lands. This approval level on rental agreements has been established on the premise that the Branch Committee will be careful to ensure that field missionaries are located where they can accomplish the most good and where the cost of accommodations and utilities will not be prohibitive. If you need further direction on this matter, please write to the Publishing Committee. The branch office should care for the payment of rent and utilities and help the field missionaries handle any legal agreements that may be needed to secure accommodations. If local circumstances require paying the owner several months of rent up front, this may be done up to a maximum of one year’s rental. Rental agreements that exceed USD 1,000 per month or USD 12,000 per year or recommendations that involve the construction of new missionary homes should be sent to the Publishing Committee. Clearly explain the needs, the options that have been considered, and the estimated cost for each option. If approval is given to investigate further, the matter will be referred to the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department (WDC). Additionally, if it is concluded that a branch-owned missionary home should be used for some other purpose or sold, the recommendation should be sent to the WDC.

d.In cases where it might be less expensive for the individual renter to pay the rent instead of the organization doing so, the branch office may provide the missionary with the funds to cover the rent. As long as the monthly rent and utilities for field missionaries is less than USD 1,000 per month for two people, there is no need to show this on the Record of Allowances (A-29) form.

e.In the exceptional case that several missionaries are sharing a large home, the branch office may find it helpful to designate one of the missionaries as the home contact. It may also be practical for the branch office to provide funds for local expenses using an imprest fund. For details on establishing such a fund, see Branch Accounting Department Guidelines.


55. Branch Committees must be practical, kind, and generous in the supplying of suitable home equipment for the field missionaries. A standard approach will not work in all countries. Some field missionaries may have personal linens, furniture, and equipment that they want to use in their assignment. Newer missionaries may have very little and may need more assistance in obtaining these items. A rented apartment in one location may have heating, air conditioning, appliances, and access to laundry facilities. In other locations, the apartment may lack these provisions, and field missionaries will need to be provided with these basic necessities. The local situation and circumstances must be carefully considered. The branch office should avoid installing expensive equipment, such as water-filtration devices and backup electrical systems, in rented missionary homes. For rented accommodations, it is preferred that any additional equipment that the branch office obtains be limited to what is practical and what could easily be moved to another rented home. For example, while the branch office should not install expensive generators in a rented missionary home, a less-expensive portable generator that provides backup power for the refrigerator and air-conditioning may be obtained if needed. The same principle applies to other equipment, such as water filters. If there is a legitimate need for something beyond that, then please write to the Publishing Committee. If the Branch Committee feels that it is reasonable to provide Internet service for a missionary home and the missionaries agree to cover the monthly costs, it may submit the recommendation with the details to the Publishing Committee for consideration, explaining the cost of installation and the monthly cost per person.
56. Special Pioneers: In general, the branch should not rent, purchase, construct, or renovate accommodations for special pioneers. They should be encouraged to locate and arrange for their own housing. An appropriate housing allowance consistent with local costs should be provided. However, where existing accommodations are available and are no longer needed for field missionaries or circuit overseers, there is no objection to using such accommodations for special pioneers on a temporary basis.



MARRIAGE

57. Assembly Hall Servants, Bible School Facility Servants, and Construction Servants: Anyone who desires to marry and remain in special full-time service should make his or her request to the Branch Committee, regardless of the length of time he or she has served. The two desiring to marry should each complete an Application to Become a Member of the Worldwide Order (A-8). If the Branch Committee decides to recommend that the engaged couple serve as members of the Order following their marriage, a recommendation will be sent to the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department (WDC) along with appropriate comments regarding the qualifications of the applicants and the need for their services. This should be done even if the mate will be replacing a servant who has departed or will soon be departing. However, if the Branch Committee does not recommend that the engaged couple serve as members of the Order following their marriage, it is not necessary to forward the recommendation to the WDC for approval. The Branch Committee may notify the couple accordingly. As a reminder, all applications from expatriate construction servants who desire to marry should be sent to the WDC along with a recommendation from the Branch Committee. Of course, it would not be reasonable for one who is in his first year of service to get engaged and apply to remain in his service following his marriage.
58. Bethel Family Members: Any member who desires to marry and remain a member of the Bethel family should make his or her request to the Branch Committee, regardless of the length of time he or she has served at Bethel. The two desiring to marry should each complete an Application to Become a Member of the Worldwide Order (A-8). If the Branch Committee decides to recommend that the engaged couple serve at Bethel following their marriage, a recommendation will be sent to the Personnel Committee along with appropriate comments regarding the qualifications of the applicants and the need for their services at Bethel. This should be done even if the mate will be replacing a member of the family who has departed or will soon be departing Bethel service. However, if the Branch Committee does not recommend that the engaged couple serve at Bethel following their marriage, it is not necessary to forward the recommendation to the Personnel Committee for approval. The Branch Committee may handle such requests without consulting with the Personnel Committee and may notify the couple accordingly. Of course, it would not be reasonable for one who is in his first year at Bethel to get engaged and apply to remain in his service following his marriage.
59. After their first year at Bethel, some who want to marry may prefer to leave Bethel, believing that this will make it easier for them to adjust to married life. They should feel free to do so. It is our hope that they will enter the pioneer work. But after a time, if they would like to return to special full-time service, they should fill out new applications, which the Branch Committee will process in the usual way. The needs of the organization should be weighed when a Bethel family member wants to marry and remain at Bethel. If someone has training or skills that the Branch Committee feels are critical to getting the work accomplished, even though he may have been at Bethel a relatively short time, his request to remain at Bethel after marriage should be given serious consideration.
60. Circuit Overseers: If a single circuit overseer becomes engaged to be married and desires to continue in the circuit work, he should inform the Service Department right away. The Service Department will send a Questionnaire for Prospective Circuit Overseer (S-323) for him and his fiancée to fill out. Additionally, the Service Department will make discreet inquiries, confidentially writing to the body of elders of the sister’s congregation and to her circuit overseer about her qualifications. (If the sister is in her fiancé’s circuit, another circuit overseer who knows the sister could be contacted.) In addition to their letters, the elders and the circuit overseer should submit separate Personal Qualifications Reports (S-326). These reports, whether favorable or unfavorable, and the questionnaire should be submitted to the Branch Committee with a recommendation. The Branch Committee will review the sister’s qualifications, her reputation in the congregation and circuit where she serves, and her physical health and stamina. She should be at least 21 years old, baptized three years or longer, and in full-time service for at least two years. If there is a great difference in age between the two who are planning to marry, the Branch Committee should carefully consider whether this would cause negative talk or be a stumbling block to others. In all cases in which the circuit overseer has requested to stay on in the circuit work after he gets married, the Branch Committee should submit its comments and recommendation to the Service Committee for its decision. This should be done well ahead of the wedding date if at all possible. If the Service Committee approves that the circuit overseer continue in the circuit work following his marriage, then his wife would immediately be enrolled as the wife of a circuit overseer and they would start serving congregations right away. The Service Department will write the circuit overseer and inform him of the decision.​—See 6:128.
61. If it is decided that a longtime circuit overseer should not remain in the circuit work after he gets married, consideration may be given to appointing him as a special pioneer. (See 6:113.) However, if the sister he is engaged to marry does not have many years in full-time service, she may continue as a regular pioneer. Any exceptional cases should be referred to the Service Committee.
62. Field Missionaries and Special Pioneers: If a field missionary or a special pioneer becomes engaged to be married, he or she should inform the Service Department right away. If desirous of continuing in the missionary or special pioneer work along with his or her prospective mate, the branch should immediately do as explained below:
            If the prospective mate lives in the branch territory, the branch should send him or her a Questionnaire for Prospective Temporary Special Pioneer (S-207) or Questionnaire for Prospective Field Missionary (S-214) to fill out. In addition, the prospective mate’s body of elders and circuit overseer should be asked to complete separate Personal Qualifications Reports (S-326).

            If the prospective mate does not live in the branch territory, the Branch Committee should obtain the Questionnaire for Prospective Temporary Special Pioneer (S-207) that is on file and the S-326 forms from the respective branch office along with the Branch Committee’s recommendation. In the case of a field missionary, the Service Committee will obtain the S-214 form from the prospective mate’s branch office.


63. The Branch Committee will review the qualifications of the special pioneer or field missionary and those of his or her prospective mate, taking into consideration the reputation and the physical health and stamina of each one. The prospective mate should be at least 21 years old, baptized three years or longer, in full-time service for at least two years, in good health, and able to maintain an active schedule. If there is a great difference in age between the two who are planning to marry, the Branch Committee should consider carefully whether this would cause negative talk or be a stumbling block to others.
64. If the special pioneer and the prospective mate are well-qualified, the Branch Committee may enroll them as special pioneers together, effective the date of their marriage. If the Branch Committee determines that they do not qualify to serve as special pioneers after their marriage, then the branch should inform the special pioneer of the decision as soon as possible and determine a stop date prior to the wedding. If the special pioneer does not agree with the Branch Committee’s decision or if the case is unusual, the Branch Committee may submit the matter along with its recommendation to the Service Committee. It is understood that in some exceptional situations, it may be appropriate for one mate to continue as a special pioneer while the other mate does not. If there is a situation that seems to merit such an exception, please provide details to the Service Committee.
65. In the case of a field missionary, all the reports (translated into English) along with the Branch Committee’s recommendation and the prospective mate’s S-214 questionnaire, whether favorable or otherwise, should be submitted to the Service Committee, which will make the final decision as to whether someone continues as a field missionary following his or her marriage.
PERSONAL EXPENSE ACCOUNT (PEA)
66. General Guidelines: The Personal Expense Account (PEA) is generally provided on an annual basis to those in special full-time service to care for nonroutine personal needs. This arrangement for the support of members of the Worldwide Order is approved by the Publishing Committee. It is based on the Cost of Living Chart (A-40) and recommendations from the Branch Committee and is listed on the Record of Allowances (A-29) form for each country under the branch territory. The PEA amount provided will depend on the branch cost of living and on a person’s seniority. [See Chart 9.1.] No changes should be made in credits for PEAs without first consulting the Publishing Committee.
67. The annual PEA amount is calculated based on the approved rate and the number of months that a special full-time servant is in his assignment during the calendar year. Once a year, at the end of the calendar year, this amount is added to the balance of the PEA for each individual or couple and made available for request. The available PEA balance may be kept either in U.S. dollars or in local currency. When the account is kept in U.S. dollars, a request from the account will be distributed in local currency at the current rate of exchange.
68. If approved by the Publishing Committee, the PEA balance may be paid out automatically with the December allowance payment after the annual amount is added. If required because of tax or banking requirements, a Branch Committee may request approval to calculate and pay out the monthly PEA amount along with the monthly allowance payment.
69. A temporary Bethel family member (BBT) or temporary special pioneer (FTS) will receive PEA for the months that he serves in the enrollment. Temporary volunteers serving for less than one year who are not members of the Worldwide Order (BBW or BBC) would not qualify to receive PEA.
70. A person leaving special full-time service, including one who is disfellowshipped or disassociated, may request any available PEA amount. This would include an amount for the number of full months he served in the current calendar year. He may apply personal time away to the month of departure, but he cannot receive any PEA amount for months of personal time away that might extend past the month of departure.​—See 9:75.
71. An individual’s PEA is closed if he leaves special full-time service for a period of more than three months unless the Branch Committee receives approval for an exception from the Personnel Committee or the Service Committee for a leave of absence. The person may continue to receive PEA while he is on short emergency leave if it seems appropriate because of his years of service.
72. In the event of the death of a mate, the surviving mate may benefit from the balance left in the deceased mate’s PEA. However, unclaimed PEA should not be included as part of the estate if there is no surviving mate.
73. Pass-Throughs: From time to time, a special full-time servant may wish to transfer funds to another branch, either for another special full-time servant or to pay a bill incurred with the other branch. Or the special full-time servant may wish to receive funds from another branch. For example, a relative or friend may wish to send the special full-time servant funds to support him in his foreign assignment. In such cases, the funds can be remitted to the special full-time servant through the respective branch.
74. The pass-through arrangement is a provision for special full-time servants only. The arrangement is not intended as a means to transfer funds to others, including relatives or friends, although funds may be received by a special full-time servant from someone who is not serving in this capacity. By restricting the use of this provision to special full-time servants, we avoid the appearance of a banking arrangement and preserve the nonprofit, religious status that our organization enjoys in most parts of the world. The arrangement is a loving provision for special full-time servants to continue to serve without distraction and not to be unnecessarily involved in mundane and other time-consuming matters, such as dealing with banks to handle international transfers.



PERSONAL TIME AWAY AND LEAVE OF ABSENCE

75. General Guidelines: Personal time away is based on basic days granted each new service year along with additional days granted based on seniority or age. On September 1, all special full-time servants receive the appropriate number of days of basic personal time away for their present special full-time service enrollment. Personal time away credits for temporary Bethel family members (BBT) should not be prorated on September 1 for the remaining full months of their assignment. Personal time away for BBTs should be handled the same way as for regular Bethel family members (BBR) as explained in paragraphs 30-37 of the Dwelling Together in Unity manual. Those who enter special full-time service after September 1 are given a prorated amount of basic personal time away for the remaining full months in the current service year. This is credited on a person’s start date in special full-time service. All such newly appointed special full-time servants are granted a prorated seniority credit or a prorated age credit, whichever is greater, on the person’s start date in special full-time service. Thereafter, the person will annually be granted the normal seniority credit or the normal age credit, whichever is greater, on September 1. Additionally, all special full-time servants who are newly appointed by world headquarters to have an enrollment code ending in the letter “F” (e.g., BBF, FMF, FCF, and so forth) are granted a prorated foreign-service credit on the person’s appointment date. Thereafter, the person will annually be granted the normal foreign-service credit of seven additional days of personal time away on September 1. Special full-time servants who have taken a vow of obedience and poverty are released from these vows while taking personal time away. Anyone leaving special full-time service cannot use more than 24 working days of his accumulated personal time away to extend his departure from special full-time service. In the event of the death of a mate, the surviving spouse should be credited the balance of unused personal time away of the deceased spouse. The branch office should not recalculate personal time away balances when a transfer takes place from one form of special full-time service to another. The personal time away that a special full-time servant has already accumulated will be retained when he transfers to another form of special full-time service. The Branch Committee may find it necessary at times to limit the number of those who can be away from Bethel at any one time. Extenuating circumstances may arise that the committee can consider before deciding what is reasonable.​—See 4:27; 9:70.
76. The Branch Committee is authorized to grant up to 90 calendar days of leave of absence time per service year. However, such leave time would usually be granted progressively, based on the circumstances, rather than immediately granting 90 calendar days away. There is no need for a person to use all of his accumulated personal time away to care for a serious health matter or a family emergency. However, it may be reasonable for the person to combine some of his personal time away with a leave of absence granted to him by the branch office. If the Branch Committee believes that more than 90 calendar days away are needed, it should make a recommendation to the appropriate Governing Body committee. In some cases, it may be better for the person or married couple to terminate special full-time service. These situations must be carefully reviewed and handled on a case-by-case basis.
77. In the case of Assembly Hall servants, Bethel family members, Bible school facility servants, and construction servants, the Bethel Office or those appointed by the Branch Committee are authorized to grant leave of absence time. In the case of circuit overseers, field missionaries, and special pioneers, the Service Department overseer or his assistant is authorized to grant the person up to 14 calendar days, including Saturdays and Sundays, of leave of absence in any service year. The Service Department overseer or his assistant and a member of the Branch Committee may grant these individuals up to 30 calendar days of leave in any service year. Any additional request for leave of absence should be handled by the Branch Committee. Any case that would involve granting more than 90 calendar days of leave of absence in any service year to circuit overseers, field missionaries, or special pioneers should be referred to the Service Committee. During an approved leave of absence, these individuals are not expected to meet the monthly hour requirement.​—See 6:139.
78. Assembly Hall Servants and Bible School Facility Servants: Assembly Hall servants and Bible school facility servants receive personal time away under the same arrangement as members of the Bethel family. They receive the same provision as Bethel family members do for time off to attend regional, special, and international conventions and, if needed, may receive a leave of absence. For more information, see the brochure Faithfully Maintaining Our Places of Worship (mtw).
79. Bethel Family Members: Members of the Bethel family are granted time off to attend one regional convention each year. This time should not be used for any other purpose. If a Bethel family member wishes to attend an additional regional convention, he must use his personal time away. When international or special conventions are held, please note that a special provision of time away from work is made for special full-time servants who are selected as delegates. (This is separate and in addition to the usual personal time away that is granted to attend one annual regional convention. The two provisions of time away are different and cannot be combined to attend only one event.) The special provision of time away is as follows: Bethel family members who are selected as delegates to attend a special or international convention will be granted one and a half days of personal time away in order to attend all program sessions at one such event.​—See 9:86.
80. What if an individual in his first five years of Bethel service requests time away from work using days other than his accumulated personal time away? It could possibly be to care for a health matter or a family emergency, such as a death in the family. Each request for a leave of absence should be handled individually, taking into consideration the recommendations of the elders at Bethel, the individual’s attitude, work habits, and general health, as well as the valuable experience, knowledge, and ability he may have gained and can contribute to the work. Thus, a leave of absence could be granted out of concern for the individual and for the Kingdom work. In some cases, it may be better for the individual to leave Bethel and reapply when he has his affairs in order again. When one is granted a leave of absence because he is in need of health care outside of the regular provisions at Bethel, the individual will pay his own expenses.
81. Bethel family members who have been in full-time service for 36 or more years may receive five additional days of time away from their Bethel work per service year for the purpose of caring for family responsibilities in connection with immediate relatives, such as parents, brothers, or sisters. However, this provision applies only to Bethel family members and not to others in special full-time service.
82. If a leave of absence has been granted to a married person to care for a health matter or a Scriptural responsibility and the mate feels that he or she should go along, this would be reasonable. However, the Branch Committee would have to approve this, taking into consideration what has been stated above. When a married individual has made a good contribution to the Kingdom work, more than the usual consideration might be shown to that one. This would especially be the case when a person has been in special full-time service for many years, though his or her marriage mate may be relatively new.
83. After a person has been at Bethel for five years, he is reasonably well-established as a member of the Bethel family. He may unexpectedly develop a health problem or be faced with a family emergency or a Scriptural responsibility that takes him away from his Bethel work for quite a time beyond the period allowed for personal time away. The longer a person has been at Bethel, the more consideration he can be shown.
84. In an exceptional case, a member of the Bethel family may need more than 90 calendar days of leave of absence time to care for a Scriptural responsibility. Because the brother (or sister) has many years of full-time service and is of value to the organization, the Branch Committee may wish to recommend to the Personnel Committee that the extended leave be approved. While there is no guarantee that he would be able to keep the room he leaves, it might be possible that for a period of a year, his room could be used as a guest room. Then, if he comes back within a year, he can return to the same room. He can either take his furniture with him or leave it in his room, or Bethel could store it if space allows. The Branch Committee should work out the details, keeping in mind concern for the arrangement at Bethel and for the needs of the individual. On the other hand, it may be that the person could leave Bethel and be encouraged to reapply as soon as matters have been cared for.
85. Circuit Overseers: The arrangements for personal time away and leave of absence time are outlined in Circuit Overseer Guidelines (tg). If needed, the branch office is authorized to increase a circuit overseer’s monthly allowance up to the amount provided to special pioneers during the time that he and his wife are on an approved leave of absence. There is no need for a circuit overseer and his wife to take personal time away in order to move to a new circuit. The branch office is authorized to determine how much time is reasonably needed for a particular move. Depending on the circumstances, some may need a few days; others may need a week or more. The circuit overseer should not be so exhausted after the move that he is not able to begin his new assignment with a positive frame of mind.​—Mark 6:31a.
86. Construction Servants: Construction servants receive personal time away under the same arrangement as members of the Bethel family. (Those who are enrolled as expatriate construction servants (BCF) also qualify for the foreign-service credit.) They receive the same provision as Bethel family members do for time off to attend regional, international, and special conventions, and if needed, they may receive leave of absence time. (See 9:79.) For further information, see the brochure Continue to Put Your Heart Into the Work (cph).
87. Field Missionaries and Special Pioneers: The arrangements for personal time away and leave of absence time for field missionaries and special pioneers are outlined in letters to these special full-time servants. There may be no need for the Service Department to maintain personal time away records for infirm special pioneers who because of advanced age or chronic illness no longer have a specific monthly hour requirement. That matter can be decided by the Branch Committee.​—See 6:122.
88. Time Away for Mates During Branch Work Assignments: The wife of a Bethel brother may travel with him on a branch work assignment at the branch’s expense whenever the trip will require ten or more working days. If a Bethel assignment requires that a married Bethel brother be away from Bethel for fewer than ten working days, any working days that are used by his wife to travel with him will be deducted from her accumulated personal time away. In addition, the couple will have to care for the mate’s travel expenses personally. After a brother has been on an assignment(s) totaling ten working days or more within a service year, his wife may accompany him if he again is assigned to be away from Bethel for a period of at least five working days. (See 7:135.) This policy does not apply to brothers in special full-time service who may be sent out on an assignment at the direction of the organization to care for various shepherding visits, Branch Committee members attending a convention assigned by the branch, or branch representatives caring for a CA-br assignment.​—See 7:22; 9:118.



PERSONNEL REVIEWS

89. General Guidelines: Regardless of enrollment, the first three years after an individual’s entering special full-time service will be considered a tested-as-to-fitness period. Such ones will be provisional members of the Order during their first three years. Shortly before completing three years, they will be evaluated before being invited to become regular members. This three-year evaluation will be made for each individual, including each married person. While the membership of individual marriage mates may vary because of differences in each one’s total consecutive years of special full-time service, the enrollments of each mate should be the same.
90. During the tested-as-to-fitness period, Bethel department overseers (for those serving at the branch office), the Construction Committee or Construction Project Committee (for those serving on large construction projects), the Local Design/​Construction Department (for those serving as Assembly Hall servants, Bible school facility servants, or construction servants), and the Service Department (for those serving as special pioneers, as field missionaries, or in the circuit work) will need to consider carefully the progress being made by individuals under their care. Appropriate training and counsel should be provided as needed. (2 Tim. 2:2; 4:2b) Toward the end of the three-year evaluation period, Branch Committees will review the comments and recommendations of those working with each provisional member so as to determine if the provisional member qualifies to serve as a regular member of the Order.
91. Before inviting a provisional member to become a regular member of the Order, the Branch Committee will want to consider his reputation and his physical health and stamina, as well as his aptitude for his specific assignment of service and his future potential. However, the extent of this evaluation will vary based on the individual and his enrollment. As an example, the evaluation of a member of the Bethel family in his early 20’s may require greater assessment than the evaluation of a circuit overseer, since the circuit overseer has already proved a measure of his qualifications based on his appointment to the circuit work and has already received an extensive review while attending the School for Kingdom Evangelizers.
92. After the tested-as-to-fitness period, if an individual does not qualify to serve as a regular member of the Order, he should be removed from the Order. As a reminder, the Branch Committee should make a recommendation to the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department if the committee feels that an expatriate construction servant no longer qualifies to continue serving as such.
93. Except in the case of temporary special pioneers, on rare occasions, a Branch Committee may feel that additional time is needed to make an accurate evaluation of an individual. In such cases, as an exception, the Branch Committee may choose to extend the tested-as-to-fitness period for an additional year or two. During this time, specific counsel and assistance should be given to the individual. At the end of this extended period, a final decision should be made. Regarding personnel reviews for temporary special pioneers, see 9:104.
94. Circuit Overseers: A review of all circuit overseers should be completed and recommendations for deletion, if any, should be submitted to the Governing Body by August 1 of each year. The Branch Committee should ensure that it has all the facts and should be reasonable in its expectations, taking into consideration local circumstances.​—Prov. 18:13, 17; Phil. 4:5.
95. A circuit overseer should be kind, impartial, and just. He should care for matters with love and patience. He should be humble and discerning, known as a man who stands firm for Jehovah’s righteous standards rather than insisting on his own opinions. (See 6:130.) These qualities are especially important in view of the weighty responsibility entrusted to him of appointing and deleting elders and ministerial servants. (Luke 12:48b; Acts 14:23) A number of factors should be considered, including the following: Does the circuit overseer display genuine zeal for the ministry? Does he take the lead in all facets of the ministry? Does he meet his hour requirement each month, taking into consideration time needed for assemblies, conventions, schools, and other theocratic assignments? Is he kind, reasonable, and patient in his dealings with others? Does he have a reputation as one who stands firm for Jehovah’s standards, or is he known as one who imposes his personal viewpoints or sets arbitrary rules? If it is necessary, is he willing to live in the homes of the brothers? Is he content with what is provided? (Phil. 4:11, 12) Have there been significant deficiencies that have warranted counsel? If so, has he received appropriate counsel? Did he quickly apply it? Does he or his wife have significant health issues that consistently prevent them from fulfilling their assignment?​—See 2:30.
96. If the Branch Committee notes a significant deficiency in the service of a circuit overseer and he has not been counseled previously on the matter, the Branch Committee should ask the Service Department to follow the steps outlined in 6:141. The Branch Committee should ensure that the circuit overseer is helped to understand the deficiency and that he receives specific suggestions that will assist him in making the needed adjustments. (2 Cor. 13:11) The situation should be monitored over the next year, and additional counsel given as needed. If there has been no improvement by the time of the next annual evaluation, the Branch Committee should recommend to the Governing Body the deletion of the circuit overseer. A brief summary of the efforts made to assist him should be included in a numbered letter that is sent along with the Recommendations to the Governing Body form. In such cases, the individual should not be able to say that he was unaware of the Branch Committee’s concerns, that his recommended deletion is the first he has heard of the matter, or that he has not been given opportunity to make needed adjustments.​—Matt. 7:12.
97. Field Missionaries: Annually, the Branch Committee should evaluate each field missionary (FMF) who is under 50 years of age. Those who are 50 or older may be included in the review process if the Branch Committee believes that there is a need. This review should be completed and any recommendations for deletion should be submitted to the Service Committee by August 1 of each year. Temporary field missionaries are not included in this annual review.​—See 6:11; 9:103.
98. In addition to reviewing the Personal Qualifications Report (S-326) submitted by the circuit overseer and by the Branch Committee member in conjunction with his annual visit, there are a number of factors to be considered, including the following: Does the missionary display genuine zeal for the ministry? Does he consistently meet his monthly hour requirement, taking into consideration other theocratic assignments, personal time away, and other relevant factors? Keeping in mind the nature of the territory, does he have a reasonable number of placements and make a good number of return visits each month? Is he a teacher in the field? Does he regularly start new Bible studies? Does he conduct progressive Bible studies? Does he work with the local publishers in the ministry? Does he have a reputation as one who promotes peace? Does his activity have a strengthening effect on the congregation? Have there been significant deficiencies that have warranted counsel? If so, has he applied the counsel? Does he have significant health issues that consistently prevent him from fulfilling his assignment?
99. In some cases, the Branch Committee may note significant deficiencies in the service of a field missionary. In such cases, the Branch Committee should first determine if the individual has been counseled previously. If not, a member of the Branch Committee should be assigned to meet with the missionary. The missionary’s circuit overseer or another mature local elder should accompany the Branch Committee member on the visit. While the tone of the visit should be kind and positive, the Branch Committee member should clearly explain the Branch Committee’s concerns. The missionary should be helped to understand the deficiencies and be given specific suggestions that will assist him in making needed adjustments. (2 Cor. 13:11) The situation should be monitored over the next year and additional counsel given as needed. If there has been no improvement by the time of the next annual evaluation, the Branch Committee should recommend the deletion of the field missionary. In such cases, the individual should not be able to say that he was unaware of the Branch Committee’s concerns, that his recommended deletion is the first he has heard of the matter, or that he has not been given opportunity to make needed adjustments.​—Matt. 7:12.
100. When the Branch Committee decides to recommend the deletion of a field missionary, a separate numbered letter for each person or couple should be sent to the Service Committee. The letter should include complete details, explaining clearly the reasons for the recommendation, the efforts made to assist the missionary, and whether he agrees with the recommendation. If the individual does not agree and he wishes to submit a letter, his letter should be included with the numbered letter. After reviewing the Branch Committee’s recommendation, the Service Committee will provide direction.
101. Special Pioneers: Annually, the Service Department should review the activity of all special pioneers to see whether they are productive and are fulfilling the requirements of their special form of service. (See 6:111.) The Branch Committee may feel that certain younger special pioneers with a minimum of three years in special full-time service could serve well as field missionaries in another country. The factors to be considered and the steps to be followed to make such recommendations are outlined in 9:109.
102. If concerns about the activities of a special pioneer are reported, the Service Department may write to the elders and/​or the circuit overseer to obtain their observations. Once the facts are known, the Service Department may write a letter of counsel and offer helpful suggestions or may direct the circuit overseer to approach the pioneer privately about the area of concern. If the special pioneer is a single sister, the circuit overseer should be accompanied by a local elder. The special pioneer should be given the opportunity to improve over a reasonable period of time and be commended on any progress made. If there is no response to repeated efforts to assist the special pioneer and the Service Department is convinced that he no longer qualifies, a recommendation can be made to the Branch Committee that he be deleted from that privilege of service. In most cases, a special pioneer who is consistently unable to meet his monthly hour requirement because of serious and debilitating health problems, perhaps for six months or so, should leave special full-time service. If married, careful consideration needs to be given as to whether the other mate should continue as a special pioneer. What would be in the best interests of the couple and of the organization? Would it be good to transition both of them out of special full-time service? If the Branch Committee feels that one mate should continue as a special pioneer while the other should not, it should provide a recommendation to the Service Committee. Extra consideration should be shown to those who are at least 55 years of age and who have 25 or more years in special full-time service. Any exceptional situations should be referred to the Service Committee.​—See 6:120.
103. Temporary Field Missionaries: When a temporary field missionary (FTF) has been in his assignment for 30 months, the branch office will write to him and ask him to submit a letter stating whether he would like to continue in the missionary work or would prefer to return home. If the individual decides to return home, the Service Committee should be informed. If the individual would like to continue as a field missionary, the Branch Committee should consider his effectiveness over the preceding 30 months and make a frank recommendation to the Service Committee. In either case, whether the individual desires to continue as a field missionary or not, the Service Committee will reply. The Service Committee will make the final decision concerning an individual’s future service as a field missionary. In all cases, after the Service Committee has replied, a member of the Branch Committee or a mature elder from the Service Department should make a shepherding visit on the missionary. This visit could be made in conjunction with the annual shepherding visit. (See 9:118; John 21:16) Married couples should be met with together. The missionary’s circuit overseer or another mature local elder should accompany the branch representative on the visit.​—See 9:97.
104. Temporary Special Pioneers: All temporary special pioneers are enrolled in an evaluation program that lasts up to three years. The program includes an annual review by the Service Department. The purpose of this evaluation program is to allow the Branch Committee to test the fitness, abilities, circumstances, and effectiveness of a temporary special pioneer and to determine how he may best be used in the future. It is not expected that all temporary special pioneers will be given an extension for a second or third year. During the annual review, the Branch Committee should extend only those who are effective in this role and who are qualified to take on greater responsibility. For more information, see chapter 13 of School for Kingdom Evangelizers Office Guidelines (skeog).​—See 9:93.
105. After a temporary special pioneer has been in his assignment for ten months, the Service Department should request and review the Personal Qualifications Report (S-326) submitted by the circuit overseer. The department will determine whether the temporary special pioneer is reaching his hour requirement, is productive in starting and conducting Bible studies, is showing a keen interest in aiding those associated with the congregation, and is enjoying and promoting good relations with others. If the report is positive, two members of the Branch Committee can extend the temporary special pioneer appointment for another year. Only productive individuals obtaining good results should be given an extension in the temporary special pioneer work for an additional year. If the report is negative or if it is clear that a brother, a sister, or a married couple is not able to serve effectively in the temporary special pioneer work, it would be appropriate for the Service Department to write a letter directing that the individual or the couple return to the regular pioneer work. The letter would also express appreciation for their service.
106. At any time, the branch office may determine that a temporary special pioneer could be used more effectively in some other form of special full-time service. For example, brothers who are graduates of the School for Kingdom Evangelizers may qualify to receive training in the circuit work.​—See chapters 10 and 13 of School for Kingdom Evangelizers Office Guidelines (skeog).
107. It is understood that temporary special pioneers who have successfully completed the three-year evaluation program have proved themselves and have potential for greater service. The Branch Committee must determine how best to use them.
108. Some temporary special pioneers who have successfully completed the three-year evaluation program may be appointed as special pioneers. Other individuals may qualify for the circuit work, and the branch may appoint such individuals as special pioneers, inviting them to complete the Questionnaire for Prospective Circuit Overseer (S-323). If after reviewing the questionnaire the Branch Committee agrees that the individual qualifies to be a circuit overseer, it may submit a recommendation to the Governing Body.​—See 2:30; 6:123.
109. In exceptional cases, the Branch Committee may feel that certain temporary special pioneers who have completed the three-year evaluation program have the circumstances and stamina to serve well as field missionaries in another country. In most cases, each mate must be between the ages of 25 and 45. Fluency in English is not a requirement. In addition to their spiritual qualities, such individuals may speak a foreign language or be adept at learning new languages or their ethnic and family background or citizenship might equip them to fill a specific need in another land. The branch may appoint them as special pioneers and send them the cover letter for field missionary candidates (S-251), inviting them to complete the Questionnaire for Prospective Field Missionary (S-214). The completed questionnaire and, if needed, an English translation of the candidate’s responses along with a numbered letter should be submitted to the Service Committee, explaining in detail the qualifications, language abilities, ethnic and family background, and citizenship(s) of each individual. Please include an English translation of the latest Personal Qualifications Report (S-326) that was submitted by the circuit overseer.​—See 9:101.
110. Those who have completed the three-year evaluation program and who are fluent in English may in time be included in the Branch Committee’s consideration of exceptional candidates to be recommended for additional training at Gilead School.​—See 6:186.



PREGNANCY

111. General Guidelines: Field missionaries or special pioneer couples who learn that they are to be parents should inform the branch immediately. The couple should be given a period of three months to get settled, during which they will continue to receive their monthly allowance. During this three-month period, the couple will need to locate suitable accommodations and find employment, so it is not expected that they will meet their monthly hour requirement. If one or both mates wish to become regular pioneers, they will have an additional three months to make the transition and their full-time service history will continue uninterrupted. If requested, the branch office is authorized to assist a departing missionary with the cost of return travel to his home country and the costs associated with shipping his basic personal belongings. For information on transitional financial assistance, see 9:37.
112. There is no provision for former special pioneers to be reappointed while a minor child is still living at home. If in the past the branch allowed a special pioneer couple to continue in that work while raising one or two children, it would be good to review the special pioneers’ activity to determine whether they are still effective in their ministry. In all cases, it is up to the Branch Committee to evaluate the circumstances of special pioneers to decide whether they should remain in special full-time service. For information on transitional financial assistance, see 9:37.



SHEPHERDING VISITS

113. Assembly Hall Servants and Bible School Facility Servants: Arrangements should be made for those who are serving as Assembly Hall servants or as Bible school facility servants to receive regular shepherding visits by members of the Branch Committee, representatives of the Local Design/​Construction Department (LDC), or other mature elders selected by the Branch Committee. This arrangement should mirror the arrangement that is in place to shepherd all members of the Bethel family regularly.
114. Circuit Overseers: Circuit overseers and their wives, if married, should receive a shepherding visit at least once every two years. Such visits should be made during a circuit overseer’s regular visit to a congregation, not during the week of a circuit assembly. In larger branches, most circuit overseers will receive a visit from another experienced circuit overseer. The experienced circuit overseer in turn will receive a shepherding visit from a branch representative. In smaller branches, branch representatives may visit all the circuit overseers. The Branch Committee is responsible for selecting the brothers who will be used to make such shepherding visits. They are informed of the circuit overseer to visit by means of an assignment letter (S-243). Branch representatives selected to make shepherding visits should be provided the latest copy of Circuit Overseer Guidelines (tg), the current policy letters having to do with the work of circuit overseers, and the current circuit overseer’s talk and meeting outlines. As soon as the branch representative or the experienced circuit overseer is provided with the names of the circuit overseers he is to visit, he should contact those brothers to determine the best time for the visit.​—See 6:141.
115. Circuit overseers or field instructors assigned to shepherd other circuit overseers should be men who are older in years and experienced as traveling overseers. They should be known as ones who maintain a good personal schedule of Bible study and meditation and who keep up-to-date with published information from ‘the faithful slave’ and with letters from the branch office. (Matt. 24:45) They should be balanced in judgment, show genuine humility, have a sincere interest in helping others, and have a high regard for the importance of the disciple-making work. (Phil. 4:5; Jas. 3:17; 1 Pet. 5:5) It is especially important that they be men who are compassionate and who are able to be encouraging and helpful to others.​—Isa. 32:1, 2; Col. 3:12.
116. Branch representatives assigned to shepherd circuit overseers may be members of the Branch Committee, experienced Service Department deskmen, or responsible brothers in the branch office who have had experience in the traveling work. Each branch representative would normally make no more than one or two such visits per year.
117. Construction Servants: It is the responsibility of both the congregation and the branch office to shepherd construction servants. Thus, while the congregation will provide shepherding to the extent possible, branch representatives, LDC representatives, and construction group overseers will need to play a larger role in such shepherding, since the construction servants are often away from the home congregation.
118. Field Missionaries: The Branch Committee assigns members of the committee to make annual shepherding visits on all field missionaries. (See 6:9.) Such visits are not made on circuit overseers in foreign service or on field instructors in foreign service. If it is practical, the visit could be arranged in conjunction with another assignment, such as a circuit assembly or a Kingdom Hall dedication, perhaps using Friday or Monday to meet with the missionaries. Apart from travel time, usually no more than a day or two should be needed to meet with all of the field missionaries who serve in a particular city. After his meeting with the field missionaries as a group, the branch representative may spend any remaining time with the missionaries on an individual basis. The branch representative should make it his goal to provide each missionary couple or single missionary with specific, warm commendation. (Prov. 12:25; 1 Thess. 5:11) Following the visit, the branch representative will provide the Branch Committee with a completed Personal Qualifications Report (S-326) on each field missionary. If problems or concerns arise, the branch representative should not try to handle these on his own. Rather, he should report his observations to the Branch Committee, which will follow up as needed. If the branch representative is married, his wife may be given time off from her Bethel assignment to accompany him. While her husband is making the shepherding visits, she could spend time in the ministry, perhaps with other missionaries or with some of the local publishers.​—See 9:103.
119. While it is strongly preferred that Branch and Country committee members make such annual visits, other mature and exceptionally kind elders working in the Service Department may be assigned to assist the committee members. This exception is made primarily for lands where there are a large number of field missionaries or where some members of the committee cannot care for this assignment because of age or health.



PETS

120. Pets are not allowed to live in any home or on any property owned or rented directly by the organization. This would include field residences used to accommodate special full-time servants, such as a Kingdom Hall apartment used to house a circuit overseer. If a special pioneer or field missionary receives a housing allowance from the branch office and rents an apartment where pets are allowed, he should wisely count all the costs involved in caring for a pet. Since most pets require time and resources, special pioneers and field missionaries should be encouraged to focus their limited time, energy, and resources on fulfilling their roles in special full-time service. Approval will not be given to the paying of increased rent so that pets can be accommodated.
121. If special full-time servants must live in an area where crime and break-ins are prevalent, they may feel that it is necessary to have a watchdog. If that is the case, the Branch Committee should make a request to the appropriate Governing Body committee on behalf of the special full-time servants, explaining why it would be necessary for them to have a watchdog on the premises. The special full-time servants would be responsible to care for the dog. Of course, watchdogs are not pets. Therefore, the dog’s primary place would be in the yard where he could effectively keep intruders away.



CHART 9.1
PEA Categories

Seniority

Maximum PEAa



1-5 years

75%


5-10 years

87.5%


10 or more years

100%



Maximum PEA Per Month (USD)

Branch Cost of Living (USD)



$30.00

Under $200


$35.00

$200-$300


$37.50

$300-$400


$40.00

$400-$500


$45.00

$500-$600


$50.00

$600-$700


$55.00

$700-$800


$60.00

$800-$900


$65.00

$900-$1,000


$70.00

Over $1,000



Rounded in local currency, not to exceed this amount.

CHART 9.2
Full-Time Service Enrollments
LC = Personnel Committee; SC = Service Committee

Bethel Enrollments

Code

Committee Oversight

FTS

SFTS

Vow/​Membershipb

Allowance

Personal Time Away

Concurrent With Regular Pioneering

Description



Bethel Family Member

BBR

LC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

First three years, serves as a provisional member of the Order; the standard tested-as-to-fitness period. After three years, may be invited to serve as a regular member of the Order. Replacements may be approved by the Branch Committee.


Expatriate Bethel Family Member

BBF

LC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Foreign

N

Similar to BBR but assigned by the Personnel Committee to a foreign country. Receives certain additional provisions that take into consideration the special nature of the work in a foreign land.​—See 4:39-44.


Temporary Bethel Family Member

BBT

LC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Similar to BBR but invited for a specific period of time with a definite start and end date, generally one year but no more than five. Used also for those who are overage or coping with potential health issues. Qualified replacements who serve for one year may be approved by the Branch Committee. Extensions beyond one year must be approved by the Personnel Committee.


Temporary Volunteer (three months or less)

BBC

LC

N

N

None

Y#

N

Y

Volunteer serving at Bethel for three months or less, although typically the period is one to four weeks. Applicants approved by the Branch Committee. #May automatically receive a monthly reimbursement equal to the amount received by Bethel family members in the branch territory when the assignment exceeds a full calendar month (unless the volunteer specifically mentions that no reimbursement is needed).


Temporary Volunteer (more than three months)

BBW

LC

N

N

Volunteer

Y

One day per calendar month

Y

Volunteer serving at Bethel for more than 3 months but no more than 12. Must be approved by the Personnel Committee if serving for more than six months. Serves under a vow of obedience but not under a vow of poverty.


Full-Time Commuter

BBL

LC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Lives within commuting distance and arranges for own accommodations; works full-time at Bethel five days per week; receives most Bethel services.​—See Guidelines for Using Part-Time and Full-Time Commuters (A-80).


Part-Time Commuter

BBV

LC

N

N

None

N

Y*

Y

Lives within commuting distance and arranges for own accommodations; serves at Bethel one or more days per week; receives limited Bethel services. Replacements may be approved by the Branch Committee. *Personal time away records not maintained in computer.


Remote Volunteer

BRV

LC

N

N

None

N

Y*

Y

Lives outside of Bethel and arranges for own accommodations; does Bethel work remotely one or more days per week for up to one year; qualifications are reviewed each subsequent year. Replacements may be approved by the Branch Committee. *Personal time away records not maintained in computer.


Remote Servant

BRS

LC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Similar to BRV but works remotely full-time for Bethel five days per week, or 40 hours per week; receives provisions similar to special pioneers; qualifications are reviewed each subsequent year. Must be approved by the Personnel Committee.​—See HLA:HLD July 22, 2015.


Bethel Consultant

BOC

LC

N

N

None

N

Y*

Y

Lives outside of Bethel and arranges for own accommodations; does Bethel work remotely when a temporary need exists; qualifications are reviewed every three years when volunteer completes a new Application for Volunteer Program (A-19). Applicants approved by the Branch Committee.​—See letter HLA:HLB February 29, 2016, No. C-44608L. *Personal time away records not maintained in computer.


Bethel Relative

BNA

LC

N

N

None

N

N

Y

Family member of a Bethelite, such as a minor child, but not a member of the Bethel family.



Design/​Construction Enrollments

Code

Committee Oversight

FTS

SFTS

Vow/​Membershipc

Allowance

Personal Time Away

Concurrent With Regular Pioneering

Description



Assembly Hall Servant

BAS

LC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Serves at an Assembly Hall. Similar to a construction servant. Recommendation form forwarded by the Branch Committee to the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department, which will obtain Personnel Committee approval.


Bible School Facility Servant

BSS

LC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Serves at a stand-alone Bible school facility. Similar to an Assembly Hall servant. Recommendation form forwarded by the Branch Committee to the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department, which will obtain Personnel Committee approval.


Construction Servant

BCS

LC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Serves on any theocratic construction project for one year or for the duration of the project. After initial assignment is completed, may be asked to serve on another assignment if still qualifies and there is a need for skills. Recommendation form forwarded by the Branch Committee to the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department, which will obtain Personnel Committee approval.


Construction Volunteer

BCV

LC

N

N

Volunteer

Y#

One day per calendar month

Y

Serves on any theocratic construction project for three months or less; may be extended for up to six months; generally pays own travel expenses. #When the assignment exceeds a full calendar month, may automatically receive a monthly reimbursement equal to the amount received by Bethel family members in the branch territory (unless the volunteer specifically mentions that no reimbursement is needed).


Expatriate Construction Servant

BCF

LC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Foreign

N

Serves on any theocratic construction project in a foreign land for one year or more. After initial assignment is completed, may be asked to serve on another assignment in a foreign field if still qualifies and there is a need for skills. Recommendation form forwarded by the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department to the Personnel Committee for its approval.


Full-Time Construction Commuter

BCL

LC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

A special full-time servant who arranges for his own accommodations and regularly assists five days a week, or 40 hours per week, on a construction project, whether at a branch office, Kingdom Hall, Assembly Hall, remote translation office, school facility, or other theocratic construction project. Includes those on the construction site and those supporting the construction activities (e.g., project development, construction office, kitchen, cleaning, purchasing) whose assignments will end at the completion of the construction work in their area. Requires a full-time construction commuter recommendation form (A-73); needs Personnel Committee approval.​—See Guidelines for Using Part-Time and Full-Time Commuters (A-80).


Part-Time Construction Commuter

BCC

LC

N

N

None

N

Y*

Y

Those who serve part-time on a construction project one or more days each week on a continual basis, commute to the project from their own accommodations, and may need access to the Bethel network. Such ones should complete an Application for Volunteer Program (A19). If a part-time construction commuter is needed for more than six months, the Branch Committee should send a part-time construction commuter recommendation form (A-90) to the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department. *Personal time away records not maintained in computer.​—See Guidelines for Using Part-Time and Full-Time Commuters (A-80).



Field Enrollments

Code

Committee Oversight

FTS

SFTS

Vow/​Membershipd

Allowance

Personal Time Away

Concurrent With Regular Pioneering

Description



Regular Pioneer

FR

SC

Y

N

None

N

Handled by pioneer

 
Devotes prescribed number of hours (840) each year in the ministry. Appointed by local elders. Not part of the Order.


Temporary Special Pioneer

FTS

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Similar to FS but serves in one-year increments for up to a maximum of three years. During this time, is enrolled in an evaluation program that includes an annual review by the Service Department. At any time during the three-year period, may be recommended by the Branch Committee for consideration for another form of service.


Special Pioneer

FS

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Devotes prescribed number of hours each month in the ministry (standard of 130; 120 for sisters 40 and over). May arrange for own housing and is permitted to do limited amount of secular work. Assigned to congregation within branch territory by the Service Department.


Infirm Special Pioneer

FSI

SC

Y

Y

Regular

Y

Handled by special pioneer or branch

N

Similar to FS but given a reduced hour requirement because of health limitations, as recommended by the Branch Committee and approved by the Service Committee. Serves as a regular member of the Order.​—See 9:11.


Circuit Overseer

FC

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Appointed by the Governing Body to travel from congregation to congregation within an assigned circuit; assignment changes every three years. Should be a graduate of Gilead or School for Kingdom Evangelizers (SKE).


Circuit Overseer Foreign

FCF

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Foreign

N

Like FC but assigned to that country by the Service Committee.


Circuit Overseer’s Wife

CW

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Wife of FC. Although a special full-time servant, serves as regular pioneer within the congregation being visited each week.


Circuit Overseer’s Wife Foreign

CWF

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Foreign

N

Like CW but assigned to that country by the Service Committee.


Field Training School Instructor

FI

SC

Y

Y

Regular

Y

Standard

N

Similar to FC but assigned specifically to instruct theocratic schools in the field for more than three months.


Field Training School Instructor Foreign

FIF

SC

Y

Y

Regular

Y

Foreign

N

Like FI but assigned to that country by the Service Committee.


Field Training School Instructor’s Wife

IW

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Like CW but does not transfer from congregation to congregation each week or have a monthly hour requirement. Works under the direction of her husband. If he is teaching at an Assembly Hall or branch facility, she may work one or two days a week there instead of in the ministry.


Field Training School Instructor’s Wife Foreign

IWF

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Foreign

N

Like IW but assigned to that country by the Service Committee.


Field Missionary

FMF

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Foreign

N

Devotes prescribed number of hours each month in the ministry (standard of 130; 120 for sisters 40 and over). Lives in housing provided by the branch office. Assigned to that country by the Service Committee.


Temporary Field Missionary

FTF

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Foreign

N

Like FMF but serves for three years and then is transitioned to FMF or to another form of service.


Field Relative

FXR

SC

N

N

None

N

N

Y

Family member of field personnel, such as the wife of a special pioneer, who needs to be tracked by the branch for some reason but is not in another suitable enrollment.



Concurrent Enrollments

Code

Committee Oversight

FTS

SFTS

Vow/​Membershipe

Allowance

Personal Time Away

Concurrent With Regular Pioneering

Description



Visiting Member at Bethel

BBB

LC

 
 
Provisional or Regular

After one to three months in temporary branch

Handled by originating branch

Concurrent with original field enrollment

For temporary organizational visits to Bethel: branch school or circuit overseer school; assisting with a project; medical treatment. Use concurrently with originating branch special full-time service enrollment.


Visiting Member in Field

FBB

SC

 
 
Provisional or Regular

After one to three months in temporary branch

Handled by originating branch

Concurrent with original field enrollment

For temporary organizational visits in the field: circuit overseer; SKE; assisting with a project; medical treatment. Similar to BBB, but for the field.


Visiting Branch Circuit Overseer

FCB

SC

Y

Y

Provisional or Regular

Y

Standard

N

Like FC but the circuit covers more than one branch territory and has been approved by the Service Committee.


School for Kingdom Evangelizers Student

SKE

SC

N

N

Dependent on one’s membership immediately before school

Y

N

Y

Enrolled in the current class of SKE. Following graduation, assigned as FR, FTS, FS, etc., based on recommendations from the instructors and approval by the Branch Committee.


Full-Time Service Transition

FRT

SC

Y

N

 
N

N

N

Not a true enrollment but exists in a volunteer’s service history to represent the period of up to three calendar months between a volunteer’s leaving special full-time service and beginning regular pioneering and is credited as uninterrupted full-time service.



Those in enrollments that include the option to serve as either provisional or regular members of the Order will serve as provisional members for their first three years of special full-time service, which is the standard tested-as-to-fitness evaluation period. Afterward, if approved by the Branch Committee, they will be invited to serve as regular members of the Order.
Those in enrollments that include the option to serve as either provisional or regular members of the Order will serve as provisional members for their first three years of special full-time service, which is the standard tested-as-to-fitness evaluation period. Afterward, if approved by the Branch Committee, they will be invited to serve as regular members of the Order.
Those in enrollments that include the option to serve as either provisional or regular members of the Order will serve as provisional members for their first three years of special full-time service, which is the standard tested-as-to-fitness evaluation period. Afterward, if approved by the Branch Committee, they will be invited to serve as regular members of the Order.
Those in enrollments that include the option to serve as either provisional or regular members of the Order will serve as provisional members for their first three years of special full-time service, which is the standard tested-as-to-fitness evaluation period. Afterward, if approved by the Branch Committee, they will be invited to serve as regular members of the Order.


