
CHAPTER 6
Service Committee



BRANCH AND SHEPHERDING VISITS

1. Branch Visits: The Service Committee assigns headquarters representatives to make visits to branch and country offices. Such visits are usually arranged each year. Periodically, headquarters representatives may also be assigned to visit some remote translation offices. The headquarters representative’s primary work is to encourage the Bethel family, to aid the members of the Branch Committee in caring for their assignments, and to see that matters are being conducted in accord with the Scriptures and in harmony with direction from the Governing Body. (Acts 16:4, 5; Rom. 1:11, 12; Phil. 1:8-11) During his visit to the Bethel departments, the headquarters representative makes himself available to the members of the Bethel family who wish to speak about their service or personal matters. To get a firsthand report of the progress of the Kingdom work in the field, the headquarters representative will meet with some of the circuit overseers. During the visit, he will also meet with the field missionaries. (See 6:3.) Following his review of branch operations, the brother will provide a brief report to the Branch Committee, outlining points of commendation. As needed, the headquarters representative will also report on any significant matters that he feels may be adversely affecting the progress of the preaching and disciple-making work as well as the smooth operation of the work at the branch.​—1 Cor. 14:40.
2. The Branch Committee should prepare well for the branch visit, in harmony with direction received from the Service Committee. (See 7:71-75.) Prior to the headquarters representative’s arrival, the Branch Committee should have already completed the Branch Visit Questionnaire (A-26) for the current service year.
3. All Bethel family members (BBF, BBR, and BBT) as well as full-time commuters (BBL) serving in remote offices are invited to come for a branch visit once every three years. This also applies to remote servants (BRS), all field missionaries (FMF and FTF), and all circuit overseers in foreign service (CWF, FCF, FIF, and IWF). When invited, these individuals will attend either at the branch office or at another designated location, such as a remote translation office. On occasions when they are not invited to come for the visit, they are to be tied in for the main talks or receive a video recording of those talks. They may also speak with the headquarters representative by videoconferencing or telephone, if they wish to do so. Since circumstances vary, each Branch Committee decides how these arrangements will be organized in order to ensure that each one is invited to come for a branch visit every three years. If a visit to a remote translation office or country office is arranged, those in that region who qualify can enjoy the branch visit at that location, not at the branch office. This would serve as their visit for that three-year period.
4. At the end of his visit, the headquarters representative will provide his additional comments on the Branch Visit Questionnaire (A-26). He will also give a letter to the Branch Committee, providing his observations and commendation as well as counsel if needed. The A-26 files and his letter to the Branch Committee are to be sent to the Service Committee, which in turn will send each respective section of the report to the appropriate Governing Body committee. The Governing Body committees will not send routine acknowledgments of the report. If a matter is raised that requires specific direction from world headquarters, the Branch Committee should write to the appropriate Governing Body committee.
5. Shepherding Visits: Governing Body members are usually assigned to make two shepherding visits per year to selected branches for the encouragement of the Branch Committees and Bethel families. (1 Pet. 5:2, 3) Such visits are about one week in length. With regard to the timing of the shepherding visits and the annual branch visit by a headquarters representative, an effort should be made to schedule these visits at least four months​—but no less than three months—​apart from each other. The shepherding visit will require less preparation than a typical branch visit. For example, field missionaries and Bethelites serving in remote offices are not invited to the branch office during the shepherding visit. In addition, prior to the visit, there will be no need for the Branch Committee to complete a Branch Visit Questionnaire (A-26). A copy of the latest A-26 should be made available to the Governing Body member on his arrival. There is no need for the branch office to arrange an extensive schedule of visits to Bethel departments. Rather, at the time of his arrival, the Governing Body member will inform the Branch Committee of how he will carry out the visit.
6. A feature of the shepherding visit is a special program for congregations. If possible, the special program should be streamed to locations throughout the branch territory. In years when both a branch visit and a shepherding visit are scheduled, the special program held during the branch visit will be kept small, perhaps being held at a nearby Assembly Hall. That program will not be streamed to other locations.



FIELD MISSIONARIES

7. The Service Committee appoints field missionaries and determines the lands to which they will be assigned. Branches that wish to request additional field missionaries should submit the Request for Field Missionaries (S-218) form to the Service Committee by April and November of each year.​—See 6:12; 9:54.
8. Temporary Field Missionaries: Newly appointed field missionaries are invited to accept a three-year assignment. The HuB enrollment code for these temporary field missionaries is FTF. When a temporary field missionary has been in his assignment for 30 months, the branch office will write to him and ask him to submit a letter stating whether he would like to continue in the missionary work or would prefer to return home. If the individual decides to return home, the Service Committee should be informed. If the individual would like to continue as a field missionary, the Branch Committee should consider his effectiveness over the previous 30 months and make a frank recommendation to the Service Committee. In both cases, whether the individual desires to continue as a field missionary or not, the Service Committee will reply. The Service Committee will make the final decision concerning an individual’s future service as a field missionary.
9. In all cases, after the Service Committee has replied, a member of the Branch Committee or another mature elder from the Service Department should make a shepherding visit on the missionary. This visit could be made in conjunction with the annual shepherding visit. (See 9:118; John 21:16) Married couples should be met with together. The missionary’s circuit overseer or another mature local elder should accompany the branch representative on the visit.
10. Hour Requirement: The field missionary hour requirement is 130 hours a month. Sisters who are 40 years of age or older have a requirement of 120 hours a month. It is understood that a field missionary who serves as a congregation elder may at times be needed for additional short-term theocratic assignments. For example, he may need to serve on a special committee or a Disaster Relief Committee, help with circuit or convention organization, assist in the construction or renovation of his own Kingdom Hall, or serve as a substitute circuit overseer. In addition, he may be needed for a brief period of time to train local elders to care for their responsibilities on a Hospital Liaison Committee. In exceptional situations, the travel time to attend an assigned circuit assembly, regional convention, or Kingdom Ministry School may be unusually long. If such assignments prevent him from making his hour requirement, a brief explanation as well as the number of hours spent should be included on the monthly report submitted on jw.org or on his monthly S-212 report. An explanation should also be written in the “Remarks” column of the Congregation’s Publisher Record (S-21) card. However, the hours spent should not be included in the “Hours” column. The branch will also mark the HuB records accordingly.
11. If a missionary with less than 15 years of special full-time service is consistently unable to meet his monthly hour requirement because of serious and debilitating health problems, perhaps for six months or so, then the Branch Committee should follow the direction outlined in 9:96. For those who are 50 years of age or older or who have 15 or more years in special full-time service, a reduced hour requirement may be appropriate. To determine a reasonable hour goal, the branch office should receive a recommendation from the missionary’s body of elders and one from the circuit overseer before submitting the recommendation to the Service Committee. For reporting purposes, a field missionary with an approved reduced hour quota will continue with the FMF enrollment code. Periodically, the branch should review the field missionary’s circumstances to determine whether the reduced hour quota is still needed or whether a further reduction should be recommended to the Service Committee. In most cases, a reduced hour requirement is better than no hour requirement at all. The recommendation that a field missionary have no hour requirement is usually reserved for field missionaries who have extremely limiting circumstances because of advanced age or life-threatening health issues and whose hour requirement has already been progressively reduced.
12. Missionary Assignments: Field missionaries are a valuable resource, and the Branch Committee must give careful consideration to where they will be assigned. Assignments should enable the missionaries to accomplish the most good in stabilizing and strengthening preaching and congregation activities in densely populated areas. Missionaries should not be assigned to areas where their health and safety will be endangered. The Branch Committee should thoroughly consider such factors as the publisher-to-population ratio, the language fields that need to be targeted, and the availability of suitable housing. Specific congregation assignments for field missionaries are made by the Branch Committee. Missionaries do not select their own congregation assignments. Before any reassignment of field missionaries is finalized, a branch representative, preferably a member of the Branch Committee, should discuss the proposal with the missionaries involved to address any questions or concerns. There is no need to consult with the Service Committee about such reassignments unless the field missionaries raise a concern about the proposed move. (Prov. 13:10; 15:22) The Service Committee should be consulted when submitting requests to transfer a field missionary to Bethel for more than three months.​—See 4:7; 6:7.



HOSPITAL INFORMATION SERVICES

13. Under the supervision of the Service Committee, Hospital Information Services (HIS), a world headquarters department, provides direction, practical assistance, and periodic training to Hospital Information Desks (HIDs) and, through them, to Hospital Liaison Committees (HLCs). This arrangement (1) supports the Bible-based position to ‘abstain . . . from blood’ and (2) helps to correct misconceptions about the position of Jehovah’s Witnesses on medical care. (Acts 15:29) HIS maintains a database of current medical articles on transfusion-alternative treatment strategies from respected medical journals. HIS also supplies HIDs with useful medical publications, medical article citations lists, video programs on transfusion alternatives, and favorable court decisions involving patients’ rights. To accommodate urgent requests for information on medical alternatives to transfusion, HIS maintains 24-7 telephone accessibility.
14. Annual Videoconferencing With HLCs: HIS supplies material and instruction for a videoconferencing that each branch should hold with the HLCs in its territory every service year. The videoconferencing should be scheduled at a convenient time during the service year but preferably not during the time period when regional conventions are being held. The videoconferencing, which will be conducted by the HID overseer and the Branch Committee member who oversees the HID, will provide HLC members the opportunity to become acquainted with the brothers who oversee their work. It also serves to encourage those serving on HLCs and promotes a cooperative spirit between them and the branch office. The Branch Committee will determine whether the videoconferencing should be presented in more than one language. If one or both of the presenters do not speak the target language, the Branch Committee may assign a qualified brother to do voice-over interpretation in the same way that JW Broadcasting uses a single video as a master for vernacular languages. Since this process will take time, each language may be presented at a different time. All language presentations should be recorded and placed on jw.org for any HLC members who may not be available for the original broadcast.
15. Hospital Information Desk (HID): An HID is established at each branch to oversee the Hospital Liaison Committees within its assigned territory. The Branch Committee oversees the work of the HID. The HID should use the designation Hospital Information Desk when communicating with the HLCs and other departments within the branch office and when writing to other branches and to headquarters. However, when the HID communicates with doctors and secular professionals, its letterhead, business cards, and e-mail signature line should describe the department as “Hospital Information Services (Country) for Jehovah’s Witnesses.” An HID should also use this designation when exhibiting at medical conferences.
16. While there is no arrangement for HID representatives to visit HLCs, the Branch Committee may grant approval on a case-by-case basis for an HID representative to visit an HLC that is in urgent need of training or that is finding it difficult to assist the brothers to obtain medical care without blood transfusions.
17. Since the support and medical information provided by HIS is primarily in English, the HID overseer or his assistant should be reasonably proficient in spoken and written English, if possible, in addition to the local language.​—See the letters dated HSA:HIA February 13, 2014, No. C-26033S; and HSA:HIA September 15, 2015, No. C-40605S.
18. When the HID requires assistance with emergency cases or other urgent situations involving the blood issue, the HID should contact HIS immediately by e-mail or by telephone, following up with official correspondence, which would normally include the Medical Emergency Worksheet (hlc-7). HIS will provide any needed materials. Therefore, HIDs should not do extensive searches for medical information or begin working on any other materials related to HID or HLC activity without permission from the Service Committee. The HID should be accessible to HLCs and hospital professionals in its branch territory on a 24-7 basis. HIS should be informed immediately of any changes to the 24-hour contact information published on jw.org.​—See the letter dated HSA:HIA December 2, 2014, No. C-33873S.
19. If the HID becomes aware of a high-quality, peer-reviewed, local-language medical article and the Branch Committee believes that the article would be useful, such an article, along with a brief English summary, may be sent to HIS for approval. Articles should focus on one or more of the following: (1) drugs, devices, or techniques that reduce or eliminate the use of donor (allogeneic) blood; (2) ethical/​legal concerns, patients’ rights, or informed consent issues; (3) transfusion hazards; (4) the cost-effectiveness of transfusion-alternative strategies; or (5) an outline of how to perform a specific medical or surgical procedure without the use of donor (allogeneic) blood.
20. The HID maintains a list of consulting doctors who are respected, highly skilled, well-known advocates of nonblood management and who are willing and able to explain effectively to less experienced doctors the use of transfusion alternatives. When emergencies or complicated cases arise, the HID may provide an HLC with the name of a consulting doctor. If there are no consulting doctors available in the country, the HID may contact HIS or a nearby HID for assistance. Each HLC maintains a list of cooperative doctors in its local area who have agreed to care for Witness patients. (In smaller branches with few cooperative doctors, the HID may decide to keep on file the HLC lists of cooperative doctors.) Thus, when Witnesses seek a cooperative specialist or medical facility, the HLCs can supply the names of several doctors or medical facilities that can provide the needed specialized care. (HLCs may provide indirect humanitarian assistance through Witness relatives or local elders to disfellowshipped individuals.) HLCs refrain from endorsing doctors, procedures, facilities, pharmaceuticals, herbal products, or alternative medical therapies. In all matters of health care, members of the HLCs avoid imposing their conscience on others. For cooperative physicians and facilities outside their assigned area, HLCs may consult with neighboring HLCs or with the HID. Only the HID should consult a nearby HID or HIS as needed.​—See the letter dated GAO:HIA October 2, 2006.
21. Hospital Liaison Committees (HLCs): The Branch Committee determines the number of HLCs needed in its branch territory. When an HLC needs additional brothers to help care for the workload, the HLC makes recommendations to the branch office, using the general guidelines set forth below. The HLC should consult the circuit overseer to ensure that the recommended brother is qualified to serve in this capacity. The HLC then sends the recommendation to the Hospital Information Desk (HID), using the Hospital Liaison Committee Recommendation (hlc-21) form. If the HID is in agreement, the recommendation is forwarded to the Service Department for comments. If there is no objection to the appointment, two members of the Branch Committee may approve it. While it is unlikely that any brother would have ideal circumstances and possess all the desired qualities, he should measure up to a reasonable degree.
           He should be an articulate, spiritual man who is respected in the area.​—1 Tim. 3:7.

            He should be courageous, not easily intimidated, willing and able to speak with doctors, lawyers, and judges.​—Ex. 4:10-12; Prov. 29:25.

            He should truly love the sheep and be willing to respond to an emergency at all hours.​—Prov. 3:27; 19:17; John 13:35.

            He should be accessible. If a brother is often away on business or is difficult to contact, this would limit his ability to assist in an emergency. Brothers who have a flexible work schedule, work part-time, or are semiretired are usually in a better position to meet with hospital personnel whenever required. This is an important qualification.

            He should be loyal in maintaining confidentiality.​—Ex. 18:21; Prov. 25:9.

            He should work well with others. Cooperation and unity are needed to accomplish the work.​—1 Cor. 1:10; 12:12-26.

            He should live in or near the city where the HLC is located, unless special circumstances warrant an exception.

            Some medical background may be helpful, but it is not necessary.

            He should not have so many other responsibilities that he would not be able to carry out this assignment.


22. HLCs are set up in most major cities to (1) act as a liaison between health-care providers and Witness patients and their families when requested; (2) assist Witness patients in locating doctors willing to provide treatment without blood transfusion; (3) provide medical articles to doctors, in accordance with copyright laws; (4) arrange consultations between local doctors and experienced specialists; (5) assist Witness patients in transferring to another medical facility if this becomes necessary; (6) make presentations to medical professionals, health ministries, social welfare officials, legal personnel, and others about our position on medical care and/​or blood transfusions; and (7) appoint elders to serve as Patient Visitation Group (PVG) members. HLCs coordinate the activity of the PVGs and meet with the members at least once a year to review needs, offer encouragement, and keep these elders abreast of HLC activity.
23. During a local blood-related medical crisis, the branch office may designate HLC members to respond to media inquiries. The Branch Committee would likely direct the HID and the HLC members to work closely with the Legal Department and the Public Information Desk on such media matters.​—See 3:39, 49, 53-58, 60-63.
24. Annually, toward the beginning of the year, bodies of elders receive a letter from the branch office reminding them to download the updated list of local HLC members from jw.org. In lands where Internet access is limited, the branch office will provide the latest list.
25. Patient Visitation Groups (PVGs): Hospital Liaison Committees (HLCs) organize PVGs in key cities to provide spiritual support for hospitalized Witness patients from outside the local area. HLCs may consult with the circuit overseers for recommendations of elders to serve as PVG members. An HLC member is assigned to oversee PVG activity, especially in metropolitan areas. At least once a year, HLCs meet with the PVGs to review needs and offer encouragement. During hospital visits, the PVG elders endeavor to provide emotional and spiritual support and, at appropriate times, pray with Witness patients and relatives. When a PVG finds a patient from a local congregation who needs assistance and support, it facilitates contact with the elders in the patient’s congregation. The PVG arrangement does not replace the responsibility of the local congregations to visit and care for the needs of their publishers who are in the hospital.
26. Bloodless Medicine and Surgery Programs (BMSPs): Hospitals in some lands have established BMSPs, blood conservation programs, and patient blood management programs. This means that the hospital administration, the coordinator(s) within the hospital, and/​or various specialists have made a commitment to provide medical or surgical care without donor blood transfusions to patients who request such care. At times, business organizations make contracts with hospitals to develop and maintain BMSPs. Even when staffed by Witnesses, such organizations are not spokesmen for Jehovah’s Witnesses.
27. Hospital Liaison Committees (HLCs) should not endorse or participate in the meetings of BMSPs or share with them the HLCs’ confidential lists of cooperative doctors. The activity of these entities must remain separate from Hospital Information Desks, HLCs, and the congregations. (km 9/87 p. 4; km 6/77 p. 4) The branch office should write to the Service Committee if there are some unusual circumstances warranting a different approach.
28. Attendance at Medical Conferences: The Branch Committee should be very selective as to the type of conferences and the number of conferences it approves for the Hospital Information Desk (HID) to attend each year, so that Bethel family members are not away from their regular assignments too frequently. Only conferences directly related to the blood issue should be considered. However, conferences featuring blood conservation or transfusion-alternative strategies will often discuss Jehovah’s Witnesses, and having an HID or Hospital Liaison Committee (HLC) representative present may help to correct any misinformation. If a conference is held in another country, the Branch Committee should seek in writing the approval of the Service Committee to have a representative attend. The letter to the Service Committee should include assurance that the Branch Committee has sufficient funds in its budget to cover the costs associated with attending the conference.
29. If the HID or an HLC is invited to present information on the position of Jehovah’s Witnesses on medical matters and the Branch Committee agrees, a copy of the proposed presentation should be sent to the Service Committee for approval. This is not necessary if the brother uses the standard HID/​HLC PowerPoint presentation.
30. The branch office should not sponsor a medical conference or symposium. If cooperative doctors consent to their names being given to the sponsors as potential presenters, this may be done. If the Branch Committee believes that more involvement is warranted, the Service Committee should be consulted. There is no objection to HLC members verbally informing cooperative doctors of such events if the HLC believes that the doctors may wish to attend. However, HLCs should not initiate a special campaign to invite doctors in their area to the event and should refrain from advertising or giving the impression that they endorse or promote an event, even when Witnesses are organizers. Furthermore, the branch office should not incur transportation, registration, or lodging expenses for physicians to attend these events. If further consideration is warranted, the Branch Committee should write to the Service Committee.
31. Exhibits at Medical Conferences and Use of Display Booths: The branch office should be very selective regarding the type and the number of medical conferences for which it will seek approval to set up a booth. Only conferences attended by doctors who regularly deal with the blood issue are to be considered. Before contracting with the sponsors to exhibit, the branch office should seek approval from the Service Committee, submitting the name of the conference, dates, location, expected attendance, total anticipated costs for exhibiting, and other relevant information concerning the event. The letter to the Service Committee should include assurance that the Branch Committee has sufficient funds in its budget to cover the associated costs. Only the approved booth graphics and signage should be used. Any modifications should be approved by the Service Committee. When a booth is requested from a custodial branch, sufficient lead time should be allowed (at least three months). Only the approved presentation kits should be used as handouts. Branches may write to Hospital Information Services for suggestions on what to include in the information packages for doctors.​—See the letters dated HIM:HIO August 23, 1999; and HIM:HIP December 22, 2000.
32. Medical Devices and Supplies: Hospitals in developing countries may ask the branch office to donate medical devices, equipment, or other supplies. Before making any commitment, the Branch Committee should write to the Service Committee for direction.
33. Pharmaceuticals: In developing lands with limited access to basic pharmaceuticals, a branch office may wish to store a small supply of specialized medicine (such as EPO or iron) and/​or other basic medical supplies. However, before requesting permission from the Service Committee, the branch office should check with regulatory health agencies in the country to determine the legal requirements that regulate storing these items. If the Service Committee approves the request, the branch office should be judicious in the amount of medicine kept on hand, perhaps storing only a six-month supply or enough for two or three patients. The branch office should submit a Nonliterature Branch Request, along with a note referencing the letter of approval from the Service Committee, to replace any items used. Brothers may express their appreciation for this arrangement by donating financially to defray the cost of replenishing the stock of medicine and supplies, though such a donation is not a requirement to benefit from this arrangement.
34. Websites: Since jw.org provides helpful information for medical professionals, neither the branches nor the Hospital Liaison Committees (HLCs) should place information about the Hospital Information Desk or HLC activity on any other website unless the Service Committee grants approval.



SERVICE DEPARTMENT

35. Under the direction of the Branch Committee, the Service Department cares for matters related to the preaching work and the activity of congregations, elders and ministerial servants, circuit overseers, and pioneers. The Service Department takes a keen interest in the spiritual growth of the congregations and provides valuable feedback to the Branch Committee as to what is needed to accelerate the preaching and disciple-making work. It also arranges assemblies and conventions and various theocratic schools. Brothers in the Service Department prepare responses to reports and inquiries from the field that relate to the preaching work and congregation activities. The Service Department works closely with the Local Design/​Construction Department to determine where Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls are needed and their priority. The Governing Body provides direction on such matters through the latest publications on congregation organization, various guidelines, and letters. If there is no clear policy on a matter, the Service Department should forward its questions to the Branch Committee. The Branch Committee may need to consult with the Service Committee or another Governing Body committee for direction.



Department Organization

36. Overseer: A member of the Branch or Country committee will be appointed to serve as the Service Department overseer. (See 2:13.) In most branches, an assistant overseer should be appointed to care for the workload, especially when the overseer is away from the office. In larger branches, two brothers may be appointed by the Branch Committee to serve as assistant overseers. (See 2:15.) Good communication, coordination, and cross-training by oversight will ensure that the workload is distributed evenly and that the department is not overstaffed.​—See letter dated HSA:HSQ October 13, 2015, No. C-41286S.
37. Deskmen: In a small branch office, the overseer may be able to handle the work of a Service Department deskman. In most branches, however, the Branch Committee will appoint other qualified elders to serve in the Service Department as deskmen who will care for the reports and correspondence from a number of circuits. The number of circuits assigned to a deskman varies according to the brother’s workload, capabilities, health, and age limitations.
38. A deskman should be an experienced elder known for his loyal adherence to theocratic direction. He must be courteous, loyal, and courageous in giving sound Scriptural direction. He must be well-organized and diligent in caring for his responsibilities. He may have gained experience as a Service Desk secretary for several years. Experience has shown that there are benefits for some of the deskmen to have served in the traveling work prior to Bethel. Deskmen should give thorough training to the secretaries in the department with the objective of helping them to take on greater responsibility in the future. (2 Tim. 2:2) In most cases, such a training program would make it unnecessary routinely to transfer circuit overseers to Bethel to serve in the Service Department. However, if there is a need to transfer a circuit overseer to Bethel to serve as a Service Department deskman, the request, along with a complete explanation, should be submitted to the Service Committee. If the Service Committee agrees to release the circuit overseer for Bethel service, the recommendation will then be sent to the Personnel Committee. (See 4:10.) When considering this option, the Branch Committee should keep in mind that not all circuit overseers and their wives will be able to adapt to Bethel life.
39. A deskman should be careful to avoid giving his own opinion on service-related matters. His counsel must be sound, based on the Bible and theocratic guidelines. (1 Cor. 4:6) To ensure that proper theocratic direction is relayed to the field, a proofreading system should be established. One deskman may proofread the work of another.
40. Service Desk Secretaries: As the workload increases, a brother may be assigned as a secretary to a deskman. Although he may be younger in years and may not have the same level of experience, a secretary must have the spiritual qualities required of a deskman. While it is preferred that a Service Desk secretary be an appointed elder, he would generally not need to be an older brother with many years of Bethel service or field experience. A modest young brother with fine spirituality and the potential to qualify in time to serve as a deskman may be used. His duties would include opening and sorting mail, attaching relevant background material, typing letters, filing, entering information into the computer, and so forth.
41. Desk Groups: As the number of deskmen increases, it may be practical to arrange them in groups of five or six and have them circulate difficult cases. The more-difficult cases can be considered at a weekly meeting. (Prov. 13:10) At the discretion of the Branch Committee, the more experienced Service Desk secretaries could be included in the group meetings in order to further their training. If those in the Service Department cannot resolve a complex issue by using published direction or if a case is of major importance, they will refer the matter to the Branch Committee. The Branch Committee, in turn, may need to consult with the Service Committee for direction.​—See 2:21; 6:61.



Handling Telephone Calls and Correspondence

42. Telephone Calls: A telephone call should always be answered in a kind and loving way. Even though the brother taking the call is busy and it may interrupt his work, reflecting warmth, respect, and concern for the brothers and others is important. One should be as helpful as possible to the individual calling. If the caller is from outside of Bethel, it is not wise for a deskman or his secretary to give his name unless the caller is a circuit overseer. However, there is no objection to providing an outside caller with the desk symbol of the deskman.
43. A telephone memorandum should be made for all telephone calls that deal with important matters and for calls in which direction is given and a record is necessary. The memorandum should include the name of the caller, the caller’s telephone number, the congregation, the nature of the call, who took the call, and any direction that was given. This can be filed in the General Correspondence section of the congregation’s file or in the HOLD file if a letter is forthcoming. If the caller presents a weighty matter, he should be requested to write to the branch office.
44. Incoming Mail: In smaller branches, the Service Department overseer may be able to handle routine mail. In most branches, it may be necessary to have a mail desk or a correspondence clerk assigned to open postal mail. A similar arrangement may be needed to process and route incoming electronic correspondence. Incoming mail is handled in the date order of receipt and according to its urgency. If at all possible, those working in the Service Department should make it their goal to reply to correspondence within two weeks.
45. Requests for Kingdom Hall Addresses and Meeting Times: In most cases, the branch office may provide any inquirer with basic information about Kingdom Hall addresses and meeting times. There is no objection to replying by e-mail to written requests for such basic information.​—See 3:10; 6:49.
46. Correspondence From Other Branches: When another branch writes to an individual in the branch territory, the letter will usually be sent to the Service Department for forwarding to the addressee. In most cases, such letters can be sent directly to the addressee. If there are any concerns about the information being provided or about the addressee, it would be best to send the letter through the congregation, with appropriate direction to the elders.
47. If the letter to the individual is accompanied by a courtesy copy for the branch, the original should be sent to the addressee, as directed above, and the courtesy copy filed in the BRANCH CORRESPONDENCE FILE. If the letter to the individual is not accompanied by a courtesy copy to the branch, this means that it was received electronically and printed in the office. The letter may be mailed as outlined above. A photocopy does not need to be made for the BRANCH CORRESPONDENCE FILE, as the electronic file copy will be retained according to the retention policy.
48. Letters sent to those living outside the branch territory are usually not mailed directly to the individual. Rather, after the letter is approved, it is sent to the overseeing branch office to be forwarded to the person or his congregation body of elders. (See 6:45-47.) Exceptions to this general policy are outlined in 6:49-50.
49. Inquiries From Publishers in Other Countries: It is important that all those who consider moving to a foreign land prayerfully count the cost and seek Jehovah’s direction. (Luke 14:28; Jas. 1:5; od p. 100; km 8/11 pp. 4-6) The branch office should be helpful and respond promptly to any publisher who inquires about serving temporarily or permanently where the need is greater. If a written inquiry is accompanied by a favorable letter of recommendation from the Congregation Service Committee, the Service Department may provide such information as Kingdom Hall addresses, meeting times, and contact information of the coordinator(s) of the body of elders. The Service Department should be sure that any areas being recommended for assistance are safe for foreigners. The reply letter may be sent directly to the publisher via e-mail or surface mail. If the branch office is uncertain about the qualifications of a particular publisher, the letter should be sent to the inquirer’s branch office, indicating that the letter should be forwarded to the individual or to his body of elders.​—See 6:45.
50. While branches are authorized to provide general information to publishers about the country and congregations needing assistance, the branch is not authorized to provide extensive additional assistance, such as issuing sponsorship or guarantee letters; supplying residency, visa, or other legal forms; locating pioneer partners; and arranging suitable accommodations. These are personal matters that require careful investigation by the publisher before he or she moves to another country. Therefore, it is the responsibility of the individual publisher, not the branch office, to obtain information about visa requirements and work permits.​—Gal. 6:5.
51. Certificates or Letters for Jehovah’s Witnesses: On occasion, publishers and others associated with a local congregation may request that the body of elders or the branch office provide them with a signed letter or certificate that confirms or explains in some way the person’s relationship with the Christian congregation. For example, local authorities in some areas may require that an elder who performs weddings or one who conducts meetings in prisons register and provide some proof of his ordination as a minister. A publisher or pioneer who is moving to serve where the need is greater in another country may request that the body of elders or the branch office provide him with a letter confirming that he is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in good standing. The immigration authorities in some countries may ask a person who is regularly attending congregation meetings to provide a signed statement from the body of elders confirming that fact. In some lands, baptized Christians are called upon to explain to the authorities their personal and conscientious objection to military service. In neutrality cases, it may be helpful for the authorities to receive a letter or a certificate from the congregation or the branch office confirming that the conscientious objector is an ordained and baptized minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses or a full-time preacher of the good news. The Branch Committee is responsible for carefully determining (1) if the elders or the branch office should be involved in replying to such requests; (2) if so, the approved wording to be used; and (3) for whom such letters and certificates may be provided. In most cases, the elders or the branch would issue such documents only for publishers in good standing. Any such letters or certificates approved by the Branch Committee should be limited to explaining the facts and not go into detail about a brother’s or a sister’s personal convictions. (1 Pet. 3:15) Furthermore, any document provided by the branch office on the letterhead of one of the organization’s local legal entities should not in any way imply that the organization is sponsoring the person financially or legally. (Gal. 6:5) Publishers and pioneers who move on their own to another land should not be represented to immigration authorities as “missionaries” because they are not sponsored by the organization as is done for those who are in the Worldwide Order of Special Full-Time Servants of Jehovah’s Witnesses. If the Branch Committee needs further guidance on such matters involving publishers, pioneers, or others in the field, it should write to the Service Committee. Matters related to the support of members of the Worldwide Order are further described in 3:29-33.
52. Circuit Overseer’s Report on a Congregation: The Report on Circuit Overseer’s Visit With Congregation (S-303) is used by the circuit overseer to give the Service Department a brief report on the spirit of the congregation and any encouragement or counsel given. It is necessary to acknowledge the circuit overseer’s report only if further correspondence would be helpful.
53. Appointments and Deletions of Elders and Ministerial Servants: Circuit overseers are appointed by the Governing Body to care for the appointments and deletions of elders and ministerial servants. (Acts 14:23; Titus 1:5) The procedures to be followed by circuit overseers are outlined in Circuit Overseer Guidelines (tg).​—See 6:74.
54. The Service Department receives the names, birth dates, and baptism dates of brothers who will be considered for appointment during a circuit overseer’s upcoming visit to a congregation. This information is received automatically when congregations use the Web version of the Recommendations for Appointment of Elders and Ministerial Servants (S-62) form to notify their circuit overseer of the recommendation. Congregations with limited Internet access may submit their recommendations to their circuit overseer by means of the printed version of the S-62 form, or the branch office may allow congregations to submit the information to their circuit overseer by means of a phone call or text message. Thereafter, the circuit overseer should immediately forward the information to the branch office. When received by the Service Department, a check may need to be performed to confirm that there is no legal reason that the recommendation for a brother’s appointment should not be considered. Such a legal check may require sending the information to the Legal Department. This legal check is not required on the names of (1) elders and ministerial servants who are recommended because they moved, (2) regular pioneers or those in other forms of full-time service who are recommended as ministerial servants, or (3) ministerial servants who are recommended to serve as elders. If there is no legal reason that the recommendation should not be considered, the Service Department should inform the circuit overseer accordingly. (If the Web version of the S-62 form cannot be used, the branch office may determine the best method of conveying to the circuit overseer that the recommendation may be considered.) The check made by the branch office is not a check of the person’s age, marital status, previous appointments and deletions, or the like. That responsibility rests with the body of elders and the circuit overseer.
55. If there is a legal reason that the appointment of a brother should not be considered (such as a valid accusation of child abuse), the Service Department should investigate the matter further and determine whether or not the recommendation should be considered by the circuit overseer. If the recommendation may be considered, the Service Department should inform the circuit overseer accordingly without delay. If the recommendation should not be considered, the Service Department should inform the circuit overseer and the elders concerning the reason.
56. If there is insufficient time for the branch office to process a recommendation before the visit of the circuit overseer, the Service Department should inform the circuit overseer that the recommendation will need to be resubmitted in conjunction with the next visit.
57. If the circuit overseer will be away from the circuit for (1) less than a month, he may hold any recommendations in abeyance until he returns; (2) one to three months, the branch office should designate another circuit overseer (perhaps a neighboring circuit overseer or one who recently served the circuit) to consider any recommendations received from substitutes; or (3) more than three months, the branch office should assign another circuit overseer to visit congregations in the circuit. If a circuit overseer is unable to communicate with the affected congregations and substitutes before leaving his assignment, the branch office should take the lead in informing them.​—See 6:139.
58. At times, the branch office will assign an appointed elder or a ministerial servant, such as a special pioneer, Bethel family member, or a graduate of the School for Kingdom Evangelizers, to serve in a particular congregation. In such cases, the Service Department should write to the circuit overseer to advise him that they recommend the reappointment of the brother. Thereafter, the circuit overseer may generate an appointment letter to the new congregation and will inform the Service Department using the Notification of Appointment or Deletion (S-2).
59. At times, a brother serving at Bethel becomes involved in misconduct and the Branch Committee decides that he can stay at Bethel, but no longer qualifies to serve in an appointed position in the congregation. In such a case, the Service Department would send a letter to the body of elders outlining the following: (1) that because of certain misconduct the Branch Committee has determined that the brother may stay at Bethel but his qualifications to serve as an appointed servant have come into serious question and thus the Branch Committee is writing to the circuit overseer recommending that he be deleted, (2) a concise explanation of the brother’s misconduct, (3) the arrangements that have been established at Bethel to provide spiritual help, and (4) that the elders should write the Service Department if the brother is still serving at Bethel when and if they recommend his reappointment. In a postscript to the circuit overseer, it should be recommended that he delete the brother at his earliest convenience.
60. Appeals Involving Deletions of Elders and Ministerial Servants: If an elder or a ministerial servant disagrees with his deletion by the circuit overseer, he should be asked immediately to write a brief letter to the Service Department, with a copy to the body of elders and the circuit overseer, explaining why he disagrees with the deletion. The announcement of deletion will be held in abeyance. Thereafter, the Service Department will select an experienced circuit overseer who will then rehear the entire matter with the original circuit overseer. These two brothers will listen to the brother carefully and deal with him kindly and justly. They may consult with the Service Department for advice. After the two circuit overseers have heard the brother’s concerns and reached a joint decision, there is no further appeal. If it is decided that the brother should be deleted, the announcement will be made at the next midweek meeting and the circuit overseer will inform the Service Department using the Notification of Appointment or Deletion (S-2).
61. In very rare situations, the Service Department oversight may see a need to select a special committee to consider an appeal involving the matter of brothers’ qualifications to continue serving as elders. For example, a special committee may be needed in unusual and complex cases that involve the qualifications of multiple elders or perhaps even an entire body of elders. The deskman, in consultation with Service Department oversight, will select the special committee from names provided by the circuit overseer and then provide direction to the special committee on its handling of the matter. (See 6:41.) After a thorough investigation and a meeting with the brothers involved, the special committee will then submit its comments and provide a recommendation to the original circuit overseer and the other experienced circuit overseer. (See 6:60.) If needed, the circuit overseers may consult with the Service Department. However, the two circuit overseers, not the special committee nor the branch office, will make the final determination regarding the qualifications of the brother(s) in question and inform the Service Department accordingly.
62. In the event that a body of elders disagree with a circuit overseer’s decision not to remove a brother whose deletion they have recommended and whose appeal they have sent to the branch office, the Service Department should obtain the circuit overseer’s comments on the elders’ correspondence. What facts did the circuit overseer take into account in rejecting the recommendation the elders made? What efforts did he make to explain kindly the reasons for his decision to the elders? Is there a valid Scriptural basis to the recommendation made by the elders? Is the circuit overseer known to be kind, impartial, and just, or does he tend to be unyielding or to impose his personal viewpoints? With this information, the branch office can determine what counsel, if any, the circuit overseer or the body of elders should receive. It may be practical to encourage the elders to continue demonstrating their submission to Christ’s headship by supporting the arrangement made by the “faithful and discreet slave.”​—Matt. 24:45-47; w14 11/15 pp. 28-29.
63. Distributing Documents on JW.ORG: Branches are notified when new and revised forms, letters, and outlines are posted on MDS. The Branch Committee will determine whether the item can be used in the branch territory without any adjustments. If so, it may be possible for the Service Department to create a link to the item under the Documents tab on the website. Often minor adjustments are needed to the documents, such as the insertion of letterheads, signature stamps, and the like. Or there may be a need to substitute the word “Province” for “State,” to add a statement giving permission for the branch or congregations to keep personal data for individuals on file, to incorporate the monetary denomination used in a specific country, and so forth. In the case of these minor adjustments, the Service Department may make the necessary changes and then upload the document to the local jw.org directory and create a link on the site. If there is a need to alter a document or to create a new form because of unique local circumstances, the Branch Committee should request approval from the appropriate Governing Body committee.​—See 6:160.



Processing Judicial Reports

64. Disfellowshippings and Disassociations: The elder serving as the chairman of a judicial committee (or “a committee” in the case of disassociation) is to submit one copy of the Notification of Disfellowshipping or Disassociation (S-77) to the Service Department. Usually there is no need for the elders serving on the committee to submit additional correspondence about the case.
65. Role of Service Desk Secretary: The Service Desk secretary will be responsible to review the S-77 form to make sure it is complete. If there is anything on the form that is not clear or is missing, the secretary will contact a member of the committee that submitted the form. It may be possible to obtain missing information by means of a telephone call. Once the Service Desk secretary has verified that the form is complete, he will enter the record into the electronic file used by the branch office. If the S-77 form is scanned into an electronic file, there is no need to keep a hard copy. Depending on local circumstances, it is left to each branch office to decide whether there is a need to send a brief acknowledgment to the chairman of the committee that the S-77 form has been received.
66. Role of Service Department Deskman: Though it is not necessary for the deskman to review all S-77 forms, the secretary should be trained to alert the deskman to any unusual or weighty cases. The following list is not comprehensive but simply provides some examples of cases that should be forwarded to the deskman for consideration and careful handling:
            There is a question as to whether there is a valid judicial charge or sufficient evidence to support the charge.​—ks10 5:2-37.

            The S-77 form reveals that the committee did not inform the individual of the decision.​—ks10 6:9-10; 7:29-30.

            The individual does not agree with the decision of the original committee and the appeal committee and is now appealing his case to the branch office.​—ks10 8:14-15.

            The original committee and the appeal committee do not agree on the decision.​—ks10 8:16-18.

            The committee has submitted correspondence about the case in addition to the S-77 report.


67. The Service Department deskman and desk groups should not be quick to second-guess how a committee cared for a particular matter unless it is clear from the S-77 form and any additional correspondence submitted that the published guidelines in the Shepherding textbook and current letters to bodies of elders were not followed. In such cases, the deskman should write to the committee in an effort to help them bring the matter to a conclusion. Thereafter, the deskman or the secretary will update the branch office’s files accordingly.
68. With reinstatements, the deskman would not usually need to review the information submitted unless there are some unusual factors. One exception is when it appears that sufficient time was not allowed for the individual to prove that his repentance is genuine. (ks10 11:3-5) Depending on the nature of the matter, the deskman may determine to provide the committee with some helpful reminders.
69. Use of HuB and JW.ORG Inbox Feature: Branches using these tools will be able to process and store S-77 forms electronically. The following is a brief explanation of the procedure that they may choose to use:
            A member of the committee submits the S-77 form using the jw.org Inbox feature.

            Upon receipt, the S-77 form is assigned to a Service Desk secretary for review.

            When the secretary has determined that the form is complete, he will enter the record in the electronic file used by the branch office, such as Tracking Persons. An incident could be created linking the form to the tracked person. In the case of a reinstatement, the secretary would update the electronic record and retain the notification in the electronic file system.

            If the S-77 form needs further review by a deskman, the secretary will pass this on to him. After the deskman has completed his review, he will return the correspondence to the secretary who will then update any electronic record of the matter.

            If needed, hard copies of S-77 forms can be scanned into HuB. A record of the matter can be entered into Tracking Persons. Any hard copy should be shredded.


70. Rescissions: If the Service Department determines that a judicial action was taken without valid basis, they should assist the elders to see why the wrongdoing did not warrant the formation of a judicial committee. If the elders agree, they should rescind the judicial decision. If a reproof was previously announced to the congregation, the elders should make the following announcement: “The announcement of judicial reproof involving [name of person] has been rescinded.” Any judicial restrictions that had been imposed should be removed, and the body of elders should determine if the publisher still qualifies for any special privileges he enjoyed before the action was taken. If a disfellowshipping was previously announced to the congregation, the elders should make the following announcement: “The announcement that [name of person] is no longer one of Jehovah’s Witnesses has been rescinded.” The body of elders should determine if the publisher still qualifies for any special privileges he enjoyed before the action was taken. The letter to the judicial committee will request that the committee reply in writing to the Service Department, providing the date when the rescission was announced. Once the date is received, the records should be updated.
71. Appeal Committees: The circuit overseer is authorized to appoint an appeal committee. For details on the formation of an appeal committee and the correspondence to be received from it, see Circuit Overseer Guidelines, chapter 13.



Forming Congregations

72. A circuit overseer will assist in organizing the formation of a new congregation if and when it is advisable to do so. A completed Congregation Application Information (S-51) form may be submitted to the branch office. Generally, the circuit overseer will sign the application.
73. In congregations or groups with no appointed elders, one or more experienced ministerial servants (or a baptized sister if a baptized brother is no longer available) may be designated to handle some necessary matters temporarily. For example, the branch office may choose to send nonconfidential correspondence to the personal jw.org inbox of a well-qualified ministerial servant. Another option is to ask an elder in a nearby congregation to assist.
74. When the Service Department gives approval for the formation or dissolution of a congregation, the circuit overseer will proceed with the appointment of elders and ministerial servants in their respective congregations, using the Notification of Appointment or Deletion. (See 6:53.) Care should be taken to see that all elders and ministerial servants are accounted for and appointed to serve with one of the congregations involved. The territory assignment for each respective congregation should be provided. In addition, various printed letters that the new congregation needs for its files should be sent. If there is a large amount of literature on hand, it would be best for the congregations to divide it instead of requesting additional literature for the new congregation.



Territories

75. Territory Assignments: The Service Department gives each congregation an assignment of territory to work. (See 6:158.) The Branch Committee and the deskmen monitor the preaching activity in the field, making all reasonable efforts to ensure that the branch territory is thoroughly covered.
76. Effective and Thorough Coverage of Territory: To ensure thorough coverage, branches should follow some general guidelines regarding the size of congregation territories. Local circumstances should be taken into consideration when determining the size of individual territories. Smaller territories give publishers the opportunity not only to cover territory but also to return to help cultivate interest that is found. If territories have fewer homes, publishers may feel more motivated to request a personal territory close to their home or workplace. Publishers may also need further training on how to keep accurate records and on how to give a more thorough witness when working from house to house. (od p. 91 par. 32; km 4/07 p. 8) If a congregation is unable to work portions of its assigned territory within two years and it is not possible to arrange for assistance from nearby congregations, the unworked territories should be assigned to nearby congregations or listed as unassigned territory.​—See 6:80-81.
77. Foreign-Language Territory: The Branch Committee and the deskmen should take steps to be sure that immigrant communities or indigenous language groups receive a witness. (See 6:149-152.) The Service Department and circuit overseers should be guided by what is published on this subject in Circuit Overseer Guidelines, Circuit Organization Guidelines, the letter to all bodies of elders dated October 23, 2015, and the letter to all circuit overseers dated October 25, 2015.​—See also km 11/09 pp. 3-5.
78. If there is a sizable population of foreign-speaking people in the branch territory and few publishers are available who speak their language, a foreign-language class may be held to train capable publishers and pioneers. Before a language class is held, the branch must identify and train language instructors. Potential instructors must meet the qualifications outlined in Instructions for Organizing Language Classes (S-367). A request to train the recommended foreign-language instructors should be submitted to the Service Committee for approval. The Service Committee will arrange for those who have been approved to attend the course “Teaching Methods for Accelerated Language Learning.” Following the training course, the branch may arrange to hold the foreign-language classes. (Helpful forms for organizing the classes are posted on MDS.) These classes should not be held at the branch office. They should be conducted in the foreign-language territory that is being targeted.​—See 7:143; tg chap. 15.
79. Seldom Worked Territory: If congregations are in need of assistance in working their assigned territory, the congregations and circuit overseers will report this to the branch office. The deskman will consider what can be done to provide assistance. If it is not possible to make arrangements to assist the congregation to cover its territory and the territory has not been worked for two years, the circuit overseer should recommend to the branch office which sections of the congregation’s territory should be assigned to other nearby congregations or listed as unassigned territory.
80. Unassigned Territory: The Branch Committee should make all reasonable efforts to cover all unassigned territory at least once a year. A letter may be sent each year to congregations, inviting publishers to apply to work unassigned territory. This letter should include a list of the territories that need to be worked. Individuals willing to assist may indicate to the branch office which territory they would like to work, the number in their group, and the amount of time they can spend in an assignment. (Groups should not be made up solely of single brothers and single sisters.) A group captain should be designated. This information is to be given to the Congregation Service Committee for approval and forwarding to the branch. The Service Department considers the information, makes an appropriate territory assignment, and informs the group captain. After the assignment is completed, the group captain should submit a report to the branch office, outlining what was accomplished and any outstanding experiences.
81. Unassigned or seldom-worked territory could include large foreign- or indigenous-language communities of perhaps thousands of people who do not receive a regular witness. When publishers in your branch territory are invited to work unassigned or seldom-worked territories, there is no need to request the approval of the Service Committee.​—See 6:76.
82. Isolated Publishers: The Service Department should send the names of isolated publishers to the congregations nearest them. Perhaps an elder or pioneer can visit them from time to time to encourage them and to work with them in the field ministry. The branch office should make arrangements for them to receive literature and any other necessary information. If practical, they could send their field service reports through the nearest congregation and obtain literature there as well. Otherwise, they may request literature from the branch office and report their field service directly to the branch each month, marking “isolated publisher” or “isolated pioneer” on the report. Only one person in the group should make arrangements for obtaining literature.
83. The role of the circuit overseer in caring for isolated publishers and pioneers is outlined in Circuit Overseer Guidelines. If reasonably possible, the circuit overseer should adjust his schedule in order to visit such ones each year. After receiving the circuit overseer’s report for the annual visit, the Service Desk will send the isolated publisher, pioneer, or group a warm and encouraging letter. A record should be kept of all such publishers and groups, with a separate file for each, until such time as they can either be associated with a nearby congregation or be organized into a new congregation. Then the information in this file is put into the file for that congregation.
84. Special pioneers have been assigned to visit isolated publishers and groups, with good results. Where there is potential to form a new congregation, temporary special pioneers or special pioneers could be assigned.
85. When a regular pioneer requests a permanent assignment to care for an unassigned territory, the branch office will write a letter, enclosing an Isolated Territory Assignment (S-63). Only one regular pioneer would be given a certain isolated territory assignment. If more than one pioneer will be working in the same isolated assignment, the other pioneers are assigned by a letter from the office to work with the pioneer holding the territory. The pioneer holding the territory is responsible for making the necessary reports to the branch office on the progress being made in the territory.
86. Book Fairs and Special Witnessing Exhibits: Before agreeing to participate in such an event, the Branch Committee must obtain approval from the Service Committee. The request should be submitted as far in advance as possible but no less than one month prior to the deadline for registering for the event. The Branch Committee should consider various factors, including the type of organization sponsoring the event, the cost, the estimated attendance, the length of time needed to prepare for the event, and the number of publishers required to staff a booth during the event. Usually it is best to limit participation in such events to only one or two key events each year. The letter to the Service Committee should include assurance that the Branch Committee has sufficient funds in its budget to cover the costs associated with participating in the event. Additionally, the following information should be provided:
a.The name of the organization that is sponsoring the event. If available, a link to the event’s website should be included in the letter. The branch should ensure that participating in the event would not call into question our neutral position or associate the branch office with any religious interfaith, social movement, or political activity.

b.The dates and location of the event.

c.The estimated attendance.

d.The size of the booth being recommended. If there are options for booth size, the different sizes and prices of each should be provided. A modest-sized booth, perhaps no more than nine square meters, is preferred. If a larger booth size is recommended, the explanation should be included in the letter to the Service Committee.

e.The estimated total cost in U.S. dollars. The branch should provide a breakdown of the costs, including entry fees, taxes, equipment rentals or purchases, and the cost of constructing (or repairing) the display. To the extent possible, displays should be designed and constructed in a way that will allow for reuse. When informed of the voluntary and educational nature of our work, event organizers sometimes will reduce or waive certain fees. The letter to the Service Committee should indicate whether the branch inquired about a discount and the amount of any discount that will apply.

f.Preliminary sketches of the proposed display, including the dimensions. The branch should avoid giving the appearance of commercializing our ministry. (2 Cor. 2:17) Relatively simple, yet attractive, displays will reflect favorably on Jehovah and his organization. There may be skilled publishers in the branch territory who have the ability, knowledge, and expertise in designing or fabricating displays typically used at these events.


87. Harbor Witnessing: The Service Department should organize harbor witnessing in harmony with Harbor Witnessing Guidelines (S-374). If a harbor-witnessing group recommends enrolling in a marine exchange or would like to pay for the storage of literature and/​or witnessing equipment, the Service Department overseer or his assistant should carefully review the request before approving it to ensure that it is needed and reasonable. (Phil. 4:5) Any costs involved with harbor witnessing, such as obtaining suitable clothing, equipment, and proper permissions, will be the responsibility of the publisher. (Gal. 6:5) Publishers should not get involved with seaman’s missions or other religious organizations in carrying out harbor witnessing.
88. Prison Witnessing: The Service Department should organize the preaching work in prisons according to the latest direction received from the Service Committee. (See the letter to all bodies of elders dated September 8, 2011, and the Prison Information (S-68) form.) A record should be maintained of congregations assigned to care for each prison facility in the country. It should also be noted whether literature can be taken into the prison by the publishers or must be mailed directly from the branch office.
89. Special Campaigns: Unless directed to do so by the Service Committee, the Branch Committee should not request help from other branch offices to fill special needs in the field. In countries where there are few publishers and large densely populated areas to cover, the Branch Committee may feel that a special campaign would be beneficial. In some cases, it may be possible to invite native publishers who are living in other lands to return and share in the special campaign. Publishers in other countries who speak the local language may also be invited. The Branch Committee should send a recommendation to the Service Committee for its consideration and approval.



Conventions and Assemblies

90. Regional Conventions: Annually, circuit overseers submit the Convention Program Participant Ratings form (S-306) to the branch office. This form identifies the elders who are qualified as convention speakers and their individual ratings. In larger branch offices, these records are kept in HuB. Brothers who are approved Bethel speakers may be invited to inform the Service Department of the convention(s) that they will attend so that they may be assigned talks. If Bethel speakers volunteer to attend additional conventions using their own personal time away and at their own expense, they may be assigned where there is a need for convention speakers.​—See 7:2-26, 80-81.
91. The Service Department will make assignments based on each brother’s speaker ratings and the convention speaker grid provided annually by the Teaching Committee. Generally, the chairman and the drama directors are assigned and notified first, followed by the Bethel speakers, and then local speakers are assigned the remaining parts. Service Department oversight will approve all convention speaker assignments before assignment letters are mailed out.​—See 7:25, 80-81.
92. Circuit Assemblies: Two one-day circuit assemblies will be held each year. One assembly (CA-br) will have a visiting branch representative assigned to speak. The other assembly (CA-co) will be served by the circuit overseer without a branch representative being assigned. Arrangements are made according to the guidelines provided each year by the Teaching Committee. Helpful guidance is also found in Circuit Organization Guidelines (S-330).​—See 7:27-35, 89.
93. The branch will assign the dates of circuit assemblies based on the number of publishers in a circuit and the size and availability of meeting locations. It may be necessary to divide a circuit into two or more sections and have separate assemblies. Circuit overseers will be notified preferably one year or more in advance in order to obtain assembly facilities. If possible, the two annual circuit assembly programs should be separated by at least three or four months. Circuit Overseer Guidelines has additional information.



Regular Pioneers

94. Direction regarding the appointment and activity of pioneers is found in the latest publications on congregation organization and in the letter to all bodies of elders dated May 15, 2017. Those leaving an assignment of special full-time service will not experience an interruption in their full-time service history if they are appointed as regular pioneers within three months. Regular pioneers who are sentenced to prison because of their Christian neutrality will have their full-time service history recorded as uninterrupted if they resume the full-time ministry within three months of their release from prison. (See 4:18-19.) Regular pioneers who accept alternative civilian service may continue serving as regular pioneers if they can reasonably meet the requirements for regular pioneers. When reviewing their overall activity, the elders should show consideration for their unique circumstances when determining whether they qualify to continue serving as pioneers. A person who is performing alternative civilian service may be appointed as a regular pioneer if he is otherwise qualified and is able to fulfill the hour requirement.
95. Transfers to Other Branch Territories: When a pioneer moves to another country, the local branch should send to the new branch the regular pioneer record from HuB. If questions arise about the pioneer’s history, the new branch may communicate with the other branch offices that are involved.



Temporary Special Pioneers

96. Temporary special pioneers serve in the same manner as special pioneers. However, they are appointed to serve in one-year increments for up to a maximum of three years. This temporary assignment will enhance their qualifications, allowing them to gain experience and to be further evaluated by the branch office. It could be a stepping-stone to a future assignment as a substitute circuit overseer, a special pioneer, a circuit overseer, or a field missionary or to Bethel service. Temporary special pioneers receive their assignment from the Service Department; they do not select their own. Individuals do not apply to become temporary special pioneers. Rather, well-qualified, local single regular pioneers and married regular pioneer couples without children are identified and invited to submit a Questionnaire for Prospective Temporary Special Pioneer (S-207).
97. Assignments: Single temporary special pioneers will ordinarily be assigned in pairs. If married, both mates would need to qualify to serve together as temporary special pioneers. Generally, temporary special pioneers are assigned to remote areas with a ratio of 1 publisher to at least 3,000 or more inhabitants to open up new territories, including those in foreign- or indigenous-language fields. Most branches have territories that are seldom worked or are remote and isolated where there are interested ones and where there is good potential for forming a congregation. Many countries have densely populated urban centers with few publishers in the inner cities. In many lands there is a great need for qualified brothers to help men reach out to become ministerial servants and elders or where the brothers need more training to care for their congregation responsibilities.
98. Qualifications: A prospective temporary special pioneer is a well-qualified and effective local regular pioneer and is usually a graduate of the School for Kingdom Evangelizers or a graduate of the former Bible School for Single Brothers or Bible School for Christian Couples. The candidate should be a citizen of the country, between 21 and 45 years of age, baptized three years or longer, in full-time service at least two years, in good health​—not having serious limitations or severe health problems—​and able to maintain an active schedule.​—See 6:111.
99. If a branch has additional needs in the field, circuit overseers may recommend others who are not graduates of the above-named theocratic schools by submitting a Personal Qualifications Report (S-326) to the branch office for review. There is no arrangement for appointing as temporary special pioneers those who have a minor child still living at home. It is preferred that the focus be on appointing single men and married couples who have the potential for taking on greater responsibility. However, if such ones are not available, well-qualified single sisters may serve as temporary special pioneers.
100. Any exceptions, including the appointing of foreign pioneers as temporary special pioneers, must be approved by the Service Committee. If there is an exceptional need that cannot be cared for locally, then the Branch Committee should submit a Request for Field Missionaries (S-218) form to the Service Committee. Unless directed to do so by the Service Committee, the Branch Committee should not request help from other branch offices to fill special needs in the field.​—See 6:109.
101. Quota: The Service Committee establishes the total number of temporary special pioneers that may be appointed in each country. If the Branch Committee sees a need to increase the quota of temporary special pioneers, a request should be sent to the Service Committee, stating the number to be added, why they are needed, the number expected to graduate from the School for Kingdom Evangelizers in the coming year, and the publisher-to-population ratios of the language fields where they would be assigned.
102. Graduates of the School for Kingdom Evangelizers: Based on the recommendations of the instructors, the Service Department will determine which graduates in each class could be recommended to the Branch Committee to serve as temporary special pioneers. For more details, see chapter 10 of School for Kingdom Evangelizers Office Guidelines.
103. Nongraduates of the School for Kingdom Evangelizers: A candidate who is a local regular pioneer will be evaluated by the Service Department, based on the Personal Qualifications Report (S-326) and any recommendation submitted by the circuit overseer. The Service Department will decide whether to recommend to the Branch Committee that a regular pioneer be appointed as a temporary special pioneer. If approved, the regular pioneer can be sent a letter (S-225) explaining the temporary special pioneer arrangement with the request that he fill out a Questionnaire for Prospective Temporary Special Pioneer (S-207). The completed questionnaire is to be carefully checked by the Service Department and thereafter reviewed by two members of the Branch Committee. If they approve, the Service Department will prepare a letter (S-220) appointing the temporary special pioneer and informing him of the location of his assignment, copying the elders of the congregation he will be working with and the circuit overseer.
104. File: A file folder is made to hold a copy of the assignment letter, the questionnaire, and other correspondence related to the temporary special pioneer. His enrollment code in HuB is adjusted to show his start date as a temporary special pioneer (FTS). A record of his monthly field service is maintained in HuB.
105. Hour Requirement: The temporary special pioneer hour requirement is 130 hours a month. Sisters who are 40 years of age or older have a requirement of 120 hours a month. It is understood that a temporary special pioneer who serves as a congregation elder in a remote area may at times be needed for additional short-term theocratic assignments. For example, he may need to serve on a special committee or a Disaster Relief Committee, help with circuit or convention organization, assist in the construction or renovation of his own Kingdom Hall, or serve as a substitute circuit overseer. In addition, he may be needed for a brief period of time to train local elders to care for their responsibilities on a Hospital Liaison Committee. In exceptional situations, the travel time to attend an assigned circuit assembly, regional convention, or Kingdom Ministry School may be unusually long. If such assignments prevent him from making his hour requirement, a brief explanation, as well as the number of hours spent, should be included on the monthly report submitted on jw.org or on his monthly S-212 report. An explanation should also be written in the “Remarks” column of the Congregation’s Publisher Record (S-21) card. However, the hours spent should not be included in the “Hours” column. The branch will also mark the HuB records and consider the remarks when performing the annual review. If a temporary special pioneer is assigned by the branch office to learn a new language in conjunction with his congregation assignment, he may be given a reduced hour requirement of 70 hours a month for up to three months.
106. Experiencing Difficulties: If a temporary special pioneer falls short of his hour requirement for two or three months or encounters serious health issues and is physically unable to meet the requirement, the Service Department may submit a recommendation for his deletion to two members of the Branch Committee for approval. It would be appropriate for the Service Department to write a letter to the temporary special pioneer, expressing appreciation for his service and encouraging him to continue working hard but directing that he return to the regular pioneer work. If the temporary special pioneer objects to the recommendation, he may submit a letter of appeal to the Branch Committee. The entire Branch Committee is responsible for making the final determination.



Special Pioneers

107. The Branch Committee is authorized to appoint special pioneers up to the quota approved by the Service Committee. (See 6:114.) Such individuals often have the potential to serve in other avenues of special full-time service, such as in the circuit work or as field missionaries. Those invited to serve as special pioneers must have the circumstances and desire to serve wherever the branch office assigns them, and they must be able to meet the hour requirement for this service. They receive their congregation assignment from the Service Department; they do not select their own. As members of the Worldwide Order, special pioneers are provided with a modest allowance to assist them with their living expenses.
108. Assignments: Single special pioneers will ordinarily be assigned in pairs. For married couples, both mates would need to qualify to serve together as special pioneers. Generally, special pioneers are assigned to open up new territories, including those in foreign- or indigenous-language fields in remote areas that have a ratio of 1 publisher to at least 3,000 or more inhabitants. Most branches have territories that are seldom worked or are remote and isolated but have interested ones and good potential for forming a congregation. Many countries have densely populated urban centers with few publishers in the inner cities. In many lands there is a great need for qualified brothers to help men reach out to become ministerial servants and elders or where the brothers need more training to care for their congregation responsibilities.
109. If there is an exceptional need, the Branch Committee may assign temporary special pioneers, special pioneers, and circuit overseers to any country overseen by the branch office. Care should be taken so that the costs involved in such transfers and the acquiring of legal residency are kept to a minimum. Since a key objective of the School for Kingdom Evangelizers and the temporary special pioneer arrangement is to help more local brothers and sisters to reach out to meet the needs within their own country, those who are assigned by the branch office to serve in another country should keep that focus in mind. Any exceptional situations should be referred to the Service Committee.​—See 6:100.
110. Branch offices are not authorized to transfer special pioneers to other branch territories. Such requests or recommendations should be referred to the Service Committee.
111. Qualifications: Since the number of special pioneers who may be appointed is limited, the branch office has the weighty responsibility of appointing qualified candidates as special pioneers and reviewing their activity annually. (See 9:101.) With the exception of the age requirement, the qualifications outlined for temporary special pioneers also apply to special pioneers. (See 6:98-100.) When the quota allows for it, a new special pioneer will usually be selected from among well-qualified temporary special pioneers who are graduates of the School for Kingdom Evangelizers.
112. Those being considered to serve as special pioneers must have demonstrated a genuine interest in helping people, an ability to maintain the routine and meet the hour requirement, and a determination to stick with an assignment when things are difficult. We want dedicated, hardworking brothers and sisters to be special pioneers, not those who may be disinterested in the work or who are more concerned about material benefits than about the privilege of sharing in this spiritually upbuilding work. We desire to appoint those who are devoted to God and who take seriously their commission as ministers. The primary purpose behind the special pioneer work is to add impetus to the preaching of the good news in areas where little is being done. In addition, the rigorous schedule requires stamina and good health. In isolated areas, upbuilding association may be limited. Appointees should be encouraged to view themselves and their circumstances realistically.
113. While there is no automatic arrangement for individuals leaving Bethel service, the circuit work, or some other form of special full-time service to be appointed as special pioneers, consideration should be shown to regular members of the Worldwide Order who are at least 55 years of age and have 25 or more years in special full-time service. In the case of a married couple, such consideration should be shown if one of the mates meets these requirements. In such cases, the Branch Committee should assign one or two responsible elders at the branch office to meet with the person or married couple to discuss their needs kindly but frankly as they prepare to transition out of their current assignment. This meeting could be handled in person or, if necessary, by telephone or videoconferencing. Do the individuals have the personal circumstances and desire to serve as special pioneers? What are their family circumstances? (1 Tim. 5:8) What is their health and stamina? What are their housing and financial needs? Do they have a source of income, a pension, or other financial means? Do they qualify for a government pension? Will they benefit from a government healthcare plan? Will they need ongoing financial assistance? Are they willing to serve as regular pioneers? If so, will they need some transitional financial assistance? (See 9:37.) If consideration is given to reassigning any Bethel family members who are 60 years of age and older to the field, the Branch Committee should first consult with the Personnel Committee. If someone in that age group has 25 or more years in special full-time service and of his own volition asks for an assignment in the field, the Branch Committee may consider the request. Careful consideration should be given to each one’s spirituality, experience, and personal circumstances. If questions arise as to whether a longtime member of the Worldwide Order qualifies to serve as a special pioneer, the Branch Committee should outline the concerns and provide a specific recommendation to the Service Committee.​—See 9:3, 6.
114. Quota: The Service Committee establishes the total number of special pioneers that may be appointed in each country. If the Branch Committee sees a need to increase the quota of special pioneers, a request should be sent to the Service Committee, stating the number to be added, why they are needed, and the publisher-to-population ratios of the language fields where they would be assigned. Special pioneers who have been given a temporary reduction in their hour requirement by the Branch Committee are included in the quota. (See 6:121.) However, those approved by the Service Committee to serve indefinitely as infirm special pioneers are not included in the quota.​—See 6:107, 122.
115. Appointing New Special Pioneers: If the Service Department identifies a need in the field that cannot be met by the use of temporary special pioneers, it can consider appointing special pioneers. A candidate for special pioneer service should be selected from those who have successfully completed three years in the temporary special pioneer work. If the Branch Committee approves the recommendation from the Service Department, the temporary special pioneer should be sent a letter explaining the special pioneer arrangement, with the request that he fill out a Questionnaire for Prospective Special Pioneer (S-208). The completed questionnaire is to be carefully checked by the Service Department, and if all is in order, it is forwarded to the Branch Committee for approval. If the appointment is approved, the Service Department sends the special pioneer an assignment letter, copying the elders of the congregation he will be working with and the circuit overseer.
116. In branch territories with just a few circuits, the branch office may have in mind assigning an appointed circuit overseer to serve temporarily as a special pioneer. Before doing so, please provide the Service Committee with information about the brother you plan to reassign. If the brother and his wife, if married, could be used in the circuit work in another land for perhaps up to three years, provide a recent Personal Qualifications Report (S-326), translated into English, along with a cover letter describing his qualifications, his citizenship, and the language(s) in which he is fluent. It may be that he could be used in a nearby country where there is a need for circuit overseers.
117. File: A file folder is made to hold a copy of the assignment letter, the questionnaire, the vow of poverty, and other correspondence related to the special pioneer. His enrollment code in HuB is adjusted to show his start date as a special pioneer (FS). A record of his monthly field service is maintained in HuB.​—See 6:176.
118. Hour Requirement: The special pioneer hour requirement is 130 hours a month. Sisters who are 40 years of age or older have a requirement of 120 hours a month. It is understood that a special pioneer who serves as a congregation elder in a remote area may at times be needed for additional short-term theocratic assignments. For example, he may need to serve on a special committee or a Disaster Relief Committee, help with circuit or convention organization, assist in the construction or renovation of his own Kingdom Hall, or serve as a substitute circuit overseer. In addition, he may be needed for a brief period of time to train local elders to care for their responsibilities on a Hospital Liaison Committee. In exceptional situations, the travel time to attend an assigned circuit assembly, regional convention, or Kingdom Ministry School may be unusually long. If such assignments prevent him from making his hour requirement, a brief explanation, as well as the number of hours spent, should be included on the monthly report submitted on jw.org or on his monthly S-212 report. An explanation should also be written in the “Remarks” column of the Congregation’s Publisher Record (S-21) card. However, the hours spent should not be included in the “Hours” column. The branch will also mark the HuB records and consider the remarks when performing the annual review. If a special pioneer is assigned by the branch office to learn a new language in conjunction with his congregation assignment, he may be given a reduced hour requirement of 70 hours a month for up to three months.
119. Reassignment: If necessary, special pioneers may be moved after three years. However, there is no need to adjust an assignment of a special pioneer unless circumstances necessitate such a move. If a special pioneer requests to be assigned to another congregation, the Service Department should consider the needs of the field, factoring in any extenuating circumstances.
120. Infirm Special Pioneers: If a special pioneer with less than 25 years of special full-time service is consistently unable to meet his monthly hour requirement, perhaps for six months or so, then it may be best for the person to leave the special full-time service. On the other hand, for those who are at least 55 years of age and who have 25 or more years in special full-time service, a reduced hour requirement may be appropriate. For reporting purposes, all special pioneers with an approved reduced hour requirement should be given the FSI enrollment code.
121. If a reduced hour requirement is needed because of temporary factors, such as short-term illness or caring for family responsibilities, the Branch Committee is authorized to approve a reduced monthly hour requirement for up to one year without consulting the Service Committee. This is with the understanding that the special pioneer will resume the normal special pioneer routine as soon as possible. This provision takes into consideration that unexpected events can overtake us all.​—See 6:114; Eccl. 9:11.
122. It may be that a permanent reduction in a special pioneer’s hour requirement is needed because of long-term factors, such as chronic or terminal illness or advancing age. Usually it is best for the branch to consult with the special pioneer’s body of elders and circuit overseer before determining an appropriate reduced hour requirement. In some cases, the branch office may be more familiar with the person’s circumstances and abilities, such as when a longtime Bethel family member or a circuit overseer is being transferred to serve as a special pioneer. In all cases, the recommendation that a special pioneer have a permanent reduction in his hour requirement and that he serve indefinitely as an infirm special pioneer should be sent to the Service Committee for approval. The recommendation should include a complete overview of the special pioneer’s circumstances, the reason(s) for recommending infirm status, and the recommended reduced hour quota. In most cases, a reduced hour requirement is better than no hour requirement at all.​—See 6:114; 9:87.
123. As needed, the branch office should kindly remind the elders and circuit overseers to ensure that the needs of the infirm special pioneers are being met and that any needed encouragement and shepherding are being given. (John 21:16) Once the Service Committee approves the initial reduced hour requirement, the Branch Committee is authorized to make any further progressive reductions to the monthly hour requirement without consulting the Service Committee. Removal of an hour requirement is usually reserved for infirm special pioneers who have extremely limiting circumstances because of advanced age or life-threatening health issues and whose hour requirement has already been progressively reduced.



Circuit Overseers

124. Circuit Overseer Guidelines and the latest correspondence from the Service Committee provide detailed information regarding the activity of circuit overseers.
125. Substitute Circuit Overseers: The qualifications for substitute circuit overseers are outlined in Circuit Overseer Guidelines. Generally, substitute circuit overseers are given access to Circuit Overseer Guidelines and to the letters addressed to all circuit overseers. Substitute circuit overseers should not be used to care for a circuit for more than three months.​—See 6:133.
126. Circuit overseers may submit recommendations for new substitute circuit overseers using the Personal Qualifications Report (S-326). Before a brother is recommended to serve as a substitute circuit overseer or a circuit overseer, he must have attended the Ministerial Training School, the Bible School for Single Brothers, the Bible School for Christian Couples, the School for Kingdom Evangelizers, or the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. The Service Department should check to see whether he is qualified to serve on special committees and has been recommended as a convention speaker. After the S-326 is evaluated and if everything is positive, the brother may be sent a Questionnaire for Prospective Substitute Circuit Overseer (S-324).
127. A brother recommended as a substitute circuit overseer will receive two weeks of training by an approved trainer prior to being appointed as a substitute circuit overseer. Only experienced circuit overseers approved by the Branch Committee will provide necessary training and evaluation. Those approved as trainers should be the most experienced and qualified circuit overseers. They should be selected from the list of circuit overseers who are approved to make shepherding visits on other circuit overseers. Substitute circuit overseers are appointed by the Branch Committee. The Service Department should submit the completed questionnaire and the S-326 forms from the circuit overseer, as well as any other information that would be helpful to the Branch Committee for its evaluation. If the brother is appointed, a letter should be sent to him informing him of this. Further details can be found in Guidelines for Processing Recommendations for Substitute Circuit Overseers and Circuit Overseers (S-385).
128. Circuit Overseer Guidelines outlines how circuit overseers can assist substitute circuit overseers who are not meeting the high standard expected of those serving in this capacity. If a substitute circuit overseer is reproved or disfellowshipped or is removed as an elder for any other reason, the date of his deletion as a substitute circuit overseer should be entered in HuB. The Service Department may refer complex cases involving a substitute circuit overseer’s qualifications to the Branch Committee for consideration. If a single substitute circuit overseer becomes engaged to be married and desires to continue in the substitute circuit work, he should inform the Service Department right away. With regard to obtaining comments on the qualifications of the sister, the Service Department will follow the same procedure as when a single circuit overseer becomes engaged and desires to remain in the circuit work. (See 9:60.) The most recent Personal Qualifications Report on the brother should be reviewed. If it would be helpful, the brother’s circuit overseer could be asked to provide updated comments.
129. In view of the great trust placed upon circuit overseers, the Branch Committee must give these recommendations very careful and prayerful consideration.​—Luke 12:48b.
130. Qualifications: The qualifications for circuit overseers are outlined in Circuit Overseer Guidelines. Since the responsibility that is entrusted to circuit overseers of appointing and deleting elders and ministerial servants is a weighty one, those recommended should be kind, impartial, and just. (Ex. 18:21) When handling recommendations, whether for appointment or deletion, the circuit overseer must avoid imposing his personal viewpoints and opinions or setting arbitrary rules. (1 Cor. 4:6) Before being recommended to serve as a circuit overseer, he should have proved that he strives to imitate Jehovah and His Son by caring for matters with love and patience. (Deut. 10:17; 16:18, 19; Isa. 42:1-4) In this way, he demonstrates deep respect and submission to Jehovah and to the Head of the Christian congregation, Jesus Christ.​—See 2:30; 9:95; Eph. 1:22.
            All brothers recommended as circuit overseers should be graduates of the Bible School for Christian Couples, the Bible School for Single Brothers, the Ministerial Training School, the School for Kingdom Evangelizers, or the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.

            Those recommended should display evidence of good judgment, spiritual depth, loyalty to God’s Word and organization, and soundness of mind. Such qualities are more important than having a compelling, charming personality.

            Those recommended for circuit work should have served as congregation elders for a minimum of three years and have at least two years in full-time service, preferably longer.

            The maximum age for those recommended is 45. As an exception, a well-qualified brother who has been in special full-time service for a considerable number of years may be recommended until the age of 50. Brothers who are 25 years of age or younger would usually not be recommended.​—See 6:132.

            If the brother is married, his wife should be at least 21 years old, baptized three years or longer, and in full-time service for at least two years.


131. Circuit overseers may submit recommendations of substitute circuit overseers for circuit work, using the S-326 form. After the S-326 is evaluated and if everything is positive, the body of elders should be asked to provide its observations and its recommendation of the brother and, if married, his wife, using the S-326 forms. If a positive recommendation is received from both the body of elders and the circuit overseer, the brother should receive two weeks of training with an experienced circuit overseer. If all is well, he may be sent a Questionnaire for Prospective Circuit Overseer (S-323). See School for Kingdom Evangelizers Office Guidelines with regard to providing circuit training to graduates. Before a recommendation is sent to the Governing Body, the substitute circuit overseer should have served congregations a minimum of ten full weeks. An exception would be when a brother has previously served in circuit work or is a graduate of the Bible School for Christian Couples, the Bible School for Single Brothers, the Ministerial Training School, the School for Kingdom Evangelizers, or the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead and has already received ten weeks of training and may have served only a few weeks as a substitute circuit overseer since then.
132. Appointments: Circuit overseers are appointed by the Governing Body. (See 2:26, 30.) There is no need to supply more information than what is requested on the recommendation form unless there are unusual factors that the Governing Body should know. For example, if the Branch Committee is recommending a brother who is not yet 25 years old or a brother who is over 45 years of age, the reasons for making such an exceptional recommendation should be fully explained. If a brother being recommended previously served as a traveling overseer, the reason for his deletion from that privilege of service should be explained. Once the branch office has received an approved recommendation form from the Governing Body, the Service Department will then send the brother an appointment letter (S-308) along with instructions concerning his new assignment.​—See 6:130.
133. Arrangements for New Circuit Overseers: Branches should have a reasonable number of approved circuit overseers available for use when needed, such as when a circuit overseer will be away for more than three months. (See 6:139.) Newly appointed circuit overseers should be given an FC enrollment. Field missionaries (FMF) who are appointed as circuit overseers should be given an FCF enrollment. If the newly appointed circuit overseer is waiting for a permanent assignment to become available, his circuit assignment should be listed in HuB as “unassigned.” The Service Department should inform a newly appointed circuit overseer who will be covering a circuit for three months or less that when generating letters of appointment or deletion, he should indicate the circuit designation on the letterhead. He should note in the letter that he is temporarily caring for the circuit. If a newly appointed circuit overseer is assigned to care for a circuit for more than three months, he should be assigned to that circuit. (See 6:125; 9:20.) Sometime during a new circuit overseer’s first year in the circuit work, he and his wife will be invited to the branch office for two weeks of training.​—See Service Department Training for New Circuit Overseers (S-381).
134. Circuits That Span Branch Territories: On a case-by-case basis, the Service Committee may authorize the formation of circuits that include congregations and groups in two or more branch territories. In such situations, the enrollment “Visiting Branch Circuit Overseer” (FCB) should be assigned to any circuit overseer serving congregations in one branch territory who has a primary assignment under the supervision of another branch office. This enrollment will be assigned concurrently with his primary FC (or FCF) enrollment. Use of the FCB enrollment will allow a circuit overseer to create a separate jw.org account for each territory. The branch receiving the visiting branch circuit overseer should provide to the home branch the name of the circuit and the contact number for the local jw.org help desk. This will allow the home branch to complete the S-134 form letter, which is used to inform the affected circuit overseers of this provision.
135. Circuit overseers crossing branch boundaries should submit a separate Circuit Overseer Routing (S-300) form to each branch office outside their home branch territory, indicating only the visits they will make to congregations and groups in that branch territory. This is in addition to the complete S-300 form that they should submit to their home branch office, which should include the weeks that they are serving in another branch territory. The weeks spent outside of their home branch territory should be entered by the home branch as “Miscellaneous” events in HuB. When scheduling circuit assemblies for circuits crossing branch boundaries, each branch office should enter the circuit assembly separately into HuB. This will allow each branch office to keep track of the activity of the congregations under its oversight.
136. Correspondence: Circuit overseers should be kept up-to-date with access to copies of all form letters, such as letters to pioneers, bodies of elders, and so forth. Any of the circuit overseer’s personal mail received at the branch office should be forwarded to his current address. At the close of each month, circuit overseers send in a Monthly Report (S-301), which shows their assignments that month, their expenses, their field service report, and dates of personal time away.
137. Size of Circuits: Circuits are generally made up of approximately 16 to 20 congregations, including isolated groups. One factor to take into consideration in determining the number of congregations to be placed in each circuit is the availability, capacity, and distance to the nearest Assembly Hall. In most cases, a circuit overseer should cover his circuit twice annually.
138. Routing: The circuit overseer submits his routing to the branch office three months in advance using the Circuit Overseer Routing (S-300) form. At the same time, he will send the congregation a Notice of Visit of Circuit Overseer (S-302) advising of the dates of his visit. Once the branch office and the congregations have been informed, the circuit overseer should adhere to the routing he submitted. If he feels that a change needs to be made to the routing, he should contact the Service Department and request permission.
139. Absences From the Circuit: A circuit overseer who is away from his circuit for more than three months may be given the “unassigned” circuit designation in HuB or another appropriate enrollment. (See 6:133.) The handling of appointments and deletions of elders and ministerial servants while a circuit overseer is away from his assignment is discussed in 6:57. Situations that may necessitate granting a circuit overseer or his wife a leave of absence are discussed at 9:77 and in Circuit Overseer Guidelines.
140. Questions About the Qualifications of Circuit Overseers: The branch office should follow up on any concerns or complaints received about a circuit overseer that raise serious questions about his qualifications. First, the office needs to obtain the facts. (Prov. 18:13, 17) In some cases, it may be best to write to the circuit overseer, informing him of what has been reported, and provide him with the opportunity to reply. Serious matters should be referred to the Branch Committee.
141. If what was reported is valid and has raised serious questions about a circuit overseer’s qualifications, it may be that a kind letter that outlines the observations and provides loving Scriptural counsel will be sufficient to address the concern. (Prov. 27:9; 1 Tim. 5:1; w99 1/15 pp. 21-24) If needed, the Service Department may ask an experienced circuit overseer or branch representative to discuss the matter privately with the circuit overseer and provide him with appropriate Scriptural counsel during the next scheduled shepherding visit. (See 9:114.) If the matter needs to be handled sooner, an experienced circuit overseer could be asked to care for the matter. When a personal visit is made, the assigned brother should submit a report to the Service Department that includes a summary of the counsel he provided to the circuit overseer. The report should also comment on how the circuit overseer responded to any counsel given. Following the visit by an experienced circuit overseer or by a branch representative, the branch office could follow up in writing to express sincere appreciation for the circuit overseer’s efforts in making improvement and to reinforce the counsel given. (1 Thess. 4:1) If this is not the first time that a similar concern has been brought to his attention, the letter from the Service Department could remind the brother of the previous counsel and encourage him to make a more concerted effort to improve. In such cases, the Service Department should copy the Branch Committee on such letters sent to assist the circuit overseer. If, over a reasonable period of time, the circuit overseer does not improve in spite of repeated efforts to assist him, it may be necessary for the Branch Committee to recommend to the Governing Body his deletion as a circuit overseer. A brief summary of the efforts made to assist him should be included in a numbered letter that is sent along with the Recommendations to Governing Body form.​—See 2:30; 9:96.
142. On occasion, complaints may be received involving the wife of a circuit overseer. Out of respect for the headship principle, the Service Department will write to the husband, informing him of the negative report and asking for his comments. He may be encouraged to help his wife. (The brother assigned to make the next shepherding visit on the circuit overseer and his wife should receive a copy of any correspondence to the circuit overseer so that the brother can offer assistance and counsel if needed.) Appropriate follow-up should be in harmony with the general principles outlined in the preceding paragraph.
143. When an allegation of serious wrongdoing is made about a circuit overseer, the Service Department should appoint two experienced circuit overseers to investigate. If it is established that there is substance to the report and evidence is available that a serious sin has been committed, the two brothers should notify the Service Department so that a judicial committee can be appointed. If there is insufficient evidence to prove that the allegations are true, the two brothers will make a full report of their findings to the Service Department for evaluation. Although a gross sin may not have been committed, it may be that the circuit overseer’s conduct is seriously in question. In such cases, the report should be referred to the Branch Committee for its consideration and direction.​—See 2:30.
144. If a circuit overseer confesses to serious wrongdoing, two experienced circuit overseers should be directed by the Service Department to investigate. After confirming the nature and extent of the sin(s) committed, they should report back to the Service Department. The Service Department will appoint a judicial committee consisting of three circuit overseers. Likely, the two who investigated the matter would serve on the committee. The committee’s decision, whether reproof or disfellowshipping, is reported to the branch in the normal way. The Service Department would designate a congregation that would hold the records in its confidential file. (It may be the congregation where the former circuit overseer indicates that he will attend meetings.) An announcement of reproof or disfellowshipping would also be made in that congregation. If the former circuit overseer seeks reinstatement, a local congregation judicial committee should hear the plea for reinstatement and seek observations from the branch office before reaching a final decision. If the decision is to reinstate, the appropriate notification should be sent to the Service Department.
145. Writing Letters to Former Traveling Overseers: In many countries, there are faithful brothers who formerly spent many years in the traveling work. To encourage such older brothers, branch offices may write a personalized letter from time to time. This shows that the organization is interested in their welfare and appreciates what they accomplished in the traveling work during a big part of their life.​—Phil. 2:4; 1 Pet. 5:12.
146. Circuit Overseers in Foreign Service: When a field missionary is appointed as a circuit overseer, he and his wife are registered in HuB with the corresponding foreign service enrollments (FCF and CWF). On rare occasions, a Branch Committee may believe that there is a need to assign a circuit overseer to a distant country in the branch territory other than the land of his birth or citizenship. When such a need arises, the Branch Committee may recommend to the Service Committee that the circuit overseer and his wife be granted the foreign service enrollment. All such recommendations will be considered on a case-by-case basis. While citizenship and country of birth are considered, these are not the sole determining factors. The Branch Committee should carefully consider the following points to ensure that the recommendation is reasonable.​—Phil. 4:5.
            Is the assignment in a distant land, making it reasonable to provide them with additional personal time away?

            Does the nature or relative difficulty of the assignment make it reasonable to provide them with considerations similar to those given to field missionaries?

            Will they be in the foreign assignment for a minimum of one year?

            Do citizens of the countries regularly travel back and forth with little or no legal restrictions?

            Why could a local circuit overseer not be used?


147. If after considering these points and any other factors relevant to the specific situation, the Branch Committee believes that there are good reasons to recommend that a circuit overseer and his wife be granted the foreign service enrollment, the brother and his wife should each fill out a Questionnaire for Prospective Field Missionary (S-214). A numbered letter should then be sent to the Service Committee along with the completed S-214 form(s) and a copy of the latest Personal Qualifications Report(s) (S-326). The S-214 and S-326 should be translated into English. In the numbered letter, a clear explanation should be given as to the reason for the recommendation. If the Service Committee approves the recommendation, the enrollment code in the HuB Person record should be updated to show the start date of the foreign circuit assignment. The foreign service enrollment stops when the foreign assignment ends.



Addressing Local Needs

148. Congregation Needs: If there is a serious matter affecting most or all congregations in the branch territory, the Branch Committee may outline the concern to the Service Committee and provide a recommendation as to how to address the local need. For example, the Branch Committee may recommend preparing an outline to be considered during the local needs part of the midweek congregation meeting. Some topics may be best handled by circuit overseers when they visit the congregations or at an upcoming Kingdom Ministry School. Generally, it is not wise to prepare new material featuring Scriptural direction on topics such as marriage, funeral customs, or superstitious practices common in the branch territory. The branch office should not organize special meetings with elders or circuit overseers without the approval of the Service Committee.
149. Evaluating the Need for Translated Publications: The Branch Committee should consider the following two principles before making a recommendation to the Writing Committee to translate publications into a language or to discontinue translation into a language. (See 8:22-29; Chart 8.1.) First, it is unrealistic to expect that most of our publications will become available in all languages. Our goal is not to translate in the largest number of languages but to follow the lead of the holy spirit to reach the largest number of honesthearted people with the good news. (Acts 13:48; 16:6-10; 1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Language communities that do not demonstrate a potential to form stable groups and congregations have a very limited need for publications. In addition, we must be careful not to pursue languages that are dying or that are preferred simply because of ethnic or tribal rivalries or other factors that do not involve spiritual needs. Second, groups and congregations may be formed in a certain language even if there are no publications in that language as long as the brothers and sisters are able to benefit from publications in another language. For example, the brothers may be able to benefit from publications in the national or regional language. (See 7:44.) In such a case, the brothers would conduct their field ministry, give comments and talks, pray, and sing in their first language but use printed publications of another language during their meetings. This simple approach works well where the brothers are multilingual. In addition to their mother tongue, they may know either the main language of the country or a major regional language.
150. Based on the two principles outlined above, the Branch Committee must carefully evaluate the need before recommending that the first publication or additional publications be translated into a language. To ensure that the Branch Committee has a clear understanding of the needs, the Service Department should obtain the facts from the field. Selected bodies of elders, circuit overseers, field missionaries, and special pioneers may be asked to comment on such factors as the following: What is the size of the language community? How many are dependent on the language? Can most benefit from another language? How many can read their own language? Do they prefer to read another language? Are there spiritually mature publishers who are native speakers or who speak the language fluently? If so, are they willing and able to support this language field, or do they prefer to attend meetings in another language? Are qualified brothers available to take the lead and to care for the spiritual needs of new ones? (Col. 2:6, 7) Are there already groups or congregations in this language in your branch territory? Are you aware of groups or congregations in this language that may be functioning in another branch territory?
151. Evaluating New-Language Publications in the Field: When a new-language publication has been prepared for use in the field, the Service Department should send the S-136 letter to the target-language congregations and circuit overseers, announcing that the newly translated publication is available. The outline “Teach God’s Word to ‘All Sorts of Men’” (S-137), which provides direction on promoting the publication by means of a campaign and practical suggestions to help publishers use the publication effectively in the ministry, should also be sent. The information contained in the Evaluation of New-Language Publications (S-138) form will assist the Service Department in evaluating the needs. It would be unwise to accelerate translation of publications into a language if there is little response in the field or if the publishers who speak it are not committed to attending meetings and preaching in that language. The Service Department should carefully consider these and other relevant factors before recommending to the Branch Committee that additional publications be translated into the language or, conversely, that efforts to develop that language field be discontinued. If the Service Department recommends that efforts to cultivate a specific language field should be discontinued and the Branch Committee agrees, there will be no need to request translation of additional publications. In the rare event that the Branch Committee believes efforts to cultivate a language field with a permanent translation team should be discontinued, the Service Committee should be consulted.
152. Evaluating Spiritual Progress in Language Fields: On an annual basis, the Service Department should provide a report to the Branch Committee on each indigenous- or foreign-language field in the branch territory. Are native speakers responding to the good news and progressing to dedication and baptism? If congregations and groups in a particular language field are not prospering spiritually, the Service Department should determine the reasons. What are circuit overseers reporting as to the needs of such groups and congregations? (tg chap. 15) What steps have been taken to address the needs? What more needs to be done? (See 6:75-78.) The Service Department’s report to the Branch Committee should include recommendations regarding further steps that could be taken to cultivate each language field.
153. Overseeing the Needs of the Blind: A brother should be appointed to oversee the work of caring for the needs of the blind and visually impaired in the branch territory in harmony with Caring for the Needs of the Blind and Visually Impaired (A-94). This will usually be handled by a brother who works in the Service Department. However, this work could be done by a brother in another department if necessary. Good communication and cooperation is required between the Service Department, the Shipping Department, and the Braille Department (if there is one) to care for the needs of the blind. Overseeing this work is not a full-time assignment, but depending on the size of the branch, one or two sisters may assist with gathering information as needed.



Other Desks in the Service Department

154. Field Ministers Desk: A desk may be designated to care for the needs of circuit overseers (including field instructors) and their wives, field missionaries, special pioneers, and temporary special pioneers. The desk assists with matters such as the allowance, health care, housing, leave of absence time, and visas for these special full-time servants. The desk also assists with the identification, training, and recommendations for appointment of substitute circuit overseers and regular circuit overseers. The Service Desks have the responsibility to identify the needs in the territory when assignments for special pioneers and field missionaries are considered.​—See 5:138.
155. Convention and Assembly Desk: A desk may be designated to ensure that practical and beneficial arrangements are made for organizing and scheduling conventions and circuit assemblies. Helpful guidance is found in Convention Organization Guidelines (CO-1). The desk maintains all files pertaining to regional conventions, including speaker ratings (S-306), convention volunteer reports (CO-53), and so forth. Some larger branches may designate a Program Desk to care for the work involved with assigning convention speakers and interpreters.
156. Master Planning for Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls: A brother in the Service Department should be designated as the contact for the Local Design/​Construction Department (LDC). He will work closely with the LDC to develop a master plan of the number of Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls that are needed and their priority. The master plan is submitted for approval to the Branch Committee. Once approved, the LDC will use this plan to prioritize and administer construction, renovation, and maintenance projects for Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls in the branch territory. The brother in the Service Department will work closely with the LDC to review and study regularly the needs for Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls in order to update the master plan.​—See 5:146.
157. Speaking Assignment Desk: The Teaching Committee provides letters and direction that outline the arrangements for Bethel speakers. These guidelines should be followed regarding assignments, expenses, and so forth.​—See 7:80-89.
158. Territory Desk: Territory maps should be prepared using the best map available in the country. Indicate on the state or province maps the territory assigned to each congregation and the boundaries of all circuits. Unassigned territory should also be indicated on this map or on a separate map. The names of circuit overseers followed by the circuit numbers may be placed within the boundary of the area they serve. A Congregation Territory Assignment (S-54) letter is sent to each congregation with the exact written description of the outlined territory. It may also be possible to send a map clearly outlining the congregation’s assigned territory. The procedure for congregations to follow in adjusting territory boundaries is outlined on the form Territory Adjustment Request (S-6).​—See 6:75.
159. Theocratic Schools Desk: This desk cares for various theocratic schools, such as the language seminars, the Kingdom Ministry School, the Pioneer Service School, the School for Circuit Overseers and Their Wives, the School for Congregation Elders, and the School for Kingdom Evangelizers.
160. Translation Desk: The Service Department is responsible for translating service-related material, such as school curriculums, forms, guidelines, letters, meeting outlines, and videos. Translation and checking should be handled primarily by part-time commuters and remote volunteers under the coordination of a brother in the Service Department, perhaps a deskman. The permanent project-team approach used by the Translation Department is not needed for most service-related material. This desk also assists with the management of jw.org and MDS postings.​—See 6:63; 8:30-31.
161. Use of Sisters: Mature sisters may be used for some clerical roles in the Service Department, such as data entry of basic personnel information, territory mapping, and the translation and proofreading of nonconfidential forms and letters. However, sisters should not be involved in handling confidential material so as not to put them in an uncomfortable situation or to be a cause for stumbling to others.



Service Reports

162. Monthly Field Service Report: Branch offices should follow the instructions provided in HuB for compiling and sending the Field Service Report (S-81) to the Service Committee. The figures for the S-81 are taken from a careful compilation of the Congregation Reports (S-1), Special Pioneer Reports (S-212), and circuit overseers’ Monthly Reports (S-301). All publishers are encouraged to report through a congregation. Isolated publishers and pioneers send their reports on the publisher’s Field Service Report (S-4), indicating that it is from an “isolated publisher” or “isolated pioneer.” The figure for the “Public by Mail” column on the S-81 can be obtained from the month-to-month record of books, brochures, and magazines sent from the branch to the non-Witness public. In addition, all magazines or literature sent out in response to coupons are listed as “Public by Mail.” Comments about new peaks in publishers, general highlights of the work, or trends may be submitted in the “Remarks” column. Questions or significant figures should be sent to the Service Committee in a separate letter.
163. A separate Field Service Report (S-81) should be submitted monthly for each political entity under the oversight of the branch. Reports should be sent no later than the 28th of the following month. Late or missing reports may be included in the report for the following month. Be sure that any peaks shown do not include reports in excess of the total number of congregations for that month.
164. Annual Field Service Report: Branch offices should follow the instructions provided in HuB for compiling and sending the end-of-year figures.



Files and Filing

165. Since the files in the office are used by many to do their work, all correspondence must be promptly and correctly filed so that it can be readily located. As a general guideline, items should be filed within one week of their being completed. The secretary has the responsibility for this and should have a regular routine for filing.
166. Electronic Files: The work of the Service Department should be maintained on a computer network system, which is backed up regularly. HuB supports scanning documents into the Correspondence and Workflow modules. However, before undertaking a project to scan large volumes of historical documents, please first consult with the WHQ Computer Department. Once hard copy paperwork has been scanned and verified, then it can be shredded. Electronic files not stored in HuB should be labeled and kept in the following structure. In the work folder, a subfolder should be designated for the YEAR (2010, 2011, and so on) and a sub-subfolder for each MONTH (January, February, and so on). Each file should be labeled with the year, month, day, desk symbols, state or province abbreviation, city name, congregation number, and name of individual or brief description of the matter. For example: 2009_02-16_SASSA_NY_Pawling_12345_John_Publisher.docx and 2009_02-16_SFSSF_CA_Los_Angeles_West_98765_BOE_Korean Group.docx.
167. Paper Files: If the Service Department files are not maintained electronically, permanent congregation files are stored in a very secure, locked area of the branch. Each congregation file has four sections: (1) circuit overseers’ reports, (2) general correspondence, (3) reinstatements, and (4) disfellowshippings and disassociations. [See Chart 6.1.]
168. Circuit Overseers’ Reports: S-303 and S-2 forms and supplemental letters are kept in the front of the file in date order with the most recent at the front. When a new report is received, a red mark is made on the upper right corner of the preceding report, and the new report is inserted in front of it. If the first report in the file has this red mark, then the most recent report has been removed.
169. General Correspondence: This material is filed directly behind the circuit overseers’ reports in date order with the most recent at the front of the general correspondence. The Congregation Application (S-51), or in its absence the oldest Report on Circuit Overseer’s Visit With Congregation (S-303), is filed at the back of the general correspondence. If the last circuit overseer’s report prior to the elder arrangement in 1972 is available, it should be stamped “DO NOT DESTROY” and retained just in front of the S-51 form. Correspondence regarding an individual accused of child abuse should be marked “DO NOT DESTROY.”
170. Reinstatements: Whether recorded on S-77 forms or in letters from judicial committees, correspondence related to reinstatements is filed directly behind the general correspondence and S-51 form in the date order of reinstatement, with the most recent reinstatement in the front of this section. The S-77 form and attached correspondence about those reinstated are kept at least five years. The S-77 form may be marked “DO NOT DESTROY” by the Service Desk if the material should be kept longer.
171. Disfellowshippings and Disassociations: These are kept at the back of the file. The most recent disfellowshipping record is filed at the very back of the folder. When an individual is reinstated, the date of reinstatement is recorded on the S-77 form, which is then filed with the reinstatements, as noted above.
172. Hold File: Each Service Desk maintains a HOLD FILE for pending items. This file typically contains correspondence on matters for which the deskman has requested further information or comments from circuit overseers or elders. It may be best also to keep in the hold file a complete copy of any material routed to Service Department oversight or to the Branch Committee. Every month the secretary should go through the hold file, checking to see whether a response has been made. If the office has not received the requested information or comments within three months, he should check with the deskman to see whether a reminder letter should be sent. When sending a reminder letter to a body of elders, a courtesy copy is provided to the circuit overseer with a blind PS asking him to make certain that the elders respond promptly.
173. Files for Isolated Pioneers and Publishers: When it is not feasible for an isolated group of publishers to be cared for by a congregation, a file folder for each isolated publisher group that cannot yet be formed into a congregation is made and arranged alphabetically according to the name of the place where the publisher receiving mail for the group resides. All correspondence to and from the group, as well as reports from the circuit overseer for his visits to the group, is placed in this file. When a group is established as a congregation, the contents of the folder are added to the CONGREGATION FILE. A file folder is also made for ISOLATED PIONEERS. The S-4 forms from isolated pioneers are kept for a year in this folder. These files are kept together and not with the congregation files.
174. Circuit Files: The S-2 forms showing the appointment of assembly overseers and assistant assembly overseers are kept in these files.
175. Branch Correspondence Files: When other branches send correspondence to your branch for forwarding to individuals in the field, they usually include a courtesy copy for your branch file. Such copies are filed in the appropriate folder of the BRANCH CORRESPONDENCE FILES, not in the congregation files. If much mail is received from other branches, it may be helpful to sort the mail into categories, such as Branch Accommodations, Donation Letters, Kingdom Hall Information Requests, and Miscellaneous. The respective retention policy should be followed for each category.
176. Special Pioneer Files: A file folder is made for each special pioneer or, if married, for each couple. The files are arranged alphabetically. The special pioneer’s current congregation assignment, his Application for Regular Pioneer Service (S-205), and the S-208 are a permanent part of the file. Also filed here are the two most recent S-326 forms submitted by the circuit overseer and the file copy of the personal annual encouragement letter sent by the Service Desk. (The personal encouragement letter is sent after the receipt of the first S-326 form each service year.) General correspondence may be disposed of when the files are weeded according to the branch’s document retention policy.​—See 6:117.
177. Active and Inactive Circuit Overseer Files: An active file folder is made for each circuit overseer by the secretary. This folder contains correspondence from the circuit overseer pertaining to his circuit as a whole, including any S-326 forms that were submitted on the circuit overseer and his wife, the file copies of correspondence written to the circuit overseer in connection with these reports, and correspondence regarding his field activity or his personal affairs. When a circuit overseer discontinues the circuit work, the folder is placed in the inactive file.
178. Active and Inactive Substitute Circuit Overseer Files: An active file folder is made for each substitute circuit overseer. This folder contains the correspondence regarding his appointment, including the S-324, any S-326 forms, and so forth. When a substitute circuit overseer discontinues the circuit work, the folder is placed in the inactive file.
179. “Declaration Pledging Faithfulness” Files: If used, a “Declaration Pledging Faithfulness” is filed by the last name of the person on the declaration. A separate list of names of those in the file should be maintained.​—See Correspondence Guidelines, pp. 74-75.
180. Files for Those Disfellowshipped and Disassociated: A permanent file of those disfellowshipped and disassociated is kept. If S-79a/​b cards are used by the branch office, they are filed alphabetically by last name, first name, and middle name and should be stored in a very secure, locked room.
181. Weeding Section Files: Deskmen are responsible for weeding the congregation files for their section. Not to be weeded are any S-2 or S-52 forms. These are to be kept indefinitely in the congregation file. Any correspondence dealing with the transfer of appointed brothers from one congregation to another should also be kept indefinitely. At least the last five copies of the S-303 forms and supplemental letters are kept. Older S-303 forms marked “DO NOT DESTROY” are also kept. The schedule for file retention is to be followed. A secretary may weed the files if directed to do so by the deskman. However, the deskman must carefully check the items slated for shredding within a short time of their being weeded by the secretary so that nothing of significance is discarded. The secretary should not shred anything from the files without getting the approval of the deskman.



SCHOOL FOR BRANCH COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND THEIR WIVES

182. The Service Committee invites Branch Committee and Country Committee members and their wives to this eight-week course. There is no provision for a husband to attend without his wife. If married, the following requirements must be met by both mates:
            Currently in some form of full-time service.

            Possess a good understanding of English in order to participate in class discussions and fulfill various student assignments to a reasonable degree.

            In good health and able to travel to the United States without assistance or the need for medical care during the school.​—Mic. 6:8; Phil. 4:5; w04 8/15, p. 24, par. 13.

             No dependents.


183. If the availability or eligibility of a Branch Committee or Country Committee member changes, the branch should update the Persons record in HuB. Until the Service Committee sends out an invitation to a specific class, there is no need for a committee member to submit the Questionnaire for the School for Branch Committee Members and Their Wives.​—See 7:113.



WATCHTOWER BIBLE SCHOOL OF GILEAD

184. Purpose of the School: The purpose of this 20-week school is to provide intensive training in Bible study and theocratic organization for experienced and well-qualified special full-time servants who have already proved that they are mature Christians. With this additional training, these individuals should be able to do more to stabilize and strengthen the field and branch organization.
185. Basic Requirements:
             Married couples, single brothers, and single sisters between the ages of 25 and 50. As an exception, Branch Committees may recommend brothers whom they feel are qualified to serve as Branch Committee or Country Committee members, even if they are older than 50.

             All must have been in special full-time service for at least three consecutive years. Married couples must have served the last three years together in special full-time service.

             Candidates must have the potential for strengthening and stabilizing the field or branch organization to a greater degree and must have demonstrated that they enjoy serving their brothers and can help others in a kind way to learn and adhere to Scriptural and theocratic direction.

             They must be exemplary in all aspects of Christian living.

             A brother must be an elder who has been serving for a minimum of two consecutive years.

             Must be able to read, write, and speak English fluently.

             Must be in good health. Those who have chronic ailments, who have physical or emotional disorders, who require regular visits to a doctor or a chiropractor, who suffer from severe allergies, or who require a special diet should not be recommended for Gilead training.

             Neither past graduates of Gilead nor current members of a Branch or Country committee should be recommended.

             Circuit overseers must have already attended the School for Circuit Overseers and Their Wives.


186. Selecting Candidates: When considering candidates to be recommended for Gilead School training, the Branch Committee should have clearly in mind the current and long-term needs at Bethel and in the field. (See 9:110.) The following points should be considered:
a. In reviewing a candidate’s strengths and limitations, spiritual qualities such as humility and submission to theocratic instruction are more important than a person’s age, seniority, nationality, or secular education.​—1 Sam. 16:6, 7; Acts 16:2; Jas. 3:17; 1 Pet. 3:4.

b. It is the Governing Body’s preference that brothers who are being considered for appointment to the Branch or Country committee attend Gilead School. As an exception, a brother who the Branch Committee feels is qualified to serve on the Branch Committee or on a Country Committee may be recommended even if he is somewhat older than 50 years of age.

c. Which special full-time servants would readily apply themselves to the intensive training at Gilead and, as a result, be spiritually strengthened so as to be of greater use to the organization?​—Phil. 2:20-22; 1 Tim. 4:15.

d. With Gilead training, which brothers would serve as effective and discerning overseers in key Bethel departments, as deskmen in the Service Department, as field instructors, or as circuit overseers?

e. Since the spirituality of translators is critical to the production of high-quality spiritual food, which translators would benefit the most from an in-depth study of the Bible and organizational matters at Gilead?

f. In the field, which special full-time servants have proved themselves to be outstanding evangelizers, maintaining their joy despite challenging circumstances?

g. Among the single sisters, which ones are excellent teachers in the field, balanced, modest, respectful of authority, sound in mind, and able to get along well with all types of personalities?

h. In lands where the Kingdom work is well-established and where there are many spiritually mature brothers and sisters, the Branch Committee should give consideration to recommending those who could fill needs in other lands after Gilead training.


187. Processing Questionnaires: Gilead recommendations are to be submitted to the Service Committee each year during the month of December. In December, each branch should submit recommendations for four married couples and four single persons. If a person indicates on the questionnaire that he does not have the circumstances to be sent to another country, he may still be recommended for Gilead training if the Branch Committee firmly believes that the person will make a major contribution to the Kingdom work locally. In the event that a branch does not have any Gilead recommendations, a brief letter of explanation should be sent to the Service Committee.
188. Qualified candidates being considered should be provided with (1) a copy of the Questionnaire to Attend the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead (G-12), (2) a copy of the G-16 cover letter, and (3) the A-63 letter. To ensure that the Branch Committee has a complete picture of the strengths and limitations of those being considered, a Personal Qualifications Report (S-326) should be obtained from the candidate’s local body of elders and circuit overseer. If the candidate is serving at Bethel, a report should also be obtained from his department overseer and elder group. If the candidate is a circuit overseer, it would be good to obtain comments from the Service Department on his qualifications and to review the latest Personal Qualifications Report on file. Before the Branch Committee reviews the completed G-12 questionnaires, it should confirm that each question has been answered correctly and completely. The Branch Committee should review the G-12 questionnaires and other reports very carefully before making final selections. Each recommendation should be sent electronically to the Service Committee with a very brief covering numbered letter that includes the following attachments:
             Gilead Student Recommendations (G-7) form. The branch should provide specific comments on each candidate’s qualifications and future potential and how the person would be used after Gilead. Gilead recommendations are valid until the following December.

             Questionnaire to Attend the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead (G-12). In addition to this completed questionnaire, a quality full-length color photo should be included as an electronic file or scanned document. If the candidate has a valid passport, a copy of it should also be included with the G-12. If the candidate does not have a passport, there is no need to obtain one until he has been invited to Gilead.





CHART 6.1






