
CHAPTER 7
Teaching Committee




1. The Teaching Committee provides instruction that highlights the practical value of the fine spiritual food that we receive from “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45; 1 Tim. 4:16) For a summary of the Teaching Committee’s general scope of operation, see Chart 7.1.



CONVENTIONS

2. In its annual letter to all branches, the Governing Body sets out the program for the coming year, including information about future conventions and general arrangements for holding regional, international, or special conventions. For more information on how these events should be conducted, see Convention Organization Guidelines (CO-1).
3. Special conventions are held every year unless international conventions have been scheduled for that year. Special conventions are generally held in venues that hold approximately 20,000. This number includes about 3,500 to 5,000 foreign delegates, depending on the circumstances of a branch. Branch-planned activities also take place on the days before and after a special convention. International conventions are held approximately every five years. They take place in venues that hold more than 20,000 attendees, including about 5,000 or more foreign delegates. Branch-planned activities also take place on the days before and after an international convention. The organization will fund those in foreign service to attend an international convention of their choice.
4. Special full-time servants who are confirmed as delegates to an international or special convention may receive time away in addition to the usual time away or hour credits granted to attend one annual regional convention. The two provisions of time away are different and cannot be combined to attend only one event. Bethel family members, circuit overseers and their wives, field instructors and their wives, Assembly Hall servants, construction servants, construction volunteers, and Bible school facility servants who are confirmed as delegates will be granted one and a half days of time away to attend all program sessions. Special pioneers, temporary special pioneers, and field missionaries who are confirmed as delegates will receive a five-hour credit for each day of the special or international convention.
5. Convention programs address concerns from Branch Committees regarding specific needs in their part of the field. If a Branch Committee desires to adjust a program because of local needs, it should write the Teaching Committee for direction before proceeding. An abbreviated two-day regional convention program is sent to all branches, as this may be helpful to smaller language groups and territories. In the rare instance when it is necessary to have only a one-day convention, the Branch Committee should select which key parts to use from the two-day program.
6. Conventions should be practical and in good taste and should prove to be a spiritual blessing to those in attendance. These events should be held at a time of year when the majority of the brothers assigned will be able to attend. An annual report on the baptism and attendance figures for the convention series should be submitted via HuB soon after the last convention in the branch territory is held. The report should include concise, meaningful comments on the effectiveness of the program and on how it was received locally.
7. Locations: When international or special conventions are arranged, one of the larger cities in the country would normally be selected. Regional conventions should be held in cities that can accommodate the anticipated attendance. In countries where restrictions make it impossible to hold regional conventions (and circuit assemblies), arrangements may be made to present abbreviated programs at Kingdom Halls or at other appropriate locations.
8. Foreign-Language Sessions: If a circuit overseer for a foreign-language field feels that a sufficient number of publishers and interested ones will be in attendance and that there are either qualified speakers or video recordings available in the target language, he may recommend to the branch office that a foreign-language session be held in conjunction with a regional convention in that area. This request should be sent by mid-January, at least one year in advance of the scheduled event. He should inform the branch how many publishers and interested ones would benefit from this arrangement, how many qualified brothers would be available to give talks, how many parts each speaker could handle, and how many parts would be presented using video recordings. This arrangement would require a program overseer for the foreign-language session, who would work under the direction of the Convention Committee. Therefore, the circuit overseer should recommend a qualified brother for this responsibility. The branch office would make the appointment of the foreign-language program overseer. Based on the ratings received from the field, the branch office will assign the speakers for all foreign-language sessions or will specify which talks should be presented using video recordings. The program overseer appointed to serve the foreign-language sessions will oversee the functioning of the sessions. If recordings are not available, as an exception, the Branch Committee may approve simultaneous interpretation into a foreign language for some or all of the parts of the program. A qualified brother should oversee the arrangements for simultaneous interpretation, under the oversight of the convention chairman. If approval is given to hold a foreign-language session concurrent with a regional convention program on the same premises where a member of the Governing Body, a helper to a Governing Body committee, or a Branch Committee member is assigned to share on the program in the primary language, such talks should be simultaneously interpreted for the benefit of the foreign-language session. If qualified interpreters are not available, those talks will be assigned to local brothers or played from a video recording in the foreign language of the session.​—See 7:29-30, 76-79.
9. Recordings: Each January, translating branches should post the schedule on PPD for uploading a video recording of the regional convention program to JW Stream. The video recording should be of one of the first convention programs in the branch territory, since this recording will be used by other branches that have relatively few qualified speakers in the target language. If a translating branch is scheduled to hold its convention much later in the service year, then a branch holding an earlier convention in the target language may make a recording that can be distributed locally. The recording should be made available, perhaps by means of JW Stream, for those who are unable to attend their assigned convention or who have limited comprehension of the language of the convention to which they are assigned. If a publisher is assigned to a convention (or an assembly) along with his congregation but lacks comprehension of the convention language, the elders may offer him recordings of the program in his mother tongue so that he can fully benefit from the spiritual food. Of course, learners should continue to attend the assigned convention with their congregation so as to benefit from association with fellow believers.​—See 7:46.
10. Expenses: The branch will cover the expenses involved in holding conventions in its territory and will accept contributions from those in attendance. These expenses should be included in the annual budget submitted to the Treasurer’s Office and the Publishing Committee. Well-organized conventions are a real stimulus to the brothers and an encouragement to interested people. If the convention runs smoothly because of good organization and loving oversight, the brothers will generally support it well. It is appropriate to remind the brothers that it is a privilege to support the convention and the worldwide work monetarily.​—Luke 16:9-13; 2 Cor., chaps. 8-9.
11. Attendees are encouraged to bring their own food and beverages. If because of local circumstances a branch finds it necessary to provide some basic food items or a beverage at regional conventions or circuit assemblies, a request should be sent to the Teaching Committee clearly explaining why this is needed and how the expenses will be covered. The Teaching and Publishing committees will consider the request.
12. Releasing Newly Translated Publications: When an approved translation of a publication that was not released simultaneously with the English edition is completed, the Branch Committee will need to determine how best to release the item. If the publication will not be available when regional conventions are held, it may be released by means of a general letter to the congregations. There is no provision for releasing a newly translated publication at a circuit assembly or a special meeting held in connection with a branch visit or a shepherding visit.
13. If a newly translated publication will be available before the regional convention, the Branch Committee may write the Teaching Committee, recommending that the item be released at that time. This should be recommended only for new publications in the primary language(s) of the branch territory. Along with their recommendation, the Branch Committee would need to supply the title and language of the publication and indicate at what point during the program they recommend making the announcement. Usually, such releases should be announced during the final talk of the convention. However, for some items, such as songbooks or the Bible, the release announcement would likely be made at the end of the first morning session so that the brothers could begin using them right away. With the exception of Bible releases, there is no physical distribution of releases at conventions.
14. If it is known that a newly translated publication will be ready for distribution shortly after the local regional conventions, a release announcement is usually made during the final talk on the program, stating when the item will be available for request through the congregations. The wording for such brief announcements may follow the pattern used on past convention talk outlines or manuscripts.
15. If regional conventions of the same language will be held in various countries, the release announcement for a new or a revised edition of the New World Translation should be made first at a regional convention in the country overseeing that language. However, for any other translated publication, its release may be announced at the first convention of the season, regardless of the country, as long as the item is available in the language of the convention. Good communication and cooperation between the branches involved is encouraged.
16. Releasing the New World Translation: Generally, Governing Body members will only release “revised” editions of the entire New World Translation. However, if the New World Translation will be released in a new language at a regional convention and you have been informed that a member of the Governing Body will be in the region and may be in a position to attend the convention, you may submit a request to have him release the Bible. In conjunction with any New World Translation release by a member of the Governing Body, you should answer the following questions: (1) What is the estimated timetable for printing and shipping? (2) What are the scheduled dates for the first regional convention in that language? (3) In what city will the event be held, and what will be the venue? (4) What is the estimated attendance? (5) Will other locations be tied in with the main venue for the talks of the Governing Body member? (6) What transportation arrangements would need to be made to get to the convention city? Is travel safe? (7) Where will the Governing Body member be accommodated? (8) Are you aware of any local regulations that would impede the participation of a member of the Governing Body on the program? (9) If so, do you foresee the possibility of requesting an exemption from the local authorities?
17. Special Meeting to Release the New World Translation: Please note that if the Bible is ready for release at a time other than your convention season, a special program may be organized. If this will be the release of a “revised” edition of the complete Bible, it may be requested that a Governing Body member handle the release. If it is the release of a new language edition, a Branch Committee member could handle the release at such a special meeting unless a member of the Governing Body will be in the area and is willing and able to release the new Bible. Such an event may be scheduled as soon as printed copies of the new Bible are available for distribution. In this way, a branch would have two options: (1) Release an edition of the New World Translation in conjunction with a regional convention whenever that is practical or (2) hold a special event. When a special event is arranged, a large venue may be rented from which the program will originate. The program may be video streamed to Assembly Halls and Kingdom Halls within the branch territory so that as many publishers as possible can benefit. If the language of the release is also the primary language of a country outside the branch territory where the program is being held, arrangements may be made for Assembly Halls and Kingdom Halls in those areas to be tied in as well. The video stream could be delayed as needed for the benefit of locations in time zones to the west of the originating venue. In this way, many publishers fluent in the language of the release will hear the news simultaneously. For details on the program format, see Chart 7.2.
18. Convention Committee: The branch office should appoint a Convention Committee made up of the Convention Committee coordinator, the program overseer, and the rooming overseer. These elders should be good organizers and have sufficient time to care for the assignment. A circuit overseer may be assigned if necessary. It is essential that these brothers be spiritual men who fully manifest the fruitage of the spirit, even under pressure. The Convention Committee should be alert, capable of dealing with officials and other business concerns. In addition to providing oversight to the overall convention operation, the Convention Committee assigns all other department heads.
19. The committee members should be well-respected by the publishers and exhibit good teaching ability. If a brother appointed to a Convention Committee is rated as an average speaker, he should be used on the program in harmony with his speaking ability. If a brother is recommended to serve on a Convention Committee because of outstanding spiritual and organizational qualifications but is not recommended to give a talk on the program because of his limitations as a speaker, the Branch Committee will need to think carefully about whether to appoint him. If he is appointed, perhaps he could be assigned to serve as a session chairman or to offer one of the prayers.
20. Accident Prevention and Security: Safety is a priority and must be taken seriously. Give careful attention to the guidelines outlined in Convention Organization Guidelines (CO-1) for safety matters and for securing money, audio/​video equipment, and other valuables.
21. Regional Convention Assignments for Branch Committee Members: Branch Committee members should attend at least one regional convention of their selection at their own expense or through private funding. As with all Bethel family members, a day and a half of time away from work will be granted to Branch Committee members and their wives in connection with only one yearly regional convention of their choice.
22. In larger branches, Branch Committee members may attend two additional conventions. These conventions are assigned by the branch. For these two assignments, convention time and necessary travel time will be granted to the brothers and their wives. A Branch Committee member is not obligated to take two additional branch assigned conventions if he has been invited to attend additional conventions with private funds caring for the transportation costs. Convention funds should not be used to defray the Branch Committee member’s travel costs. If local private funds are not offered to cover the related travel expenses incurred from the two additional conventions attended by the Branch Committee member and his wife, if she accompanies him, the expenses may be reimbursed by the organization.​—See 9:88.
23. If it is practical for a Branch Committee member to use a branch vehicle in order to attend any of the additional conventions to which he is assigned, the fuel charge would be noted as an organizational expense. Such factors as the distance to be traveled and the length of time a brother would be away from his Bethel assignment would need to be weighed to determine whether it would be practical to use a branch vehicle. If the Branch Committee member is unable to drive, a Bethel driver may be assigned to assist him. If so, the driver would be granted the necessary time away from work.
24. At times, because of location or other circumstances, a number of regional conventions might not be visited by a Branch Committee member or another responsible Bethel representative. When that is the case, the talks given by a Branch Committee member could be streamed or played from a video recording to such regional conventions, as long as the technology is available. This provision would allow the audiences at those locations to have some exposure to a Branch Committee member.
25. Speakers Attending a Convention in Another Country: At times Bethel speakers, missionaries, and circuit overseers make personal plans to attend a regional convention outside of their branch territory. If a qualified speaker serving in one of these forms of special full-time service makes known that he will be attending a regional convention in another country, using his personal time away and private travel funds, his speaker’s ratings may be forwarded to that branch office. (It is not necessary to survey brothers in your branch territory to find out if they will be attending conventions in other lands.) The responsible brothers in the country that he will be visiting may assign him a part on the program in harmony with his qualifications. Or he may be interviewed during one of the parts. However, a branch need not feel obligated to include such a visiting speaker on the program. (See 6:90-91.) There is no arrangement for foreign delegates attending international or special conventions to serve as visiting speakers and give talks on the program of the primary language. However, if there are foreign-language sessions at such a convention and there are not enough qualified local speakers fluent in one of those languages, it may be that a qualified visiting delegate fluent in the language could be included on the foreign-language program. Foreign delegates in special full-time service, such as missionaries, can be used in an interview if the part calls for it. The interview can be rehearsed well in advance.
26. Media Services for Regional and Circuit Events: Each year an updated package containing timely guidelines is made available to all branches via the Materials Distribution System (MDS).



CIRCUIT ASSEMBLIES

27. The Teaching Committee provides programs and outlines for two circuit assemblies each year. These events are to be conducted in accord with Circuit Organization Guidelines (S-330). Taking into account the recommendations of the circuit overseers, the Branch Committee will arrange to hold two one-day circuit assemblies a year for each circuit or section of a circuit. Normally, a branch representative will be sent to serve one of the events (CA-br) as the visiting speaker. A circuit overseer will handle the main talk(s) for the other assembly (CA-co). Where practical, the Branch Committee may assign visiting speakers from the branch to serve circuit assemblies in other countries under its oversight, following the guidelines given in 7:33-34. Only circuit overseers or regular members of the Bethel family (BBR) who are currently appointed as branch representatives at circuit assemblies may be used for these assignments. (See 7:89 for guidelines on these appointments.) Translating branches should make arrangements to upload recordings of both circuit assemblies to JW Stream early in the service year, if possible. This recording can be used by other branches that have few qualified speakers in the target language. It can also be made available for those who are unable to attend their assigned assembly or who have limited comprehension of the language of the assembly to which they are assigned. An annual report on the baptism and attendance figures for the assembly series should be submitted via HuB shortly after the last assembly is held in the branch territory. The report should include concise, meaningful comments on the effectiveness of the program.
28. If it is felt that the published CA-br program should be adjusted for a certain locality, a proposal should be sent to the Teaching Committee for approval. In countries with only one circuit or where publishers are very poor and cannot afford to travel to three events in a year, the Branch Committee could consider any of the following optional arrangements: (1) obtain a video recording of an earlier CA-br program in the language of the circuit for showing at the Kingdom Hall(s) where the affected publishers meet, (2) merge the two yearly events for the affected circuit into one weekend, or (3) not hold the CA-br program. If circuits in a large city cannot make separate assembly arrangements because of local circumstances, then, as an exception, it is permissible for two or, at most, three circuits to have a combined assembly. The circuit overseer(s) should call the branch office to discuss which date should be used for the combined assembly and which parts each circuit overseer will present. The circuit overseers will decide who will handle the program parts that are to be given by local brothers and who will care for the various assembly departments.
29. Foreign-Language Circuit Assemblies: If a circuit overseer for a foreign-language field feels that an assembly would be well-supported and a program could be presented using qualified speakers, interpreters, or video recordings, he should submit his recommendation to the branch office for approval. This request should be sent well in advance of the scheduled event. In his report he should answer the following questions: How many publishers and interested people would benefit from this program? How many elders qualify to give talks or interpret the program? How many parts could the appointed brothers present? How many parts would be presented using video recordings? Are the video recordings available from the translating branch? How many other publishers qualify to interpret the program? After determining that an assembly can be organized by appointed men and that it will be well-supported, the Branch Committee may grant approval to hold the assembly.​—See 7:46.
30. Foreign-language circuit assemblies should aim to present a program similar to the program of the primary language, using qualified speakers to care for all parts locally. If this is not possible, sessions may be played from video recordings in the target language. Interspersing live talks by fluent speakers with video recordings improves the quality of the teaching and holds the attention of the audience. The assembly organization should function according to the usual arrangements, with the following provisions: Prayers should be given locally unless the program is being streamed live. The baptism could be held locally after listening to the recorded baptism talk, or the candidates could join with another language group for water immersion. When a pregroup, group, or congregation views a recording of a circuit assembly, the circuit overseer can determine how best to handle the Watchtower summary, based on the local circumstances. He has the option (1) to pause the recorded program so that a local elder can give a 30-minute summary talk, (2) to assign a local elder to conduct a 30-minute abbreviated Watchtower Study, or (3) to remind the publishers to study the current week’s article on their own.​—See 7:8, 45.
31. As an exception, assemblies may be interpreted simultaneously if video recordings are not available. They would be held concurrently with the program in the primary language of the event. The sessions are usually held in a separate room or area of the venue and are organized so that they will not distract the audience attending the main program. When simultaneous interpretation is approved for circuit assemblies, a qualified brother should oversee the arrangement, under the direction of the assembly overseer. If possible, the brother selected should know the foreign language. The circuit overseer should meet with this brother to decide on such matters as a practical seating location for those listening to the interpretation, one with sufficient lighting and good sound. The brother overseeing the interpretation should schedule the assignments well in advance. If at all possible, qualified brothers, rather than sisters, should be used for the principal talks, particularly those of the circuit overseer or the representative from the branch. When qualified sisters must be used as interpreters, they should be referred to the published direction given on this matter. (w09 11/15 pp. 12-13) If a separate room or area of the venue is not available and the foreign-language attendees will be sitting in the main auditorium, the interpreted program could be broadcast over an FM transmitter to small FM receivers used with earphones.​—See 7:76.
32. Travel Expenses Associated With Circuit Assembly (CA-br) Assignments: The circuit should cover the transportation expenses of the visiting speaker and his wife (if married) even if he uses a branch vehicle to travel to his assignment. The branch is authorized to fund or supplement any financial shortfall for circuits unable to cover these travel expenses. Therefore, even if the circuit cannot reimburse his travel expenses, a branch representative could be sent to the circuit each year, provided that there are a sufficient number of branch representatives and the travel costs are not exorbitant for the number of attendees. If the branch must initially pay the travel expenses of the visiting speaker and his wife, the insolvent circuit still may be able to contribute “something” to assist. (1 Cor. 16:1, 2) As an option, Branch Committee or Country Committee members could serve such circuits in conjunction with their annual visits to missionaries or remote translation offices.
33. Time Away for Circuit Assembly (CA-br) Assignments: Generally, Bethel speakers would need no more than a total of two days to travel to and from most circuit assembly (CA-br) assignments. (For these assignments, wives would also be granted the same time away from work as their husbands.) Assignments closer to Bethel may require little or no time away. In branches overseeing territories that span many time zones or in lands where travel is very difficult, more than a day’s time might be needed for a speaker to reach his assignment. In such rare cases, the branch representative should make a reasonable determination of the amount of travel time needed, considering such local circumstances as the reliability of the transportation, the schedules, and the travel costs. Occasionally, a brother from Bethel might be assigned to serve a circuit assembly (CA-br) in a remote area if he will be able to reach the assembly either en route to or returning from another distant assignment, such as a visit to a remote translation office. Also, if a brother will be taking personal time away in a distant part of the branch territory, some thought might be given to having him care for a circuit assembly (CA-br) being held in the vicinity.
34. If the circuit assembly (CA-br) is scheduled for a Sunday only and reaching the site will not require a significant amount of travel time, the brother would usually travel on Saturday as long as suitable transportation is available and travel costs would not be much higher than if he traveled on Friday. Typically, he would travel back to Bethel on Monday. When the event is scheduled for a Saturday only, the speaker would normally leave from Bethel on Friday so as to reach his accommodations for that evening at a reasonable time. Likely, he will return to Bethel on Sunday, providing circumstances allow for a reasonable itinerary that day. If it is normally possible to keep to the aforementioned travel schedule but a speaker opts to leave earlier or return later, he is expected to use personal time away from Bethel.
35. If the above guidelines do not answer questions that could arise regarding this subject, the Branch Committee should feel free to contact the Teaching Committee, explaining what is involved in a particular situation.​—See 6:92.



CONGREGATION MEETINGS

36. Midweek Meeting: Unless there are extreme extenuating circumstances, congregations worldwide hold one midweek meeting sometime between Monday and Friday. Detailed instructions for the midweek meeting are set out in Instructions for Our Christian Life and Ministry Meeting (S-38). This meeting features the Life and Ministry Meeting Workbook (mwb) and is formatted as follows: It begins with song, prayer, and opening comments followed by Treasures From God’s Word, Apply Yourself to the Field Ministry, and Living as Christians, which includes a 30-minute consideration of the Congregation Bible Study. The entire meeting lasts one hour and 45 minutes, including the closing song and prayer.
           Treasures From God’s Word will usually follow the global schedule for Bible reading to help the brotherhood be “united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.” (1 Cor. 1:10) If the Bible or the references are not available in the language of the congregation, publishers may use another language to prepare for this part of the meeting. For some languages, translating branches may translate Bible citations and publication references and provide these in the document References for Life and Ministry Meeting Workbook (mwbr). The mwbr document may be distributed electronically to congregations in the branch territory, if desired. Otherwise, if a publication cited in the Life and Ministry Meeting Workbook is not yet available in a particular language, branches may use alternate source material, as long as they select a current publication that is available in the local language. Similarly, if the cited reference material for a question in the Life and Ministry Meeting Answer Sheet (lma) is not available in the target language, a new question and answer may be formulated, based on the reference material available in that language, without having to submit the revised text to the Teaching Committee for approval.

            Apply Yourself to the Field Ministry will feature three sample conversation videos​—the initial call, the first return visit, and the second return visit. The front page of the workbook will contain brief outlines of the sample conversations that will match the sample conversation videos. If a sample conversation is not effective in a certain language, it may be adjusted by the translating branch as long as the new conversation will be effective for publishers using that language around the world. If it is not possible to adjust the sample conversation video, it may still be played and discussed as an option to the adjusted written sample conversation, provided this would be helpful to the field. Apply Yourself to the Field Ministry will have student assignments as outlined in the meeting workbook. (The Bible reading at the end of Treasures From God’s Word is considered a student assignment.) Generally, the branches should not adjust this program. The primary purpose of these assignments is to help publishers develop greater skill in the ministry. Students should base the initial call and return visit assignments on the sample conversations. They may decide whether or not to introduce a publication or video from our Teaching Toolbox.

            Living as Christians includes the Congregation Bible Study and one or two parts practical for Christian living. Some languages will consider a different publication for the Congregation Bible Study, and the schedule in the workbook should reflect this. The other meeting parts in this section may be modified by the Branch Committee to be more effective for a particular language field. If there is a need in the branch territory, rather than preparing substitute material for the workbook, the Branch Committee may prepare a letter to the elders, giving direction for the subject to be discussed during an upcoming local needs part. If videos featured on the midweek meeting need to be translated, branches may proceed with translating them into the target language without checking with the Teaching Committee. If regions of the branch territory do not have the ability to view videos, the Branch Committee may need to provide them with alternate material and direction, perhaps by means of a letter.


37. Weekend Meeting: After opening with song and prayer, a 30-minute Bible discourse is presented from one of the approved outlines on the list Public Talk Titles (S-99) or as otherwise provided by the organization for special occasions, such as the circuit overseer’s visit. Normally, following the Bible discourse and after an intermediate song, the scheduled Watchtower Study article is reviewed by the congregation as a question-and-answer session lasting one hour. The discussion includes the reading of all the paragraphs and all the scriptures marked “read” as well as a brief consideration of the review box. Paragraph reading should be uninterrupted. The “read” scriptures would normally be read after the paragraph reading and prior to considering the portion of the paragraph in which they are located. The scriptures marked “read” should not be read before the reading of the paragraph unless the scripture is cited at the very beginning of the paragraph, such as in a verse-by-verse discussion. The weekend meeting that features the public Bible discourse and Watchtower Study should not be combined with the midweek meeting except in extreme circumstances.
38. Visit of the Circuit Overseer: The above-mentioned formats vary only during the visit of the circuit overseer. On such weeks, the Watchtower Study is abbreviated to 30 minutes and paragraph reading is suspended so that the circuit overseer can give a final 30-minute service talk. During the midweek meeting, the Congregation Bible Study is replaced with a 30-minute service talk by the circuit overseer. (tg 4:10) Family heads should consider the assigned Congregation Bible Study material during family worship. When several congregations meet in one Kingdom Hall, those not being visited will adjust meeting times as needed for that week. Any schedule of meeting times that involves rotation is worked out through the elders in a spirit of mutual concern and brotherly love.​—Phil. 2:2-4; 1 Pet. 3:8.
39. Audio and video transmissions or recordings of our regular congregation meetings may be made for those unable to attend physically because of illness or other circumstances. (Helpful comments appear on MDS regarding the technical aspects of these provisions.) Congregation meetings should not be made available to a wide audience on the Internet. Neither should recordings of congregation meetings be distributed indiscriminately. However, it is not necessary to monitor who has access to congregation meetings. Care should be exercised that conferencing systems and recordings do not become a convenient substitute for attending meetings in person. If congregations have not yet made arrangements to record congregation meetings for the benefit of the elderly, infirm, and those who are otherwise unable to attend, the elders may provide them with access to recordings in the target language on JW Stream. Viewing the meetings on JW Stream allows those unable to attend an opportunity to view any videos presented. In order to reduce the load on congregations with very few brothers qualified to handle meeting parts, the circuit overseer may give approval for groups and small congregations to view recorded meetings or portions of meetings even if the congregation holds meetings in one of the primary languages of the country.
40. Visual Aids: Unless specifically directed by the organization, no video footage should be used in conjunction with congregation meetings, assemblies, or conventions. Brothers who present talks at congregation meetings may display still images on-screen as visual aids if the necessary equipment is available at the Kingdom Hall. Still images are not to be used by speakers at assemblies and conventions, because these programs are specifically prepared by the Teaching Committee and the images could be misconstrued as being authorized by the organization. Sign-language meetings, assemblies, and conventions may continue to make judicious use of video footage and still images as a visual teaching aid for the special needs of deaf audiences.​—See 7:93.



Meetings in Foreign Languages

41. Foreign-Language Groups: When there are only a few publishers working a foreign-language field, a group can be formed under the supervision of a host congregation. (km 11/09 p. 5 par. 10; tg chap. 15) Such foreign-language groups may hold their Congregation Bible Study in a separate room at the Kingdom Hall at the same time as the midweek meeting of the host congregation. In cases of severe space constraints, the group may hold this 30-minute meeting just prior to the host congregation’s midweek meeting. If this is not possible, a less preferred option would be to have the group meet just before or after the host congregation’s weekend meeting. A foreign-language group that has grown in size may need to be transferred to another host congregation that meets in a Kingdom Hall with a larger auxiliary room.
42. Newly Formed Congregations: If a group is making good progress, has responsible ones taking the lead, and has reasonable prospects for further growth, consideration may be given to forming a congregation. (tg chap. 12) Meetings should be conducted in the language of the congregation (or group) even if only a few publications are available. For example, the Congregation Bible Study may be conducted using just the first few publications on the translation priority list. Understandably, the schedule and the content for this part of the Life and Ministry Meeting would differ from those of the major languages. If different publications are needed, the Alternate Material for the Congregation Bible Study form found on MDS along with a proposed study schedule in English should be submitted to the Teaching Committee for approval.
43. In the event that no responsible brothers in the congregation are available to conduct the meeting on a particular day and video recordings are not accessible, an interpreter could be used so that most would be able to understand the comments of the assigned conductor or public speaker for that occasion. (See 7:76.) This would harmonize with the precedent found in 1 Corinthians chapter 14. Also, it should be noted that many languages have a suitable vernacular Bible translation or at least a portion of it. The brothers should be encouraged to use these Bibles at their meetings and in the field ministry.
44. When no publications are available in a certain language, meetings could be conducted using our publications in another language as long as most in the congregation or group are able to follow along. For example, an indigenous group may also understand a major language in which publications are readily available. However, all talks, prayers, question-and-answer sessions, and meetings should be conducted in the language of the group. As mentioned above, if the assigned conductor does not speak the language of the group, a qualified interpreter may assist him. Also, when a group is started, it may be possible for the brother assigned as reader for the Congregation Bible Study or the Watchtower Study to make a personal translation of the material under discussion, although this is not ideal. Once meetings are held regularly in the language of the group and the formation of a congregation is imminent, the Branch Committee should contact the Writing Committee, outlining the needs of the congregation and providing the names of any baptized Witnesses who could be used as translators.​—See 8:23.
45. Video Streaming and Recordings: Conducting congregation meetings locally is preferable. However, if such is not yet possible and the congregations obtain the necessary equipment, a pregroup, group, or small congregation may request permission from the circuit overseer to view recordings of the meetings of a congregation in the target language. Under the direction of the Branch Committee, the circuit overseer approves which pregroups, groups, or small congregations in his circuit will view recordings of another congregation approved to stream meetings in the target language and to what extent. The circuit overseer must consider all of the factors surrounding the request in deciding whether to give approval for such an arrangement or not. Access to these recordings in the target language is available on JW Stream. Interspersing talks by fluent speakers with video streaming or recordings, whenever possible, raises the quality of the teaching and holds the attention of the audience. Prayers must be given locally unless the program is being streamed live.​—See 7:30.
46. Translating branches should provide high-quality video footage of meetings (along with conventions and assemblies, including the annual pioneer meeting in conjunction with the circuit assembly) in harmony with the latest guidelines posted on MDS and PPD. In order to benefit congregations and groups worldwide, each translating branch should select a qualified elder, such as a circuit overseer or a Bethelite, to deliver the Memorial and the special talk in the target language. Branches should finalize the arrangements for posting a new Memorial and special talk to JW Stream by January of each calendar year so that congregations and groups that will use the recordings can be notified well in advance by the local branch office. These programs should be posted about one month before the scheduled date of the event. Besides removing prayers, the Memorial recordings should exclude the section of the talk subtitled “Observing the Memorial of Christ’s Death Today.”​—See 7:9, 29.



DEDICATION PROGRAMS




Branch Dedications

47. Dedication programs are special occasions of great spiritual encouragement for Jehovah’s people. These programs are held in connection with newly acquired or newly built facilities that are fully owned by the organization. Months in advance of a branch dedication, an overview of the plans, including details about the program content, rooming for guests, feeding, and so forth, should be sent to the Teaching Committee for final review and approval. If an exception to the following guidelines is necessary, the Branch Committee should contact the Teaching Committee before proceeding.
48. If a four-page printed program is planned, the branch should submit the recommended text and a PDF of the proposed design directly to the Writing Committee. The text in the program sample will be reviewed and approved by the Teaching Committee, while the actual design of the program will be reviewed and approved by the Writing Committee.
49. Day and Time for Program: If possible, a branch dedication program should be held on a Saturday. A program approximately three hours in length should be arranged. If one or more talks need to be interpreted, the program may take another 30-40 minutes. The format may be adjusted to fit local circumstances. [See Chart 7.2.]
50. The chairman will give the opening words of welcome. Then for about 20 minutes, a member of the Branch Committee should relate the history of the Kingdom work in that country, followed by how Jehovah opened up the way for a new branch to be constructed. If there are longtime missionaries present, approximately eight minutes can be dedicated to interview them. They may comment on their share in the early development of the work and relate any personal experiences involved. Then 30-40 minutes should be used to discuss the construction project itself. A member of the Branch Committee who was involved with the project is usually assigned this part. It could be developed as a discussion by three brothers, two of whom would be involved with oversight of construction organization. It may include a few interviews with key workers on the project. These interviews could highlight problems that were overcome, relate any outstanding experiences that took place in obtaining equipment and accomplishing the work, or indicate how a witness was given to the community. This discussion could conclude by referring to the fine cooperation of the local brothers and the way Jehovah blessed the activity.
51. If there are a few Branch Committee members present from nearby branches, a representative from each may use from four to six minutes to relate outstanding experiences and reports about the progress of the work in those countries. This segment could be about 20 minutes in length. It would be followed by song, announcements, and the reading of any greetings, all of which should take no longer than 15 minutes.
52. Dedication Talk: If a member of the Governing Body is assigned to attend the dedication, he will give the dedication talk. This discourse is usually about an hour in length, but if interpreted, it may take 90 minutes or more. The Governing Body member will usually give the dedication prayer.
53. Invitations and Seating: The program will generally originate from the branch’s main auditorium. Overflow seating may be set up in a Kingdom Hall or an Assembly Hall on the property of the branch being dedicated. Extra chairs may also be set up in dining rooms and in other locations on the premises. The number invited will depend on the size of the facilities, the number in the Bethel family, the size of the engineering and construction staff, and the number of visitors from other branches. In some branches, those in the field who have served faithfully in the truth for 40 or more years have been included. No other venue will be rented unless there are exceptional circumstances. If this is the case, write to the Teaching Committee, explaining the details and requesting that an exception be made.
54. The dedication program, a tour of the facility, and association with the Bethel family and others can encourage visitors to continue doing Jehovah’s will. However, there is no need to arrange for a family day or family night program. These events for the Bethel family should be scheduled at another time, exclusively for the Bethel family and any approved guests. Entertainment programs for visitors require many hours of rehearsal and therefore should not be approved for presentation. By keeping the arrangements simple and on a high spiritual level, such occasions will be delightful and beneficial for all.
55. Printed Invitations: Some branches have printed badge cards for attendees, similar in size to the badge cards used at regional conventions. This helps to ensure that only those invited will be permitted entry. This can also be done for the special program on Sunday if seating is limited.
56. Food Arrangements: If Saturday morning is devoted to tours, there could be a light buffet meal at noon or light packed lunches for the dedication visitors. The dedication program could begin at 1:30 p.m. or 2:00 p.m. A light buffet meal in the evening would be appropriate for the Bethel family, the engineering and construction staff, and any overnight guests staying at the branch. However, there should be no arrangement for feeding everyone who attends the dedication program. If there are questions about this, please write to the Teaching Committee before plans are finalized.
57. Special Meeting on Sunday: If practical, a special program may be held on Sunday at a larger hall or stadium. As an alternative, the program could be held at the branch and video streamed to Kingdom Halls throughout the country if such technology is already in place. The program could begin at 9:30 a.m. or 10:00 a.m. The format for this special meeting may be as follows: After an introductory song and prayer, the chairman will extend a warm welcome to the audience and make a few encouraging comments. Then he will introduce a 30-minute summary talk of the Watchtower Study for that week. Afterward, a 20-minute review of the dedication program that was held on the preceding day may be presented as a discussion between two Branch Committee members. Next, Branch Committee members or representatives from other branches may present four or five reports, as they did the day before. However, since those who attended the dedication will also be in attendance at this meeting, it would be best if different reports were given than the ones presented at the dedication program the day before. This segment could last up to 30 minutes, depending on whether interpretation is needed. After another song, announcements can be made along with the reading of any greetings. Then the guest speaker will give a one-hour service talk. The content of this talk will be different from that of his dedication talk on Saturday. If interpreted, this talk may take 90 minutes or more. (See 7:76.) The special meeting would end with a closing song and prayer. [See Chart 7.2.]



Assembly Hall Dedications

58. When a new Assembly Hall is built or an existing facility has undergone extensive renovation resulting in a significant change of its floor plan and overall appearance, a dedication program would be in order. Generally, there would be only one guest speaker assigned to an Assembly Hall dedication. Organization funds may be used to cover the travel expenses of only one Branch Committee member and his wife. Also, only one Branch Committee member should share in the dedication program. When the dedication speaker is a member of the Governing Body, the program should be held on a Saturday. In this case, one Branch Committee member may be assigned to present a report on the advancement of the Kingdom work in the country, while focusing on the progress of the work in the area of the Assembly Hall. (See 7:60.) As described below, an additional special program should be arranged for Sunday of the same weekend if a Governing Body member is present for the dedication weekend. During that program, the same Branch Committee member may be assigned to present a 30-minute summary talk of the Watchtower Study for that week or an additional report on the work in the local branch territory. Other Branch Committee members may attend both programs if they wish, but they would not be assigned a part and their travel expenses should be covered by private funds. Please note that a Governing Body member would not normally be assigned to visit the branch and conduct morning worship in conjunction with the dedication of an Assembly Hall unless the facility is very close to Bethel. Any exceptions would need to be approved by the Teaching Committee.
59. The dedication program may be video streamed, if possible, to the Kingdom Halls of the congregations that will make use of the Assembly Hall. If video streaming is not possible, only those who can be accommodated in the Assembly Hall would be invited to the dedication program on Saturday. (If that is the case, to make it possible for more brothers to attend, the Governing Body member may agree to give his dedication talk again during a second program that would be presented later on Saturday, but this decision is left to the Governing Body member.) The Branch Committee determines who will be invited.​—See 7:66.
60. Saturday Program Format: The dedication program need not be longer than two and a half hours. A brief history of the progress of the Kingdom work in the area may be presented, possibly including an interview of one or two longtime Witnesses. Experiences and comments by those being interviewed should be to the point. Participants should emphasize, not so much how the building was constructed, but how Jehovah blessed the work and the effect the project has had on the community and on the brothers.​—Acts 14:27; see 7:58.
61. A video presentation or slide show should be no more than 15 minutes in length. Just a few of the main construction phases should be featured. The presentation should be dignified and the content in good taste, forasmuch as the program is an occasion to praise Jehovah for his blessing on the project.
62. The dedication talk may be up to one hour in length. If interpreted into another language, it will be somewhat longer.
63. The Assembly Hall is to be dedicated only once, by means of a prayer. When it is necessary to schedule a second program later in the day or on the next day, the speaker will explain that the building was dedicated at the preceding program.
64. Program participants should be exemplary Jehovah’s Witnesses. There is no provision for government officials or others to address the audience on any occasion, just as is the case at any theocratic meeting. If an official wishes to make a brief speech or offer expressions of appreciation at a dedication program, he may be received hospitably and given audience by a few responsible brothers in a separate room before or after the program.
65. Tours: A tour of the Assembly Hall or an open house may be arranged before the dedication program. If the program is scheduled in the afternoon, the open house could be organized in the morning. Or, if more convenient, it may be arranged on the day before or even one or two weeks prior to the dedication. If practical, arrangements can be made to serve light snacks or refreshments but no alcoholic beverages. Many brothers have found this to be a fine time to invite businessmen and officials who may have become familiar with our work and who may have expressed a desire to see the completed building. It is appropriate for an elder to be assigned to escort these individuals and to make their visit informative and pleasant. Other guests may also be given a brief tour by one of the attendants. Such tours are generally scheduled for the morning or early afternoon prior to the dedication program.​—See 7:68.
66. Seating: The hall should be filled for the dedication program, but it may be necessary to limit the number invited in order to avoid overcrowding. In some cases, those invited are limited to those in special full-time service, elders, ministerial servants, regular pioneers, and their families, along with those who have been baptized for a certain number of years. Invitations are often extended to those who contributed much in the way of time, effort, or materials toward the construction.​—See 7:59.
67. Sunday Program Format: If the visiting dedication speaker is a Governing Body member, an additional special program lasting about two hours (or two and a half hours if interpretation is required) should be arranged for Sunday. Depending on local circumstances and the practicality of the arrangement, the special Sunday program could be video streamed from the Assembly Hall that was dedicated to the Kingdom Halls of the congregations that will make use of the new facility. If local circumstances do not allow video streaming of the special program to most of the publishers in the congregations making use of the Assembly Hall and the country is one seldom visited by a member of the Governing Body, a larger facility could be rented for a special Sunday program if that is practical. [See Chart 7.2.]



Dedications of Remote Translation Offices (RTOs)

68. A dedication program may be organized in connection with a new remote translation office (RTO) as long as the premises are owned by the organization. Hence, no dedication program will be arranged when a rental facility is being used. A Governing Body member, a Branch Committee member, or another qualified brother could be assigned to give the dedication talk in conjunction with a scheduled trip to the region, such as a visit to the missionaries or the translation team. Since there is no auditorium at an RTO, the program may be held at the Kingdom Hall closest to the RTO and should follow a format similar to that used for Kingdom Hall dedications. If necessary, the dedication program could be held at a rented facility near the RTO. Appropriate arrangements should be made for all in attendance to tour the RTO, preferably prior to the dedication program.​—See 7:65; Chart 7.2.



Kingdom Hall Dedications

69. The most up-to-date guidelines on this subject, as provided to all bodies of elders and circuit overseers, should be followed when arranging for these events. Travel expenses for a Bethel speaker must be covered by the congregation or by private funds. If it is not possible to invite a speaker from Bethel, a circuit overseer or another qualified elder should be assigned to deliver the Kingdom Hall dedication talk. [See Chart 7.2.]
70. Normally, other facilities will not be tied in for these programs. But if there are extenuating circumstances warranting an exception, the Branch Committee may decide to give approval for one additional Kingdom Hall to be tied in. For example, when several congregations share in a project, it may not be possible to include all the publishers who worked on the building. Hence, it might be necessary to tie in a neighboring Kingdom Hall so that all can benefit from the dedication program. The Teaching Committee should be contacted for approval if the Branch Committee feels that something more than what is outlined above will be necessary.



BRANCH AND SHEPHERDING VISITS

71. Special Program: Arrangements should be made to hold a special program at a suitable location for the brothers living in the branch territory. Please note that dedication programs for newly acquired or newly built facilities should not be scheduled during a branch or a shepherding visit. Normally, all such events are arranged at a different time. If a Branch Committee feels that extenuating local circumstances would warrant an exception in this regard, an inquiry including all pertinent details may be submitted to the Teaching Committee.
72. If the cost is not excessive, the branch may rent one large facility, such as a stadium or a sports hall, relatively close to the branch office to accommodate a larger crowd. With a rented facility, if possible and the costs are not excessive, Kingdom Halls or Assembly Halls in other parts of the branch territory may be connected by an audio or audio/​video tie-in. The rental of additional facilities for tie-in purposes is viewed as an exception based on extenuating circumstances. The Teaching Committee will decide on a case-by-case basis. As another option, if video streaming is possible to most Kingdom Halls, the program could originate from an auditorium or a Kingdom Hall on branch property instead of a large rented facility.
73. Transmission of Program: Since this is a special event, the Branch Committee may arrange for an audio or audio/​video tie-in to Assembly Halls in other countries they oversee so that as many publishers as possible may hear the program. The program may be delay-streamed or video recorded for broadcasting later on the same day, on the next day, or on the following weekend at Assembly Halls and Kingdom Halls. Any questions or unusual circumstances related to the special program should be sent to the Teaching Committee.
74. Program Format: The program should include a 30-minute summary talk of the Watchtower Study for that week. A 20-minute report on the progress of the Kingdom work in the country can be included as well. The total time for the program would be approximately three hours, especially if the headquarters representative’s talk needs to be interpreted. Since the program would include the Watchtower Study summary and it is a spiritually rich program, the scheduled weekend meeting for the invited congregations will be suspended for that week. Therefore, depending on the itinerary of the Governing Body member or headquarters representative, it might be advantageous to schedule this program on a Sunday. If the special program is scheduled during the week, the publishers can be encouraged to concentrate on sharing in the field ministry on the weekend, since there will be no meeting.​—See 6:1-6.
75. Branches that may have more than one language group represented at these occasions should make arrangements to hold the program in the language of the majority. If practical, it may also be possible to arrange for simultaneous interpretation into any other language(s) represented, as long as this would not serve as a distraction to the rest of the audience. Generally, with the exception of the headquarters representative (who may not know the language of the land), all speakers should present their talks uninterpreted in one language (with simultaneous interpretation if needed) for the benefit of the majority present.



INTERPRETERS OF KEY TALKS AT SPECIAL EVENTS

76. Interpreters should be exemplary publishers approved by the Congregation Service Committee to assist in this way. Accurate knowledge of the truth of God’s Word is required in order to interpret Scriptural thoughts correctly into another language. It is essential that an interpreter have a good comprehension of both languages, particularly of the target language.​—See 7:8, 31, 43, 57.
77. A copy of the talk outline may be given in advance to the assigned interpreter, who will use it for preparation purposes only. In addition, the speaker may be able to give the interpreter a copy of his personal notes prior to the presentation. Either way, those copies are only to be used by the interpreter to prepare for his assignment. Neither the copies nor a translation thereof should be used by the interpreter during the actual presentation of the talk. Rather, he should listen carefully to the speaker’s delivery and convey to the audience an accurate interpretation of the speaker’s statements. (See be p. 55.) Any copies of the talk outline or the speaker’s notes given to the interpreter beforehand should be returned to the speaker or destroyed after the program. Before the actual delivery of the talk, the speaker would do well to meet with the assigned interpreter to discuss details of his presentation, such as illustrations, numbers, and figures of speech. This guideline may be followed for all interpreted events.
78. It is preferred that the most qualified brothers be assigned to interpret talks given by members of the Governing Body or special representatives of the organization, even if it is necessary to use younger brothers. A brother’s depth of experience in theocratic and organizational matters does not necessarily make him the finest choice of interpreter. Those assigned should be able to communicate the emphasis, intensity, and emotion of the speaker into the target language, while not calling undue attention to themselves. Those who are selected for this privilege should be reminded of the principles expressed at Romans 12:3 and 1 Corinthians 12:28-31 so that they maintain a humble disposition while carrying out this special responsibility.
79. Interpreted Prayers: Any officially assigned visiting speaker at conventions, assemblies, and meetings may have his prayer interpreted, either consecutively or simultaneously. This also applies to circuit overseers if they are visiting a foreign-language congregation or assembly.



BETHEL AND REGIONAL CONVENTION SPEAKERS

80. Evaluation of Regional Convention Speakers: Pertinent guidelines for bodies of elders and circuit overseers about “Recommending Local Elders as Regional Convention Speakers” and “Regional Convention Speaker Ratings” are posted on MDS. All elders serving at Bethel should be rated even if they have had only limited exposure on circuit assembly programs. Those serving in foreign-language congregations should be rated both for the language of their congregation and for the primary language of the country. Elders at Bethel can be appointed as regional convention speakers if they have a speaker rating of C+ or higher. Temporary volunteers serving at Bethel during the convention season may be asked to indicate the convention they will attend, and talks may be assigned to them according to the need and their qualifications.
81. Evaluation and Selection of Bethel Speakers: Yearly evaluations received from the circuits for all brothers recommended as regional convention speakers can also be used as a basis for selecting new Bethel speakers. Those appointed as Bethel speakers would be ones who were rated higher than average in their circuits. An elder serving as a regular Bethel family member (BBR) who has been on a regional convention program for two years will be eligible for consideration as a Bethel speaker, as long as he meets the following additional criteria: (1) His speaker rating is B or higher; (2) he has served at Bethel for a minimum of three years, including consecutive periods of temporary service; (3) he has a reputation worthy of representing Bethel; and (4) he is able to hold an audience’s attention for one hour. Furthermore, when a brother is first notified of his appointment as a Bethel speaker, it is recommended that about six months be allowed to pass before his first assignment so that he may have time to prepare a suitable one-hour service talk. In view of this, when deciding whether a brother should be appointed as a Bethel speaker, those recommending Bethel speakers should give serious consideration to whether he could give an effective one-hour service talk. Since a brother’s qualifications for presenting a one-hour talk would need to be much higher than for presenting a short convention talk, an individual might be qualified to serve as a regional convention speaker but not as a Bethel speaker. As an example, those recommending Bethel speakers would do well to ask themselves if they view the brother in question as qualified to address their own congregations for one hour. Hence, as a general rule, a brother would qualify to be used on a regional convention program before he could serve as a Bethel speaker. Brothers called to Bethel from the circuit work, however, may be appointed as Bethel speakers upon completing Bethel Entrants’ School. (See 6:90-91.) When a brother is appointed as a Branch Committee member, there is no need formally to evaluate his speaking abilities for convention assignments; instead, the Branch Committee can determine which speaking assignments he is qualified to handle.
82. Weekend Speaking Assignments: Congregations near the branch office may request that approved Bethel speakers be assigned to give a service talk and public talk. A Speaking Assignment Desk may be set up in the Service Department for scheduling these assignments. (See 6:157.) When an assignment is made, the “Notice to Congregation of Bethel Speaker Assignments” (S-35) is sent to the congregation and the “Notice to Bethel Speaker of Assignments” (S-37) is sent to the speaker. Generally, Bethel speakers would not receive more than three weekend speaking assignments per year. Likewise, individual congregations will be officially assigned up to three Bethel speakers each year. Bethel speakers may not be requested by name for these official Bethel speaking assignments.
83. Travel and Time Away: Bethel speakers may be sent to congregations within 200 miles (320 km) of Bethel, if that distance is practical. Whatever the radius from Bethel, the speaker should be able to travel safely to and from the assignment with minimal impact on his Bethel work. The brother (and his wife) should be able to arrive back at Bethel and get a good night’s sleep on Sunday evening. If the weekend meeting is held late on Sunday and the location is a considerable distance from Bethel, the speaker may return early Monday morning without taking personal time away as long as he is back at his work assignment after lunch.
84. Brothers who are regular Bethel family members serving at remote translation offices may be appointed as Bethel speakers and assigned to visit congregations within 200 miles of their location. However, the branch office may opt to make the travel radius less than 200 miles if local circumstances would make it difficult for the brothers to travel that far in a weekend and still return in good time to carry out their weekly Bethel routine.
85. Expenses: The speaker’s travel expenses (and his wife’s if applicable) should be covered by the local congregation. A resolution is not required for these expenses since it is part of the ongoing Speaking Assignment Desk arrangement. If for some reason the congregation does not reimburse the speaker, the branch may reimburse his travel expenses, having in mind the cost of public transportation, the distances involved, and the current price of fuel if a personal vehicle is used. If the congregation does not supply meals, the speaker may be reimbursed for that expense. The branch should write a kind letter to any congregations that fail to reimburse these expenses, reminding them of their responsibility and telling them that the branch has cared for the reimbursement in this case. However, when a congregation chooses to invite a particular Bethel speaker for a special weekend of activity apart from those arranged by the Speaking Assignment Desk, all travel expenses for the speaker (and his wife) should be covered either with private contributions or with congregation funds as approved by a resolution.
86. Bethel speakers are expected to share with the congregation in field service on the weekend of their public talks, according to local arrangements.
87. Video presentations and slide shows are not approved for use on Bethel speaking assignments. Saturday service talks should be Scriptural and encouraging discussions, generally only one hour in length. Such talks may be shortened to 30 minutes if they must be presented after the regular one-hour Watchtower Study.
88. Only approved Bethel speakers are to present service talks to the congregations. As an exception, visiting missionaries who are qualified may present a special service talk but only at the Kingdom Hall and at a time other than that scheduled for regular congregation meetings. For these special presentations, a missionary could use a few visual aids, including pictures from the area where he serves. However, such pictures should be in good taste and not overshadow the Scriptural message of his talk. Visiting missionaries might also give a brief report during a local needs part on the midweek meeting or after an unabbreviated Watchtower Study, if requested.
89. Circuit assembly branch representatives are selected from among the better-qualified and highest-rated Bethel speakers. In large branches, those considered for this privilege have served at Bethel for many years. At smaller branches, the Branch or Country committee may need to consider using brothers who have served for fewer years, bearing in mind that Bethel representatives should nonetheless be exemplary in their conduct and public speaking.​—1 Tim. 4:12; see 6:92; 7:27.



MORNING WORSHIP AT BETHEL

90. General Guidelines: Diligence is essential in preparing information that is of benefit to the Bethel family. Those entrusted with this serious assignment ought to handle it in accord with the principle found at Romans 12:8. The assigned chairman should arrive at the table approximately ten minutes before the start of the program so that he can settle in and get any needed observations from the sound technicians or other responsible brothers at Bethel. Approved overnight guests staying at the branch may attend morning worship along with the Bethel family.
91. In most branches, morning worship begins at 7:00 a.m., with the chairman taking no more than a few seconds to welcome the family. He then calls on the brother assigned to offer a brief opening prayer of less than one minute. This prayer should include giving thanks for the breakfast meal to follow. In some branches where most in the family eat breakfast in their personal rooms and there is no provision for receiving a video signal, the family may gather afterward in a suitable location, such as a dining room or a Kingdom Hall, for the Morning Worship program before going to work.
92. Program: In most branches, at 7:20 a.m., the chairman introduces the full Morning Worship program. After the daily text is read, the chairman calls on each of the four assigned commenters to offer a comment of one minute or less. Branches with few in the Bethel family may have two comments of two minutes each. Although it is appropriate to acknowledge each comment, care should be exercised not to exalt any one participant over the others. After the last one on the panel has commented, the chairman takes eight or nine minutes to develop a few Scriptural thoughts for the encouragement of the family. Scriptures should be read directly from a hard copy of the Bible or from an electronic device rather than from printed notes except when paraphrasing certain verses. The chairman should conclude his comments by 7:35 a.m. at the latest. Then, he will call on the brother assigned to read the printed comments from Examining the Scriptures Daily. The chairman then reads announcements if there are any. (See 7:93.) The program continues with a brother assigned to read a scheduled segment from the Bible. On Wednesdays, a brother will present a five-minute Bethel Spiritual Gems instead of a reading. Periodically, a ten-minute department report or branch visit report will be presented after the Bethel Spiritual Gems. [See Chart 7.3.]
93. Selected greetings may be read once a week at the discretion of the Branch or Country committee. Greetings and table announcements should be approved by a member of the Branch Committee or by the Bethel Office. The chairman should make announcements regarding memorial services or judicial action just before his concluding prayer. The occasional use of visual aids that are dignified and instructional is acceptable at morning worship. If someone uses something inappropriate or outlandish, the Branch Committee should arrange for appropriate counsel to be given. (See 7:40.) This format for morning worship at Bethel should be followed at other sites outside of Bethel, such as remote translation offices. While this same general format can be followed at the various field schools, the brothers should be guided by the instructions provided in the School for Kingdom Evangelizers Instructor Guidelines (skeig). Please contact the Teaching Committee for any exceptions to this format.
94. Transmissions to Other Sites: Inasmuch as Morning Worship programs are designed for the spiritual benefit of members of the Bethel family and temporary volunteers at the branch, such programs should not be transmitted to outside locations other than as explained below. While local Morning Worship programs may be held at remote translation offices (RTOs) as long as sufficient qualified personnel are on hand, transmissions to and from the branch may also be arranged if such would not require a great expenditure. (See 8:104.) Where implemented, such a local arrangement should give all RTO personnel an opportunity to share in the program in a way similar to what is done at the branch. Please note that the program will usually originate from the branch, though on occasion program participants might be streamed (or prerecorded) from the RTO back to the branch. If a capable brother appointed as a Morning Worship chairman at the RTO would also qualify to conduct morning worship at the branch office, his morning worship may be streamed (or prerecorded) back to the branch if the cost is reasonable and the high standards for the program are maintained.
95. Those in special full-time service working remotely on construction projects, such as construction servants (BCS), expatriate construction servants (BCF), construction volunteers (BCV), and full-time construction commuters (BCL), may be tied in to the Bethel Morning Worship program up to four days each week. The Branch Committee may determine how many times a week those on a specific project will benefit from the Bethel program. During branch visits, all special full-time servants in these remote locations can benefit from the Bethel Morning Worship program during the entire visit. When a construction project is under way, each location should arrange for at least one local Morning Worship program each week. If there are also local volunteers working on the same project, they are permitted to enjoy the program along with those who are in special full-time service. If because of time-zone differences the program will be delay-streamed or a recording of the program is made, prayers should be said locally. Assembly Hall servants (BAS), Bethel remote servants (BRS), Bible school facility servants (BSS), and Local Design/​Construction field representatives may view the Bethel Morning Worship program each day, since there is no arrangement for a local Morning Worship program. While Assembly Hall servants (BAS) are permitted to view morning worship as outlined above, local volunteers should not be invited to join them for the program.
96. The Branch Committee has permission to determine on a case-by-case basis which Bethel family members traveling for extended periods on branch assignments may have remote access to the Bethel Morning Worship program. When members of the Translation Department travel to work with temporary translation teams, they may tie in to the branch Morning Worship program along with the temporary translation teams although members of the team may not be in special full-time service.
97. Visiting Morning Worship Chairman: A headquarters representative will preside over the program on the days that he is assigned to visit the branch. A brother visiting from another branch is not to be invited to serve as chairman for morning worship​—even if he is used in that capacity at his home branch—​unless he is a member of the Governing Body or an appointed helper to one of the Governing Body committees and serves as a Morning Worship chairman in the United States.
98. Additionally, a brother visiting a remote translation office under the oversight of his home branch may be asked to conduct morning worship only if (1) the branch has assigned him to make the visit, (2) he already serves as Morning Worship chairman at the branch, and (3) there are very few local brothers approved to conduct.
99. Recommendations of Morning Worship Chairmen: Recommendations of those who will serve as a chairman at a branch or at an RTO should be submitted on the most current Recommendations to Teaching Committee form. The details requested on this form should guide the Branch Committee and the Teaching Committee in evaluating who is qualified for this special privilege. Elders may be considered who have served in an exemplary way at Bethel for a number of years, who enjoy the respect of the Bethel family, who are viewed as solid spiritual men, and who are good teachers. Brothers serving as construction servants may be recommended if they are qualified. In addition, time spent in some form of special full-time service before coming to Bethel may be taken into account. Those recommended should be capable of giving good Scriptural encouragement to the Bethel family. There is no need to submit recommendations to the Teaching Committee for those who will preside over the Morning Worship program at local construction projects. The Branch Committee should use good judgment to appoint qualified brothers who will impart a spiritual gift to those serving on the projects.
100. Morning Worship Commenters: Brothers and sisters who are regular members of the family (BBR), as well as those serving as temporary Bethel family members (BBT), may be assigned to give a text comment upon completion of their first year of Bethel service. Construction servants (BCS), expatriate construction servants (BCF), full-time construction commuters (BCL), and construction volunteers (BCV) should be assigned to give comments at morning worship during their stay at the branch regardless of the length of time they have been assigned to serve at Bethel. Full-time commuters (BBL) may also be assigned as commenters during morning worship. Part-time commuters (BBV), on the other hand, may attend on the days they work at Bethel but would not usually be approved as commenters.
101. If the Branch or Country committee feels that an exception is warranted in the case of a potential Morning Worship commenter, the matter should be brought to the attention of the Teaching Committee for review. In smaller branches where commenters are not specifically assigned in advance, the Branch Committee can determine whether part-time commuters may participate.​—See 7:109.
102. After a sister has given her first text comment, she has the option of sending a note to the Bethel Office requesting to be exempted from a future Morning Worship assignment.
103. Opening Prayers: At larger branches, after serving at Bethel and as an elder for five years, a brother may be assigned to represent the family for the opening prayer at morning worship.
104. Readings and Bethel Spiritual Gems Assignments: Generally, Bethel speakers are used to read assigned portions of the Bible at morning worship, present the Bethel Spiritual Gems assignment, and read at the Bethel Family Watchtower Study. At times, a Branch Committee may decide that circumstances warrant using other qualified elders, those not yet appointed as Bethel speakers, for these assignments.
105. The Bethel Spiritual Gems assignment is based on the weekly Bible reading schedule for the Bethel family. It should feature outstanding principles in the account that build appreciation for Jehovah’s qualities and standards while imparting Bible understanding. The material should be applied to the Bethel family, where appropriate.
106. Text Reading: Ministerial servants who have served at Bethel for one year and who have passed a reading evaluation test may be assigned to read the daily text and the printed comments at morning worship.



BETHEL FAMILY SPIRITUAL PROGRAMS ON MONDAY EVENING

107. Bethel Family Watchtower Study: The weekly Watchtower Study is a customary feature of Bethel family life at all branches. Conductors are usually circuit assembly branch representatives. In smaller branches, Bethel speakers may also be assigned.
108. General Guidelines: It is especially important for those assigned as Bethel family Watchtower Study conductors to adhere closely to published direction, and these brothers should be encouraged to review such direction periodically. (ks10 2:24-25; w03 9/1 pp. 21-22) Elders who conduct the Watchtower Study in their congregations view the Bethel family Watchtower Study as a model to follow. The conductor should prepare thoroughly. He should not introduce additional material from his own personal research, as it could overshadow what has been published in the study article. Extensive research has already been done in producing the study material, and the points to be emphasized are those included in the paragraphs under consideration. He should not comment excessively. In some branches, the Watchtower Study starts at 6:15 p.m. with the conductor’s welcoming expressions and introduction to the opening song and prayer. The call for the concluding song and prayer is at 7:15 p.m. Therefore, the Bethel Watchtower Study is conducted within 55 minutes (including appropriate brief comments on the artwork and good use of the teaching boxes). This requires that the conductor apportion the time carefully so as to allow for balanced coverage of the material. The conductor should prepare well, maintain eye contact with the brothers as they offer their comments, and warmly commend the participants. Conductors are to be reminded of these points as needed. Readers for the Bethel family Watchtower Study should be chosen from among appointed Bethel speakers.
109. Watchtower Study Commenters: In larger families, about 15 to 20 brothers may be assigned to participate as commenters. Regular Bethel family members (BBR), temporary Bethel family members (BBT), construction servants (BCS), construction volunteers (BCV), full-time construction commuters (BCL), and full-time commuters (BBL) may be used for these assignments. Part-time commuters (BBV) may attend but would not usually be approved as commenters.​—See 4:49 and the exception in 7:100-101.
110. Watchtower Study Attendees: Those serving at the branch as regular Bethel family members (BBR), temporary Bethel family members (BBT), construction servants (BCS), expatriate construction servants (BCF), construction volunteers (BCV), full-time construction commuters (BCL), full-time commuters (BBL), and part-time commuters (BBV) as well as remote volunteers (BRV) and Bethel consultants (BOC) may attend the Bethel family Watchtower Study and other spiritual programs typically held on Monday evenings, provided that (1) such volunteers reside in close proximity to the main Bethel facility or a remote Bethel facility and (2) there is adequate space for such volunteers to join the Bethel family for the program. Believing marriage mates and well-behaved children still residing at home may join BRVs, BOCs, BBLs, and BBVs for the Bethel spiritual programs held on Monday evenings if there is adequate space for all such ones to attend. (This provision does not include attending morning worship at Bethel.) Each week, those in special full-time service working remotely on construction projects, such as construction servants (BCS), expatriate construction servants (BCF), construction volunteers (BCV), and full-time construction commuters (BCL), may be tied in to the Bethel family Watchtower Study and any additional spiritual program on that evening. Local volunteers working on the project who are not in special full-time service would not be invited to this program. If because of time-zone differences the program will be delay-streamed or a recording of the program is made, prayers should be said locally. Bible school facility servants (BSS), Bethel remote servants (BRS), and Assembly Hall servants (BAS) are also permitted to tie in to the Bethel family Watchtower Study under the same arrangements as outlined above for construction workers in special full-time service.
111. Bethel Family Lectures: These 45-minute lectures are designed for the Bethel family and are usually presented after the Bethel family Watchtower Study on Monday evening. The Branch Committee selects qualified Bethel speakers from those appointed as circuit assembly branch representatives. The outlines provided by the Teaching Committee are available on MDS.



SCHOOLS FOR THEOCRATIC TRAINING

112. Watchtower Bible School of Gilead: This 20-week course provides intensive training in Bible study and theocratic organization. Invitations to attend this school are issued by the Service Committee. The Teaching Committee is responsible for the curriculum.
113. School for Branch Committee Members and Their Wives: The Service Committee invites qualifying members of Branch and Country committees and their wives to this eight-week course in accord with current guidelines. (See 6:183.) The Teaching Committee is responsible for the curriculum.
114. School for Circuit Overseers and Their Wives (SCOTW): The Service Committee oversees the scheduling of SCOTW worldwide. Unless the Service Committee has granted an exception, this school is not to be held on branch property. If permission was given in the past to hold this school at the branch and it has not been verified that this is still acceptable, the Service Committee should be informed of the current circumstances and, if desired, the branch may request that this arrangement continue. However, any questions regarding the curriculum for this four-week course should be directed to the Teaching Committee. In the event that an exception has been granted and the school is held at the branch, arrangements should not be made for class introductions to the Bethel family. Instead, a general Morning Worship table announcement welcoming the new class as a whole can be made to the Bethel family at the beginning of the schooling period. If desired, a parting announcement could also be read to the Bethel family on the last day of class. None of the students should be assigned to give a report to the Bethel family. Additionally, only the brothers attending the SCOTW on branch property should be assigned to give a comment at morning worship. The Teaching Committee is responsible for the curriculum.
115. School for Kingdom Evangelizers (SKE): All reasonable efforts should be made to hold the SKE in the field. Exceptions have at times been made, but only when special circumstances have warranted them. In such cases, however, none of the students attending this school on branch premises would be invited to present reports to the Bethel family or to offer Morning Worship comments. Any questions regarding these matters should be addressed to the Teaching Committee. The branch Morning Worship program should not be streamed to SKE locations. The local Morning Worship program of SKE is viewed as part of the curriculum.
116. SKE Applicants: Qualified single brothers and sisters as well as couples between the ages of 23 and 65 who have been married for at least two years and have been in full-time service for at least the last two consecutive years may apply to attend this eight-week course. (Ps. 68:11) Any applicants between the ages of 50 and 65 must be able to provide for themselves and be in no need of financial or medical assistance from the organization. If enrolled in this school, they will continue to serve as regular pioneers wherever they are assigned by the organization but will not be invited to become members of the Worldwide Order of Special Full-Time Servants. Application forms and related material may be requested from the congregation secretary. Procedures for holding this course as well as for arranging graduations have been outlined in the School for Kingdom Evangelizers Instructor Guidelines (skeig) and the School for Kingdom Evangelizers Office Guidelines (skeog). While the Service Committee oversees the scheduling of these classes worldwide, any questions regarding the curriculum should be directed to the Teaching Committee.
117. SKE Graduations: When Kingdom Halls are not available for holding SKE graduations, a multipurpose room at an Assembly Hall may be used as long as its use does not interfere with any other scheduled event. If it is believed that circumstances warrant the use of the main auditorium of an Assembly Hall and such use would not interfere with a scheduled circuit assembly, the Branch Committee can make the decision without inquiring of the Teaching Committee. Attendance at these graduations should not exceed 350.
118. A Bethel representative may be assigned to serve an SKE graduation only when it is possible to care for his travel expenses in one of the following ways: (1) the graduation occurs on the same weekend as a circuit assembly served by the branch representative and the circuit covers the travel expenses; (2) brothers defray the travel expenses from private funds; (3) the Bethel representative uses his own funds to cover the travel expenses; (4) organization funds are used to cover expenses in conjunction with an official work assignment for the branch, such as visiting a remote translation office or missionaries near the graduation site. Where it is not possible to have a Bethel representative present, one of the regular class instructors will serve as chairman for the program, give the graduation talk, and hand out the graduation certificates.
119. In the event that a Bethel representative is present for the graduation, he might be able to conduct morning worship on Saturday from 7:45 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.; yet, it is up to him to decide if he can accept this responsibility, taking into account his other assignments that weekend​—especially if he is also the visiting speaker at a circuit assembly (CA-br).
120. After breakfast and perhaps commencing at 8:30 a.m., the Bethel representative might also be able to present an encouraging talk to the class on a theme of his choice. Or he may prefer to give this talk toward the end of the morning, perhaps commencing at about 11:40 a.m. If serving a circuit assembly (CA-br) on Saturday, he would need to give this discourse either before or after his first talk to the circuit. This Scripturally upbuilding talk may be up to 45 minutes in length.
121. On Sunday, the Bethel representative would ordinarily serve as chairman for the graduation program, although there may be times when it would be better to have the “A” instructor serve as chairman. In either case, the Bethel representative would present a 20-minute graduation discourse.
122. SKE School Instructors: The Teaching Committee appoints the instructors for the SKE, based on recommendations from Branch Committees. It is preferred that instructors be selected from circuit overseers who are above-average teachers. In order to help these ones qualify as instructors, the Branch Committee first appoints them as observers of a class of instruction. Branch Committee members and other Bethel family members should not be recommended as instructors; nor should they be selected to be observers. To appoint a new instructor, the Branch Committee must send its recommendation to the Teaching Committee. All circuit overseers who serve as field instructors will discontinue their assignment on August 31 of the service year that they reach 70 years of age. The brother and his wife, if married, may be transferred to serve as special pioneers. This should be done with sufficient advance notice so as not to impact any previously scheduled classes adversely. Additional instructors for the SCOTW would be selected from among the most qualified instructors of the SKE. Some who are over 70 years of age might still be qualified as instructors for the one-week School for Congregation Elders (SCE). Hence, if an SCE class is held near a brother’s assignment, he may be assigned to teach it on occasion.​—See 7:133-136.
123. Bethel Entrants’ School (BES): The Teaching Committee has prepared a series of lectures and classroom discussions designed to give new Bethelites and those with a design/​construction enrollment a spiritual outlook on their new form of service. Regular Bethel family members (BBR), temporary Bethel family members (BBT), expatriate Bethel family members (BBF), visiting members (BBB), full-time commuters (BBL), part-time commuters (BBV) who commute three or more days each week, construction servants (BCS), expatriate construction servants (BCF), full-time construction commuters (BCL), Assembly Hall servants (BAS), and Bible school facility servants (BSS), regardless of the site where they are serving, may be enrolled, provided that they are approved to serve for one year or longer and have not attended BES in the past ten years. If a special full-time servant is getting married to someone not in special full-time service and the couple are approved to remain in special full-time service, both would be enrolled in this course. If a marriage takes place between two individuals who have already attended BES, they would not be enrolled in the course or be required to complete the one-year Bible-reading program for new arrivals. This also applies to regular special full-time servants transferring from one branch to another.
124. BES Curriculum and Schedule: The 16-unit course should be covered during four weekday mornings, from 8:00 a.m. to 11:45 a.m. New arrivals should attend the school within their first month of special full-time service, preferably during the second week after the new member’s arrival or as soon as possible thereafter. This will allow new ones to receive necessary orientation during their first few weeks of special full-time service. There is no minimum number of students required to hold a class. Branches may use their discretion if they wish to delay a class for a week or two in order to form larger classes. Each student should receive a copy of the school schedule. All of the references to material that the students will need to prepare are cited on the school schedule. Each morning session will conclude with a 30-minute question-and-answer review of the Dwelling manual. The questions for these reviews are not supplied. At the discretion of the branch and based on local needs and circumstances, BES instructors may be provided with specific direction on topics in the Dwelling manual that the Branch Committee feels should be highlighted during each day’s review.
125. Before completing their first year at Bethel or in the field, new members are expected to read the entire Bible, from Genesis to Revelation. Depending on the location of each student’s assignment, either the LDC or the Bethel Office (along with the department elder groups) should monitor each student’s progress at specified times throughout the year. The branch office should maintain a record of when each new member completes his Bible reading. Many often express appreciation for this arrangement. BES students are required to read the entire Dwelling manual immediately after their arrival at Bethel, while those with a design/​construction enrollment should read the entire Continue to Put Your Heart Into the Work (cph) brochure or the Faithfully Maintaining Our Places of Worship (mtw) brochure.
126. BES Instructors: Two BES instructors should be selected by the Branch Committee to conduct the class over the period of four half days. The instructors should be selected from among high-quality teachers at Bethel who have a good rapport with the Bethel family. Although seniority may lend weight to a brother’s teaching, years of service should not be the primary factor. Select well-qualified teachers who are approachable. One substitute instructor should be selected to fill in as the need may arise. It is the Branch Committee’s responsibility to select the team of three well-qualified instructors (two primary instructors and one substitute instructor) for the BES. In some branches only one team of instructors will be necessary. In other branches, a few additional teams of instructors may be necessary and used on a rotational basis, depending on the number of new arrivals to Bethel. Selecting a relatively small group of brothers who can serve as BES instructors at various times each year will increase the effectiveness of the BES, since these elders will become well-acquainted with teaching the spiritually rich course material to new arrivals. Conducting the BES will not be a full-time work assignment. So instructors should have a primary Bethel work assignment. However, work time may be used to prepare for the class. The two instructors should divide the classroom sessions they are to teach. For the first four-day class of BES, the “A” instructor should teach the first and third sessions each day, and the “B” instructor should teach the second and fourth sessions each day. Also, the “A” instructor should conduct the review of the Dwelling manual on the first and third days, and the “B” instructor should do so on the second and fourth days. For each class that follows, the two instructors rotate teaching assignments.
127. New Member Lectures: New family members are also given five lectures related to Bethel life, work habits, health, study, dress and grooming, and other topics. Branch Committees may adjust these lectures as needed. These lectures are to be held following the Bethel family Watchtower Study over a period of five weeks or so. New members would generally attend the lectures after attending BES. Special full-time servants serving outside of Bethel should view recorded lectures during the week of BES. The Branch Committee should select those who will deliver the New Member Lectures from among high-quality teachers at Bethel who have a good rapport with the Bethel family. Additionally, elder groups may make use of the information presented in these lectures as a basis for future reminders or counsel, as needed. Recordings of these new member lectures may be useful in circumstances where it is not possible to schedule a live presentation.
128. Helping Brothers to Make Spiritual Progress at Bethel: The Branch Committee should provide progressive training to brothers, starting from the day they arrive at Bethel. Good training will enable a brother gradually to take on more responsibility at Bethel and to become a more valuable asset to Jehovah’s organization. While the advancement of individual brothers will differ according to each one’s abilities and local circumstances, the Branch Committee should take a keen interest in helping each brother to be used as fully as possible. Chart 7.4, “General Progression of Teaching Privileges for Bethel Brothers,” is provided to guide the Branch Committee when periodically reviewing brothers in the Bethel family and ensuring that no one is being overlooked for teaching privileges for which they may qualify. Of course, spiritual progress does not manifest itself only in the teaching privileges extended to a person but is expressed when that person demonstrates Christlike qualities and aspects of the fruitage of the spirit in his work habits and dealings with others.–Gal. 5:22, 23; 1 Pet. 2:21.
129. Pioneer Service School (PSS): This school provides training for regular pioneers and special full-time servants. These include regular Bethel family members (BBR), expatriate Bethelites (BBF), temporary Bethel family members (BBT), full-time commuters (BBL), construction servants (BCS), expatriate construction servants (BCF), full-time construction commuters (BCL), Assembly Hall servants (BAS), and Bible school facility servants (BSS). Special pioneers, field missionaries, and wives of circuit overseers who have served as such for at least a year may attend the school again. Field classes should be held at central locations, usually Kingdom Halls. Regular pioneers are invited to attend PSS toward the end of their first year of pioneering. Multiple invitations may be extended to one who is in the aforementioned forms of service as long as he or she has not attended in at least the last five years and classes are not full. There should generally be 20 to 25 students in a class. However, in branches with a sizable number of pioneers, consideration may be given to increasing the class size to as many as 50 students.
130. The curriculum for this school is based on the textbook “Fully Accomplish Your Ministry”​—2 Timothy 4:5. (pt14) Capable instructors, usually circuit overseers, will conduct the course. This course is designed to be covered in six days. However, if local circumstances require an adjustment, the Branch Committee should consult with the Teaching Committee about the matter. Students have the option of receiving an electronic or a printed copy of the textbook.
131. Since some special pioneers and others attending PSS may have to travel some distance, the school instructors may need to organize rooming accommodations. It may be that local publishers will be happy to provide temporary accommodations. Where possible, students will not be asked to come from too great a distance. The branch will care for the travel and food expenses of special pioneers and field missionaries attending the schools. Congregations may also wish to contribute in some measure. The local circuit will cover the circuit overseer’s expenses. (See S-330 2:5.) The organization does not wish anyone to be unduly burdened in financing a PSS. Instructors should inform the branch office of the needs at each school location.
132. The Service Committee oversees the preparation of the annual pioneer session that is held in conjunction with the circuit assembly (CA-br).
133. School for Congregation Elders (SCE): This one-week school is for the benefit of appointed elders. Its curriculum is posted on MDS. Circuit overseers and Branch Committee members are generally not invited to this school, since they attend either the School for Circuit Overseers and Their Wives or the School for Branch Committee Members and Their Wives. All other elders serving at Bethel and in the field should be invited. Bethelites will be granted time away from work so that they may attend. Also, a time credit may be given to elders serving as special pioneers equivalent to one quarter of their monthly hour requirement. Regular pioneers may receive a 20-hour credit.​—See 7:122.
134. It is preferred that a student attend the school to which he is assigned. Exceptions may be made if the Branch Committee feels that such are warranted. For example, if a brother requests permission to attend an SCE being conducted in a different language within the branch territory and the Branch Committee agrees that his request is reasonable, the brother may be authorized to do so. If a student wishes to attend a school in another land and there is a good reason for this exception, the two branch offices may work out the necessary details. The brother should be informed that he will be assigned to one SCE only and that he will be responsible to cover all travel expenses involved.
135. On occasion, someone in special full-time service may request permission to attend an SCE in a nearby country where a class is scheduled in his dominant/​preferred language. Such may be approved. The branch office may cover the brother’s travel expenses and all entry visa costs. In determining where the brother will attend the SCE, the branch office should select the country with the most economical round-trip travel fares. If expenses would be unusually high, the branch office should send its recommendation to the Teaching Committee for consideration. If the brother is married and he chooses to bring his wife along, the couple would be responsible for the wife’s travel expenses inasmuch as the husband’s attendance at the SCE is not a branch work assignment. The sister would also need to take personal time away for the extent of the trip.​—See 7:138; 9:88.
136. The Branch Committee selects SCE instructors from among experienced circuit overseers in the local territory, preferably those who serve as SKE instructors, if they are available.​—See 7:122.
137. Kingdom Ministry School (KMS): The curriculum for this program is prepared for appointed elders and, at times, ministerial servants. It is presented in the form of lectures, videos, demonstrations, interviews, and class discussions. Circuit overseers and, at times, Bethel representatives are assigned to conduct this school.
138. Because the Service Committee schedules KMS, it will answer any questions about those who qualify to attend. Elders in a given area will convene for the school over a one- or two-day period; when invited, ministerial servants will meet for one day. The school may be conducted on a weekend or on weekdays, depending on local circumstances. The entire body of elders of a congregation should attend at the same time. Requests for permission (as an exception) to attend elsewhere may be handled in harmony with the guidelines given in 7:134-135. The branch office may schedule school sessions in harmony with what is best locally, keeping in mind that all elders in the branch territory should attend the course in a comparatively short time, perhaps within three to five weeks. The branch should make arrangements for adequate facilities. Although Kingdom Halls are preferred, Assembly Halls may be used where practical.
139. The most recent KMS textbook is entitled “Shepherd the Flock of God”​—1 Peter 5:2. (ks10) Refresher courses may be offered periodically, using other suitable material provided by the Teaching Committee. In countries under ban or serious restrictions, Branch Committees may supply congregations with at least one copy of the current textbook to be kept in a safe place for the local elders to use and study on their own. When the circuit overseer visits, he can help the elders by teaching them from the material they already have on hand.
140. Literacy Classes: The Branch Committee should inform congregations of the provision for learning how to read and write, and they should make definite arrangements for assisting those needing help. In multilingual societies, the best results usually come from teaching people to read and write the primary language spoken at home and in the community where they live. Classes may be held using the brochure Apply Yourself to Reading and Writing.
141. Different options are available for organizing literacy classes. Each body of elders should carefully survey the needs of any associated with their congregation and then make arrangements as needed. Material from the weekly Bible reading or from a publication such as My Book of Bible Stories may be used for these classes.
142. Oftentimes, classes are held in conjunction with the Life and Ministry Meeting. When this is done, the class would be held in a separate room in the Kingdom Hall during the student assignments. The Kingdom Hall could also be used at other times during the week, as long as the arrangements would not conflict with another congregation’s meeting. Those needing additional help may be tutored on a personal basis. Keep in mind, however, that it would be ill-advised for two individuals of the opposite sex to meet alone unless they are close relatives.
143. Foreign-Language Classes: For details regarding this provision, see 6:78.



AUDIO AND VIDEO PRODUCTION

144. The Teaching Committee oversees the work of Audio/​Video Services (AVS) at world headquarters. Approval should be obtained from the Teaching Committee before producing any local branch video, with the exception of simple training videos that follow the published guidelines. (See 7:150.) Unless a branch is approved by the Teaching Committee to host a regional video team, branches should not purchase equipment or maintain full-time personnel for video projects. When approval is given for an occasional video project, local brothers often have the personal equipment and skills that can be used for this purpose.
145. Audio publications include magazines, books, brochures, articles for the website, dramatic Bible readings, and song recordings. The Teaching Committee oversees the recording and distribution of English audio publications, whereas the Writing Committee oversees the translation and vernacular audio recordings. Thus, new requests to translate and record an audio publication should be addressed to the Writing Committee.
146. Video publications include videos for jw.org, JW Broadcasting, conventions, and midweek meetings. The Teaching Committee oversees the recording and distribution of English video publications. The Writing Committee oversees translation and vernacular audio recording for videos. The production of sign-language video publications is overseen by the Writing Committee. New requests for approval to translate a video publication into a vernacular language should be addressed to the Writing Committee, since they are responsible for the work of Translation Departments. Furthermore, videos are now included as a part of regional convention programs. Since these videos are categorized as convention materials, they can be translated without asking for additional approvals if a branch has the personnel and resources to produce these materials without neglecting other priority translation projects.
147. Regional Video Teams (RVTs): Under the direction of the Teaching Committee, AVS supervises and assigns the work of approved RVTs. A branch should not assign work to the RVT, use team equipment or personnel, or make personnel adjustments to these teams without approval from the Teaching Committee.
148. Audio and Video on JW.ORG: After a Web page is created for a publication under the direction of the Writing Committee, AVS is responsible for uploading audio and video publication files in English, while translating branches upload files on a vernacular page in the target language.
149. Branch Tour Videos: Branches desiring to produce an on-site tour video for visitors should request approval from the Teaching Committee. These videos should not describe the history of the work in the country but should show what currently transpires at the branch in support of the preaching work. A branch tour video should last ten minutes or less. When submitting a new proposal, please keep the following in mind:
            New audio or video equipment should not be purchased for this purpose. If none is available at the branch, it may be possible to use the equipment and expertise of a local brother.

            Please send the Teaching Committee a narrative script in English and a description of the proposed visuals for review and approval before recording.

            If prerecorded music will be included, the orchestral music produced by our organization is often used. For any original music donated for such a project, the branch should obtain a signed release from the owner.


150. Training Videos: The Teaching Committee provides the following guidelines for producing simple departmental training videos. Each Branch Committee should ensure that any departments producing such videos adhere closely to these guidelines.
a.Consider whether producing a training video is really necessary. Training information may be conveyed more effectively by another means, such as in a document or PowerPoint presentation. In other cases, another department may already have a training video that can be reused, or there may be a commercially-available training video that will meet the needs of your department.

b.Plan carefully beforehand. Determine the scope and duration of what is needed beforehand. Do not begin production without a clear scope of the work in mind.

c.Keep the production work as simple as possible. It may be possible to produce an effective training video simply by recording a skilled worker performing a task and explaining each step in the process. Screen-capture software can be used to create a video of work being performed on a computer. Although your finished training video may later be helpful to other departments, it should not be produced with the intention of distributing outside your department. If there is a need for a training video that would be distributed outside your department, a clear scope of the work should be conveyed in an Audio/​Video Services Project Request Form to the Teaching Committee. Audio/​Video Services Dispatch will assist you with filling out the form.

d.Limit the number of people working on and participating in a training video. Reenactments or other video segments involving large numbers of cast or crew should be avoided. At maximum, one person from outside of Bethel may be invited for less than three months each year to assist with the production of training videos for departments. A crew should not be formed to provide lighting, makeup, grips, or specialized audio. If it is felt that more personnel will be needed, provide an explanation and a clear scope of the work to the Teaching Committee.

e.Set a reasonable expectation of quality. The purpose of a training video is simply to convey information, not to impress or entertain. Elaborate props or camera, lighting, and sound equipment are not needed. Video should be captured in an economical format (for example, codec and resolution) that will not require excessive storage space. Many phones and tablets can capture video and audio of acceptable quality for training purposes.

f.Keep the postproduction work as simple as possible. Avoid the use of complex 3-D animations or visual effects that are time-consuming to produce. Avoid background music simply to make the video more entertaining. If music is needed, you may use orchestral music produced by our organization or royalty-free stock music instead of commissioning original compositions.


151. Suggestions for Video Programs: A branch may receive suggestions from the field or from within Bethel for a video program. For example, there may be an exemplary publisher whose experience could be presented in a video interview or there may be a unique special event such as a convention or preaching campaign taking place in your branch territory. Before initiating any such video productions, the Branch Committee should write to the Teaching Committee and provide a one-page treatment describing the proposed video. The treatment should provide a clear explanation of the theme, Scriptural teaching points, story development, and target audience of the proposed video. If approved, the Teaching Committee will forward the treatment to AVS for scheduling. The production of the video will not necessarily be assigned to the branch that submitted the idea.



RADIO AND TV PROGRAMS

152. Questions concerning such programs may be sent to the Teaching Committee.
153. Periodically, all branches receive an updated listing of approved videos with guidelines on how to use them.
154. Approved programs should be shown unedited and without interruption except for station identification. No editing of any sort should be done without prior authorization from the Teaching Committee. None of the approved programs should be shown for commercial purposes. Permission will be granted to show our programs only in public service, educational, or noncommercial venues. They should not be shown in a context that could make it appear that we endorse any political or interfaith movement, hospital, or group.
155. The above guidelines should be provided to the broadcasting station for compliance every time one of the approved programs is to be aired. All branches have been sent a formatted sample of these guidelines for use as intended.



WHQ BROADCASTING DEPARTMENT

156. The Teaching Committee oversees the work of the WHQ Broadcasting Department, which does the following:
a.Establishes standards for broadcasting audio/​video (A/​V) equipment at world headquarters, branch-owned facilities, Assembly Halls, Kingdom Halls, and conventions. It works closely with Branch Committees and those involved in the design and construction process to ensure that the A/​V equipment recommended by the Broadcasting Department is installed safely and is appropriate for the venue in which the equipment is installed.

b.Answers questions submitted by branches regarding the specification, installation, and operation of A/​V equipment.

c.Recommends and coordinates the acquisition, rental, or loan of broadcasting A/​V equipment for conventions and other branch-sponsored events. It provides this service to facilitate the sharing of equipment and to conserve dedicated funds.

d.Develops, maintains, and oversees the JW Stream website, accessible at https://​stream.jw.org. This site provides small foreign-language congregations, groups, and pregroups with video recordings of conventions, assemblies, and congregation meetings. Branches can also use this site to stream Bethel-sponsored programs.

e.Assists branches with technical issues involving video streaming.

f.Develops, maintains, and oversees software development of the Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) system. IPTV provides live and recorded programming from the Bethel video system and JW Broadcasting. While each Christian is responsible to exercise good judgment and train his powers of discernment, the Branch Committee should periodically review the content of material that is being provided on IPTV out of regard for the overall spiritual welfare of the Bethel family and visitors. The Branch Committee should inform the WHQ Broadcasting Department when adding commercial channels to the IPTV system.

g.Coordinates and schedules satellite broadcasting content worldwide. Satellite broadcasting is used in countries with limited access to the Internet for transmitting recorded programs from JW Broadcasting and live programs, such as branch visits and special conventions.

h.Records and distributes WHQ department meetings via JW Stream or jw.org event media.





REGIONAL BROADCASTING DEPARTMENT​—EUROPE

157. The Regional Broadcasting Department​—Europe (RBD-E), hosted by the Central Europe branch, operates as an extension of the WHQ Broadcasting Department. This department:
a.Implements the standards set by the WHQ Broadcasting Department for broadcasting audio/​video (A/​V) equipment at branch-owned facilities, Assembly Halls, Kingdom Halls, and conventions in Europe. It works closely with Branch Committees and those involved in the design and construction process to ensure that the A/​V equipment recommended is installed safely and is appropriate for the venue in which the equipment is installed.

b.Answers questions submitted by branches in that region regarding the specification, installation, and operation of A/​V equipment.

c.Recommends and coordinates the acquisition, rental, or loan of broadcasting A/​V equipment for conventions and other branch-sponsored events in that region. The RBD-E provides this service to facilitate the sharing of equipment and to conserve dedicated funds. At times, the RBD-E may ask branches to adjust convention dates.

d.Assists branches in its region with first-level support for technical issues involving video streaming.

e.Reviews and approves the A/​V designs for each convention that it will route equipment to. The Local Broadcasting Department in each European branch submits these designs in harmony with the standards outlined by the Teaching Committee.​—See 7:158.





LOCAL BROADCASTING DEPARTMENT

158. The Branch Committee may decide to form a Local Broadcasting Department if the workload warrants it. Smaller branches may not need to form such a department if they have brothers trained to care for this work on a part-time basis. This department:
a.Implements the standards set by the WHQ Broadcasting Department for broadcasting A/​V equipment at branch-owned facilities, Assembly Halls, Kingdom Halls, and conventions in the branch territory. It works closely with those involved in the design and construction process to ensure that the A/​V equipment recommended is installed safely and is appropriate for the venue in which the equipment is installed.

b.Recommends and coordinates the acquisition, rental, or loan of broadcasting A/​V equipment for conventions and other branch-sponsored events in its branch territory, unless the region is served by RBD-E.

c.Creates an A/​V design for each convention venue in its branch territory, adhering to the standards outlined by the Teaching Committee.

d.Provides training, oversight, and coordination of the technical support personnel for spiritual programs originating at the branch. These programs include morning worship, Bethel family Watchtower Study, along with other spiritual and department meetings.

e.Designs, installs, and maintains the A/​V equipment used for conference rooms, tour displays, and classrooms at the branch.

f.Maintains and oversees any cable television system and Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) system in the branch.





JW BROADCASTING (JWB)

159. Programming: JW Broadcasting content is overseen by Audio/​Video Services, under the direction of the Teaching Committee. However, the studio, its maintenance, and control is the responsibility of the WHQ Broadcasting Department, under the direction of the Teaching Committee.



WHQ TRAVEL DEPARTMENT

160. The Teaching Committee oversees the work of the WHQ Travel Department, which involves the following areas of responsibility: (1) researching and securing air travel for headquarters personnel caring for their organizational assignments and (2) researching and securing air travel for those in foreign service who are eligible to be funded to an international convention of their choice.



HOTEL REWARD POINTS AND VENUE COST ANALYSIS

161. The Teaching Committee Office also provides assistance to branches in the following ways: (1) overseeing the collection and management of accrued hotel reward points and (2) reviewing convention venue rental expenses and assisting with hotel negotiations and usage.



CHART 7.1





CHART 7.2
Sample Programs
Special Meeting to Release the New World Translation
10 min: Opening song and prayer. The chairman follows with a warm welcome to the audience and a few encouraging comments
30 min: Watchtower Study summary. (To be included when the event is held on a Sunday or when a program held on Saturday will need to be video streamed also on Sunday and regular congregation meetings in the target language will not be held that weekend)
15 min: As an optional feature, the 15-minute video presentation Entrusted With Translating “The Sacred Pronouncements of God”​—Romans 3:2, if translated in advance
10 min: Group interview of two or three local publishers who remember the original release of the New World Translation in the local language
25 min: Release talk by a Governing Body or a Branch Committee member, based on the outline entitled “A Spiritual Milestone!” (bi-12)
 5 min: Song
10 min: After inviting the audience to be reseated, the chairman announces that the new Bible will be distributed at this time
15 min: Talk by a Branch Committee member, based on an outline provided by the Teaching Committee, entitled “Translating God’s Word Accurately”
15 min: Talk by a Branch Committee member, based on an outline provided by the Teaching Committee, entitled “‘Handling the Word of the Truth Aright’​—2 Timothy 2:15”
40 min: Talk by a Governing Body or a Branch Committee member on a topic of his choice
 5 min: Brief closing comments by the chairman, followed by song and prayer
Branch Dedication​—Saturday
10 min: Opening song and prayer
20 min: History of work in the country. (Includes group interview of two or three longtime missionaries if available)
30-40 min: Construction project and experiences. (May include interviews with key workers)
20 min: Reports from other branches. (If available)
15 min: Song, announcements, and greetings
45-60 min: Dedication talk. (If interpreted, additional time may be needed)
10 min: Closing song and prayer
Branch and Assembly Hall Dedications​—Sunday (Governing Body Member Present)
10 min: Opening song and prayer, followed by a few encouraging comments by the chairman
30 min: Watchtower Study summary
20 min: Review of the dedication program
30 min: Reports from other branches (if available) and/​or a report presented by a Branch Committee member about the work in the branch territory
10 min: Song and any needed announcements
60 min: Talk by the Governing Body member. (When interpreted, this service talk could take 90 minutes or more)
 5 min: Closing song and prayer
Kingdom Hall, RTO, and Assembly Hall Dedications​—Saturday
10 min: Opening song and prayer
20 min: History of work in the local area. (Includes group interview of two or three longtime Witnesses if available)
30-40 min: Construction project and experiences. (May include interviews with key workers)
10 min: Song, announcements, and greetings
45-60 min: Dedication talk. (If interpreted, additional time may be needed)
10 min: Closing song and prayer
School for Kingdom Evangelizers​—Graduation-Day Program
10 min: Opening song no. 111a and prayer
10 min: Opening remarks by chairman
10 min: Local elder (or observer) interviews four students regarding how they have benefited from the course
30 min: Watchtower Study summary (Students of the class will be assigned specific paragraphs and then answer the corresponding questions asked by the conductor)
15 min: Local elder (or observer) interviews students on experiences they have had in connection with their field activity during the school
10 min: Song no. 124b and chairman reads any greetings received
15 min: Local elder (or observer) interviews students regarding adjustments made to attend school
10 min: Talk by Instructor A
10 min: Talk by Instructor B
20 min: Talk by chairman
10 min: Presentation of certificates by chairman
 5 min: Class letter read by designated student
 5 min: Concluding comments by chairman
 5 min: Closing song no. 65c and prayer by chairman
[Footnotes]
“Sing Out Joyfully” to Jehovah songbook
“Sing Out Joyfully” to Jehovah songbook
“Sing Out Joyfully” to Jehovah songbook
CHART 7.3
Typical Morning Worship Format
7:00 a.m.: Brief welcome by chairman and a prayer of less than one minute
7:01 a.m.: Breakfast (in dining room or occupant rooms)
7:20 a.m.: Scripture text is read
7:21 a.m.: Chairman introduces fourd individuals for a comment of one minute or less (5 min.)
7:26 a.m.: Chairman’s comments (8-9 min.)
7:35 a.m.: Reading of Watchtower comments followed by announcements (if any) by the chairman
7:37 a.m.: Bible reading (6-7 min.)
Wednesdays​—Bethel Spiritual Gems (5 min.)
7:43 a.m.: Concluding prayer
(7:42 a.m. on Wednesdays unless there is a report or a special announcement)
Branches with few family members may choose to have two comments of two minutes each.

CHART 7.4
General Progression of Teaching Privileges for Bethel Brothers
Privilege

Qualifications

Reference


Commenter at the Bethel family Watchtower Study

In larger families, about 15-20 brothers (BBR, BBT, BCS, BCV, BCL, BBL)

bo 7:109


Text commenter at morning worship

BBR, BBT, BBL: On completion of first year of Bethel service
BCS, BCF, BCL, BCV: Regardless of the length of time of assignment to serve at Bethel

bo 7:100-101


Reader of the daily text and printed comments at morning worship

Ministerial servants who have served at Bethel for one year and who have passed a reading evaluation test

bo 7:106


Offer opening prayer at morning worship

At larger branches, after serving at Bethel and as an elder for five years

bo 7:103


Regional convention speaker

Elders who have a speaker rating of C+ or higher

bo 7:80


Bethel speaker, receiving weekend speaking assignments to give a service talk and a public talk in congregations

Elders (BBR) who have been on a regional convention program for two years, (1) whose speaker rating is B or higher, (2) who have served at Bethel for a minimum of three years, (3) who have a reputation worthy of representing Bethel, and (4) who are able to hold an audience’s attention and can give an effective one-hour service talk
Brothers called to Bethel from the circuit work, on completing Bethel Entrants’ School

bo 7:81-82, 84


Bible reader at morning worship; Bethel Spiritual Gems assignments; Bethel family Watchtower Study reader

Generally, Bethel speakers

bo 7:104


Circuit assembly branch representative (CA-br)

Better-qualified and highest-rated Bethel speakers; exemplary in their conduct and public speaking; at larger branches, after serving at Bethel for many years

bo 7:89


Conductor of the Bethel family Watchtower Study

Usually, circuit assembly branch representatives; at smaller branches, Bethel speakers may also be assigned

bo 7:107


Bethel Entrants’ School instructor and new member lecture speaker

High-quality teachers at Bethel who have a good rapport with the Bethel family and who are approachable

bo 7:126-127


Presents a Bethel family lecture

Qualified Bethel speakers who are circuit assembly branch representatives

bo 7:111


Morning Worship chairman

Elders who have served in an exemplary way at Bethel for a number of years, who enjoy the respect of the Bethel family, who are viewed as spiritual men, and who are good teachers, capable of giving good Scriptural encouragement to the Bethel family

bo 7:99




