
CHAPTER 8
Writing Committee



Web Publishing

1. The Web Publishing Department maintains the organization’s websites. It works with departments at world headquarters and in the branches to develop Web content in many languages. This material includes answers to Bible questions raised by the public, information about our headquarters and branches, and news releases about events involving Jehovah’s Witnesses. Selected publications can be read online or downloaded in various digital, audio, and video formats.



Writing Archives

2. Writing Archives is a work group within the Writing Department that is responsible for gathering, cataloging, and preserving material related to our theocratic history. Archival records and artifacts come from branches, congregations, individuals, and secular institutions. The Archives collection includes publications, clippings, documents, photographs, audiovisual recordings, and other items of historical value. Detailed life histories of longtime servants of Jehovah are also kept on file. Over time, such material is being digitized in order to provide electronic access and avoid damage to the original items. Archival research is used in preparing material for publication, display, and other educational purposes.
3. Many branches have assembled similar items during the preparation of Yearbook accounts and for other projects. The Writing Committee is interested in the preservation of such material, either at individual branches or at world headquarters. Consideration should be given to the proper organization and storage of such items, thus increasing their value for future research and publication. Such archival work should not be cared for by the Writing Desk. It may be assigned to another Bethel department, such as the Bethel Office.



Writing Articles for The Watchtower, Awake!, and the Website




WRITING DESKS

4. The Governing Body has approved the setting up of Writing Desks in a number of branch offices. This arrangement has these objectives: (1) publish articles that reflect an understanding of local cultures found in various parts of the earth, and (2) distribute the writing workload.
5. A Writing Desk should consist of an overseer, one or two writers, and a secretary. The work of all Writing Desks comes under the oversight of the Writing Department at world headquarters. The Branch Committee can decide whether additional staff is needed to handle replies to inquiries received from the field that deal with Scriptural doctrine and our published material. Brothers who handle such correspondence, whether assigned to a Writing Desk, the Service Department, or another department, may be granted access to the Writing Desk research library. (See letter dated HWC:EB October 31, 2014, No. C-33138W.) Branch Committees need to obtain approval from the Writing Committee before either adding or reassigning permanent writers whose main work is to handle writing assignments for our publications. If a permanent writer is invited to attend Gilead School, please inform the Writing Committee.
6. The Writing Desk overseer is expected to work closely with the Writing Department at world headquarters. He is to supply copy to the Writing Department according to the schedule and instructions received from the Writing Department. If the Writing Desk overseer wants to contact other branches to request information not available locally, he will first ask the Writing Department which branches are available to handle such requests. After that, he should send copies of such correspondence to the Writing Department.
7. Before articles are written, preview outlines should be submitted for approval with a cover memorandum. A Preview Outline form can be found on MDS in the “Other Materials” section. The Writing Desk overseer and a Branch Committee member should be convinced that an outline is satisfactory before submitting it. When a writing assignment is made, the length of the article is specified. Suggestions may also be made as to what the article may include. The writer may make limited changes in the outline as he works on the article.
8. The Writers’ Workshop is the principal means by which individuals are identified and approved to write for our publications. When a Writers’ Workshop is scheduled to be held at a branch, the Writing Committee may invite that branch to supply names of individuals living in the branch territory who may have potential as writers. Writers from other branches may also be enrolled. It will then be determined by the Writing Committee who will be invited to attend the class. Those recommended as potential writers should have writing ability and must be baptized, spiritually mature, and in good standing. They should be balanced, exemplary, modest, and not inclined to talk freely about their writing activity. In most cases, writers should be elders. Anyone assigned to write an article should be given a copy of Writing for Our Publications (A-41). Although it is not required that the writer read the English Standards Manual, he will likely find it beneficial to become familiar with some of its content. The Writing Desk overseer should be well-acquainted with it and should apply its standards to copy that is submitted to the Writing Department.



PREPARING MATERIAL

9. All writers should be conscious of the target audience for the publication for which they are writing:



Awake!

Readers of Awake! typically have little or no knowledge of the Bible. They may know nothing about Christian teachings, they may be somewhat distrustful of religion, or they may be unaware that the Bible has practical value. A primary objective of Awake! is to convince its audience that God exists. This journal also aims to help the reader to build faith in the Bible and to understand that Jehovah’s Witnesses are different from other religious groups.



The Watchtower​—Public Edition

This journal focuses more on spiritual matters because its target audience may have a measure of respect for God and for the Bible. They have some knowledge of the Bible but do not accurately understand its teachings. Many readers of the public edition are not familiar with Witness terms and concepts. If such are used in articles, they should be explained.



The Watchtower​—Study Edition

This edition is written primarily for Jehovah’s Witnesses as well as for those who attend our meetings, are familiar with the Scriptures, and understand Witness terms and concepts.



The JW.ORG Website

10. Since many people who visit jw.org are non-Witnesses, Witness terms and concepts should be either avoided or explained. Each branch without a Writing Desk, along with the countries it oversees, is assigned by the Writing Department to a particular Writing Desk. At times, with the Writing Department’s direction, a Writing Desk may contact these branches in order to identify stories that could be used as a basis for an article in the ABOUT US > ACTIVITIES section of the website. Articles in this section typically cover newsworthy events or experiences with the objective of helping the reader learn about the fine works of Jehovah’s Witnesses around the world.
11. Remain alert to what is happening in the branch territory. When an event occurs that would be of interest to our readers (for example, if a natural disaster strikes), please forward this information promptly to the appropriate Writing Desk. The Writing Desk will then review the information to determine if it is suitable for the ABOUT US > ACTIVITIES section. If it is, the Writing Desk will prepare an outline of the proposed article and submit it to the Writing Department.
12. Time to do the work of writing varies. Those not in full-time service can do their writing in the time they have available. The Writing Desk overseer and anyone who may be working with him full-time are expected to do such work during working hours. Other Bethel family members assigned to write articles may be asked whether they can do so on their own time or will need to use some work time. Evenings or weekends may be used for this work, but no one should be discouraged from asking permission to use some work time for such an important assignment. The Branch Committee can grant a Bethelite, a missionary, a special pioneer, or a regular pioneer a time allowance for writing. Some writing assignments may not require much time, whereas more time may be needed for others. It is best for a missionary or a special pioneer to care for a writing assignment within a single calendar month.
13. Field service experiences that are outstanding may be sent to the Writing Committee for possible use. At times, the Writing Department may request that your branch submit a life story. Be sure that a worthwhile point is made by either the experience or the life story. Regarding the qualifications of those featured in life stories, see Writing for Our Publications (A-41), paragraph 17.



DOCUMENTING ARTICLES

14. Throughout an article, place reference numbers in brackets after quotations and facts requiring documentation. Attach separate reference pages listing the sources after the corresponding numbers. Mnemonics should be used to identify Watch Tower publications. This information is useful in many ways, and having it may even determine whether an article is published. For details and a sample reference page, see Writing for Our Publications (A-41). For articles containing quotations from newspapers, magazines, books, or sources other than the New World Translation, send electronic copies, with English translations if needed. Keep the originals for translation work or other use. If a certain quotation appeared previously in our literature, state where it was used.
15. An article must be accurate in every detail, and that responsibility rests chiefly with the writer. When the Branch Committee coordinator, another Branch Committee member, or the Writing Desk overseer reads the article and sees something that raises a question, that point should be checked with the writer or looked up to make sure it is correct. If it is wrong, delete it or make a correction. Clarify ambiguous statements.



SUBMITTING ARTICLES

16. Before submitting an article to the Writing Department, the Writing Desk overseer should read the article very carefully and evaluate it in the light of what is said in Writing for Our Publications (A-41). The article should be worthy of publication. Also have in mind the possible effect of the article on people living in the local territory. Sometimes it is best not to say certain things, even though they are true. Do not submit material for publication that might cause difficulty for our brothers locally or elsewhere. Many things can be written that will not hurt our work and may even engender goodwill. The truth should be presented, of course, but in a tactful way.
17. If possible, send photographs with an article, as these help the Art Department to prepare good illustrations. Photographs should be accompanied by signed releases, as explained in Writing for Our Publications (A-41), paragraph 58. If you learn that a model in a photograph that you supplied has become disqualified, please follow the guidelines provided in the letter dated HWC:HWG September 28, 2017, No. C-54749W.
18. Articles and related materials should be submitted electronically via the Materials Distribution System (MDS) by accessing “Transfers” under the “Writing Transfer” section. Detailed submission guidelines are available on MDS. If electronic submission via MDS is not possible, articles and related materials may be submitted with a covering numbered letter via branch mail.
19. Every article sent to the Writing Department should be dated and must bear the names of the branch and the writer and the names or signatures of the Writing Desk overseer and the Branch Committee member who reviewed it to indicate that the article is approved for publication.



Translation Responsibilities




OVERVIEW

20. While the Writing Committee oversees the translation of our publications worldwide, the Branch Committee oversees the translation work that has been assigned to its branch.
Note: Bracketed references can be found at the end of this chapter. [See List 8.1.]



DECIDING WHAT TO TRANSLATE

21. In addition to publications that will be printed or posted on jw.org, the Branch Committee supervises the production of audio and video material and publications for the deaf and the blind. The committee also coordinates the translation of materials for our website and for JW Broadcasting.



Starting Translation Into a New Language

22. The Branch Committee regularly reviews the spiritual needs of every language group under its care. The Service Department is responsible for determining what publications are really needed and which priority list (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, or H) best fits the situation of each language in the branch territory. [See Chart 8.1.] The findings are presented to the Branch Committee. [1]
23. In consultation with the Service Department, the Translation Department recommends potential translators to the Branch Committee, which then approves those who qualify. The candidates should (1) be baptized, (2) know the target language very well​—perhaps as their mother tongue—​and (3) be available for some weeks to receive training and to translate their first publications. They may come from varying backgrounds (male, female, older, younger, single, married, and so forth).​—See 7:44.
24. The Branch Committee requests permission from the Writing Committee to translate some of the publications specified on the priority list. It is essential to include the completed New Language Translation Request form. (The form is available on the Publication Processing Documentation (PPD) site, under TRANSLATION > TRANSLATION AND LANGUAGE OVERSEERS > GENERAL.) Be sure to specify the format(s) being recommended for the publications and which priority list applies to that language.
25. All new translation teams must receive training before beginning translation. Therefore, specify whom you recommend to provide the training. This will usually be an experienced translator who can teach the translation techniques course. If you do not have someone qualified to do this, please request assistance from the Writing Committee.
26. Once permission is granted, arrange for training to be given where the translators are located, so that they do not need to travel far. Where possible, train more than three candidates in order to have enough translators to choose from for future projects. Provide equipment and accommodations for the trainer. The trainer teaches the candidates basic translation techniques and works closely with them as they translate their first publications.
27. The translated publications are reviewed by a panel of native speakers to ensure natural language. (See 8:53c.) The translation is corrected and proofread, and the project team gives the translated publications a final check. The publications are composed or, in the case of audio publications, recorded. When the project is completed, the temporary translators return to their previous assignments and the Service Department provides direction on how the publications are to be used in the field and monitors how they are received. [2]



Requesting Publications in a Language That Has a Temporary Team

28. When the Branch Committee requests additional publications in a language that has a temporary team, the request should be accompanied by a report as outlined by instructions from the Service Committee. (See 6:149-152.) There is no need to request permission from the Writing Committee to translate public talk outlines and material for assemblies and conventions. Videos that are part of the annual convention materials or that are for JW Broadcasting may be translated into any language if you have adequate personnel and resources to handle the work without neglecting other priority translation projects. However, if you have begun translating these items in a language for the first time, please inform the Writing Committee. Study questions and videos for the midweek meeting may also be translated by temporary teams. [3]



Requesting Publications in a Language That Has a Permanent Team

29. Before making recommendations to the Writing Committee,
a.Consult the document Priority List Guidelines, which is available on the PPD site. [See Chart 8.1.] Written languages and sign languages have separate priority lists. The Writing Committee regularly informs all branches of new publications under development, provides contents listings, and explains the purpose of each publication.

b.Consult with the Service Department to determine which publications should be translated.

c.Check with the respective language overseer(s) to determine whether the translation team would be able to translate additional publications. [4]

d.For dated publications, specify the edition and the format in which it will be produced and the date of the first issue.


Once you have started translating dated and recurring publications (Examining the Scriptures, Research Guide, Watch Tower Publications Index, assembly and convention outlines, and drama scripts) make sure that these are being produced on time before requesting additional publications.
30. The Translation Department translates only publications used for field service, meetings, assemblies, and conventions, as well as materials for JW Broadcasting. Materials needed by Legal, Construction, Maintenance, Hospital Information Services, Correspondence, and the Service Department are translated by individuals in those departments or by part-time volunteers.​—See 6:160. [5]
31. These volunteers, who are not part of the Translation Department, may have access to the section of the Watchtower Translation System (WTS) that deals with general translation. They are welcome to attend weekly team meetings of the Translation Department in order to stay up-to-date with the latest translation techniques and guidelines.
32. Sign-Language Translation: When starting translation into a sign language, a procedure is followed similar to that for spoken languages. The Writing Committee provides a separate priority list for sign languages and arranges for training when permission is given for the first publication in a sign language. Sign-language video production in each branch falls under the oversight of the Translation Department. MEPS Programming has been assigned to coordinate training for those who record and edit videos. [6]



Special Publications

33. Bible: Translating the New World Translation involves years of work. Languages approved to translate the Bible are allowed to have additional project teams, a secretary, and an elder to serve as the translation coordinator for the duration of the Bible project. The Branch Committee usually recommends the most qualified translators for Bible translation teams, made up of both brothers and sisters. It is permissible to use younger translators if they are well-qualified. [7] If you do not have enough qualified translators to translate the Bible and at the same time keep up with the approved publications, it may be necessary to produce fewer public magazines or to delay the release of other publications in order to complete Bible translation first. When the Writing Committee gives permission to translate the Bible, it arranges for initial and periodic training of the Bible translators by Writing Committee representatives. Branch Committees may request additional training when needed. Special consideration is given to add temporary teams for languages that work on the Study Edition of the Bible and/​or Insight on the Scriptures. [8]
34. Selecting Magazine Issues: The Branch Committee decides which issues of the public edition of The Watchtower and/​or Awake! will be published. Inform your printing branch what issues will be produced. [9]
35. Braille Publications: Braille publications can be transcribed using WTS. We make Braille publications available in any language in which we have printed publications, even if there are only a few blind individuals.
36. A branch desiring to transcribe publications into Braille should first request approval from the Writing Committee. The approval will be followed up with direction on how to proceed.
            While there is no priority list for Braille publications, it is best to begin with a small undated item, such as a tract or a brochure.

            Publications that can be transcribed into Braille generally include tracts, brochures, books, the New World Translation, The Watchtower, Awake!, and the Life and Ministry Meeting Workbook.

            Specialized publications can also be transcribed, such as public talk outlines, invitations, programs, the Pioneer textbook, and the Shepherding textbook.

            On request, electronic text may be provided for blind and visually impaired readers who use Braille notetakers or computers with screen readers. These files can be posted on jw.org in notetaker (BRL) format and RTF format. [10]


37. Study Watchtower: While all translators can benefit from consulting the simplified English text, languages that do not have a wide vocabulary may use it as source text for translation of The Watchtower. Since the majority of people do not use academic or formal language but rather use everyday language to communicate, translators of all language teams need to use a simpler level of language when translating the study Watchtower. [11]
38. Songbook: Detailed guidelines are provided on PPD for translating songs. Individual songs can be translated and posted on the jw.org website for use at congregation meetings and other spiritual events. [12]
39. Audio, Video, and Web Publications: For some languages, video and audio publications are more effective than printed publications. Publications can be published on the jw.org website in audio format even if they are not produced in print or in other electronic formats. Each Branch Committee should analyze what site features are available in all the languages for which their branch is responsible and can approve any feature that would be valuable to a language field if this will not create a burden for the translation team. [13]
40. JW Broadcasting (JWB): The Governing Body views the material on JWB as spiritual food. Each language (including sign languages) approved to translate the full JWB program has a brother serving as a permanent translator in order to coordinate the translation work. Two part-time commuters (not temporary volunteers) should be assigned to work with him on a translation team. Based on the need, he may enlist the help of additional part-time commuters and remote volunteers to sustain regular production. When translating a JWB program, careful attention should be given to the main talk; experienced translators should be used for this part. As is the case with all videos, you should decide whether to translate the audio track or to use subtitles, depending on the preferences of the target audience, the technical possibilities, and the workload of the team. (For example, some languages will record a vernacular version of original songs, while others will simply provide subtitles.) If time permits and they have the necessary skills, this team may work on translating regional convention and assembly outlines. [14]



DEPARTMENT ORGANIZATION

41. Each language overseer assigns individuals to specific project teams as needed.
42. Translation Capacity: The workload must be scheduled in such a way that team members do not regularly have to work overtime. The Branch Committee carefully monitors the workload of the translators to make sure that they are not burdened with unreasonable schedules.
43. Before starting any translation project, be sure that permission has been obtained for it. When permission is granted, obtain the source text of the publication from WTS or MDS. The master copy of the English Final mailing contains all corrections and approved updates.
44. Schedules: Local schedules for translating new and dated publications are based on the schedules for English publications provided by the Writing Department. For most publications, the Writing Department sends two different mailings:
(1) Early mailing: This contains early text to start translation and a preliminary PDF of the composed pages. At this point the text and artwork are subject to change. Nevertheless, translators should start translation as soon as possible after this mailing is received. The compositor(s) prepare the early composition pages for an audible reading check and a mechanical check of the translation.

(2) Final mailing: This mailing contains the finalized text and artwork. The project team compares the final adjustments of the English text with its translation to ascertain whether any changes will affect the translated text.


45. Correction notices should be handled according to the guidelines provided by the Writing Committee. [15]
46. Translation errors in publications that have already been published in any format may be corrected with the approval of the Branch Committee. The printing date on the publishers’ page should be updated. [16] Complete retranslations requiring new copyright dates, corrections of serious translation errors that call for destroying copies in stock, and corrections to videos already produced need to be approved by the Writing Committee. [17]



Local Adjustments (Text and Art)

47. The Branch Committee recommends replacement material if the material in the English could cause problems in the local field. The Writing Committee will review recommendations for replacement text. Adjustments to long-established Biblical and theocratic terms should be requested through a numbered letter to the Writing Committee. [18]
48. The Branch Committee may give local approval for adjustments in the following matters:
            Replace textual illustrations or examples that may be inappropriate for the local field.

            Replace references to our publications and links to a resource (such as an article, publication, audio or video file) that are not available in the target language.

            Replace Scripture citations if the cited scriptures in the vernacular language do not support the point being made in English. Replacing “read” scriptures requires approval via the Translator Help Desk unless the change involves simply the citation range. [19]


49. When adjusting the text to adapt it to the local field, care must be exercised so that facts are not distorted.
50. In rare instances, artwork may be unacceptable for some cultures. The Writing Committee will provide alternate artwork only if an image would endanger the safety of the brothers. [20]



Translation Questions

51. The Writing Committee handles the bulk of the translation questions. They are sent directly via WTS by the language overseer to the Translator Help Desk.
52. Before sending a translation question to the Translator Help Desk, the project team checks to see whether the question has already been submitted by another team. The language overseer reviews the question for clarity and completeness.
a.During the translation process, editorial, cultural, legal, organizational, linguistic, procedural, and other questions need to be resolved.

b.It is important that questions be submitted using WTS so that they can be registered in the central database for efficient handling.

c.The Translator Help Desk distributes answers to all translation teams.

d.Answers for one language may be applied to another language that has the same question. Project teams do not need to ask permission to apply such answers. [21]

e.For dated publications, questions should be submitted soon after Early mailing, if possible within one week. [22]

f.Teams should not be discouraged or hindered from sending questions.





Ensuring High-Quality Publications

53. The Governing Body desires that all our publications be accurate, easy to read, and clearly understood by common people.
a.The language overseer makes sure that each project team has the necessary training, experience, and spiritual maturity to produce a natural, accurate translation.

b.Each translation team should actively seek feedback from the audience for whom they translate.

c.Publications that are in the Teaching Toolbox or that target a specific audience, such as young ones, should be reviewed by a small group of selected publishers who are representative of the field and of an age appropriate to the publication. The members of the review panel should preferably use the target language as their first language.​—See 8:27. [23]

d.It is necessary that project teams keep in touch with how people in the field use their language.

e.Personal preferences are not to be imposed on the project team. The language overseer has the responsibility to ensure that all project teams produce translations that are appealing and at the same time in harmony with the way the language is generally used.

f.Project teams must take care not to use out-of-date expressions that are not understood by the majority of the readers.


54. Branch Committees rarely need to override the translation decisions of teams that have been carefully selected and thoroughly trained.



Workflow

55. All procedures for translation, checking, proofreading, composition, mechanical checking, and audio recording should be performed as directed in Translation Workflow, Composition and Mechanical Checking Workflow, and Audio and Video Publications Workflow. All in the department, including part-time volunteers and others who might be helping remotely, should be familiar with the latest version of these documents, which are posted on PPD.
56. The language overseer ensures that every publication is clean and press-ready before printing files are mailed to the file maintenance branch or digital media files are uploaded. He does this by making sure that all the necessary steps in the workflow are properly followed and that all involved in the process are thoroughly trained. Once the text leaves the translators for final composition, it should not be recalled for translation adjustments, except for changes needed because of correction notices. The goal is to send to the printing branch press-ready materials that can be printed without further correction. In exceptional cases, with approval from the Publishing Committee, publications may be printed locally. Audio publications are usually recorded locally.
57. Printing branches do not proofread or perform mechanical checks on publications they print for other branches. The printing branch may make necessary adjustments to the publishers’ page to meet local legal requirements.



Office Equipment

58. Translators need a quiet office environment. Project teams should have sufficient office space to work without disturbing others. Such office space can be arranged in a variety of locations, including remote translation offices, Assembly Halls, Kingdom Halls, or other suitable facilities, depending on local circumstances. Everyone in the department should have:
            A suitable desk and comfortable chair

            Adequate lighting

            Good ventilation

            A computer as specified by the WHQ Computer Department


All requests for equipment to translate publications​—whether in printed, electronic, audio, or video format—​should be submitted to the Writing Committee. The Writing Committee coordinates requests for equipment and facilities with the Publishing Committee, the WHQ Computer Department, and the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department.
59. Reference Materials: All translators should have ready access to reference works that are frequently needed. The following is a partial list:
            Standard vernacular Bible(s)

            The latest electronic English dictionaries

            An up-to-date English-vernacular dictionary

            Target-language grammar books and dictionaries

            The revised English New World Translation (2013 Edition)

            Watchtower Research (English, plus vernacular library synchronized)

            The research library for translators, which should be updated regularly

            A dictionary of English idioms

            A team dictionary [24]

            Where possible and relatively economical, translators should have Internet access on their computer. [25]


60. All members of the department should have full access to guidelines, translation training material, and correspondence that apply to their work. To this end, make sure that the members of the department including part-time volunteers are added to the role groups that correspond to their assignments so as to have access to PPD where possible.
61. Standards Manual: All languages should endeavor to compile a Standards Manual for the target language that sets out grammar rules and style guidelines. It will differ from the English Standards Manual.
62. Confidentiality: Translators must keep confidential what is being translated and who works on each publication. The following materials are confidential and are strictly for the use of the Translation Department:
             Publications being translated

             Correction notices

             Translator comments

             Translator Help Desk questions and answers

             Research information

             Training materials

             Information found on PPD pages


63. The above items are not for personal use and should not be distributed outside of the department. Every precaution should be taken to make sure that confidential material, either on paper or by electronic means, is not divulged to and cannot be accessed by anyone who is not authorized. Failure to comply with these guidelines could lead to the termination of one’s Bethel service.
64. All members of the Translation Department, including part-time volunteers, must sign the Watchtower Information Resources Confidentiality Affirmation Statement and Acknowledgment of Use of Work Software before they start to work in the department.
TRANSLATION ORGANIZATION
65. The following functions are necessary:
             Translation overseer (and assistant[s] if needed)

             Language overseer(s)

             Team secretary(ies)

             Translation project team(s)

             Technical support (compositors, digital publishers, computer support, audio technicians) [26]


Note: Translators serving Service Department, Legal Department, and Printery needs are part of their respective departments and not part of the Translation Department.



Translation Overseer

66. He supervises the Translation Department and usually serves on the Branch Committee. He cares for the following matters: the size of translation teams (number of full-time and part-time personnel), offices (recommends where they are located and what type of facilities are used), language needs (sign language, Braille, website, composition, digital publishing), training (procedures, techniques, production), and the needs of all translation personnel. Although it is preferable, it is not a requirement that the translation overseer have translation experience. However, he must be up-to-date with translation guidelines, translation techniques, production workflow, and be thoroughly familiar with the circumstances and needs of the languages under his oversight. If his workload is too heavy, an assistant(s) may be appointed to help him. The assistant should be a brother who is familiar with translation work, is reliable, and responds in a timely manner to the needs of the translation teams. The translation overseer cooperates with the language overseers to ensure that schedules are met and that directives from the Branch Committee and the Governing Body are implemented. Capable language overseers may be used in this capacity. [27]



Language Overseer

67. He works under the direction of the translation overseer. The language overseer should have translation experience. He must speak the language well (ideally a native speaker), understand translation principles, have good oversight skills, and be able to organize the work efficiently. He must be able to organize personnel in a productive way, that is, to combine full-time personnel and part-time volunteers in an optimum manner, and he must be able to establish, monitor, and follow up with production schedules effectively. He must be communicative, loving, and kind. When a temporary team is formed, a trainer works with the team. [28]
68. Responsibilities: Each language overseer keeps the translation overseer informed of personnel and volunteer needs and issues, translation issues that require handling by the Branch Committee, and production matters.
             His role is not simply administrative; it is a full-time assignment requiring interaction with the project teams on a daily basis. To facilitate such communication, his office should be located near most of the project teams.

             He thoroughly understands the translation process as set forth by the Writing Committee, and he is thoroughly familiar with translation principles and procedures.

             He does not institute his own workflow procedures.

             He ensures that proper procedures are followed when assigning responsibilities to Translation Department personnel.

             He assigns work to the project teams, and he schedules production.

             He is responsible for ongoing translation training.

             He should be sensitive to direction and feedback from his oversight and the field, and he should be able to give clear direction.

             He should always be on the lookout for prospective translators who may serve either full-time or part-time.

             He should have access to MDS and PPD, as well as be given access to this chapter of Branch Organization.

             At times, he will participate in project-team meetings while translation is being done in order to ensure that the team functions well and is following proper procedures.





Substitute Language Overseer

69. A brother on one of the project teams should be trained to substitute as language overseer when the overseer is ill, away, or otherwise unavailable. This is not an extra position added to the department, as this brother is a member of one of the project teams.
70. The language overseer keeps his substitute fully informed of all matters concerning the department so that he will be able to replace the overseer seamlessly when circumstances require it. The substitute has access to MDS and PPD, just as the overseer has.
71. The substitute language overseer is authorized to make decisions in the absence of the language overseer.



Team Secretary

72. This brother is well-organized and must be able to keep track of translation files, schedules, and correspondence.
             The secretary should be capable of communicating clearly in written correspondence.

             This assignment requires some skill in organizing and maintaining accurate electronic files.

             If a brother is not available, a sister may be assigned as secretary.


73. Responsibilities: The team secretary may assist with downloading and organizing electronic source materials from MDS, updating team dictionaries, backing up publications, sending completed materials to the printing branch, and scheduling, as well as keeping track of other correspondence.
74. At least one other person in the department should know the basic functions of the secretary. He or she should be kept up-to-date with procedures so as to be able to replace the secretary on short notice if necessary.



Project Teams

75. A project team is made up of three members who perform the roles of translator, checker, and proofreader. A detailed description of the various responsibilities of each member is presented in the Translation Workflow document. Because of circumstances and at the discretion of the language overseer, a team might function with only two members for a short period of time. This might be due to sickness, vacation, or leave of absence, or it might be that one member of a project team is asked to help another team temporarily, such as when working with part-time volunteers.
76. Responsibilities: Working as a team of three, the team translates, checks, and proofreads its own work. It is therefore a requirement that the team members be able to work cooperatively in a team setting.
             Although the project team translates, checks, and proofreads together, each member performs a specific function in the process.

             Each member must have a good command of his or her own language, and at least two members of the team must clearly understand the source language. It is not expected that one individual will have all the skills needed to translate, check, and proofread.

             The project team is also responsible for the audio recording of the publications it translates. [29]

             Each project requires different skill levels. Select individuals who will fit into a project team according to their skill level.

             Sisters can be used for most translation assignments, including the Bible.

             Whatever the translation assignment, each member of the project team must have a thorough understanding of Scriptural truth so that accurate and faithful translations can be produced.


77. It is expected that the cooperative translation process, as set forth in the Translation Workflow document, will be followed by the project team.
78. It is recommended that the project team members attend congregations that have meetings in their language and are using the target-language literature. This enables them to keep up-to-date with the language. It also means that they will personally use the target-language literature in the field.
79. Because brothers have the responsibility to teach in the congregation, at least one brother, preferably an elder, should work on each project team if at all possible. Branch Committees should search for qualified brothers who can be assigned to serve on project teams.



Technical Support

80. Composition: The compositor must be familiar with computers, be a quick learner, and be attentive to detail. He or she should have an eye for making the text appealing in appearance and layout. The compositor needs to work in close cooperation with the translation team and be able to follow instructions carefully. Each compositor must have a trained backup, who may be one of the team members or someone from another language team.
81. Compositors must become fully familiar with all computer programs related to making publications. One compositor prepares early and final composition of the translated material. A backup compositor is usually in the best position to do publication checking of composed pages.
             Compositors may be given other work assignments within the department, such as digital publishing or Braille transcription. However, compositors and their backups need to work regularly in composition to be up-to-date with the latest styles for our publications.

             If you do not have an experienced compositor who can help provide training, please make your needs known to the Writing Committee.


82. Composition is part of the Translation Department, not the Printery or Graphics. Even when compositors are not physically near the translators, they need to maintain good communication with the project teams.
83. Digital Publishing: Research libraries must be well-maintained and up-to-date. They are used to produce a variety of file formats for our website, the JW Library app, the Research Guide, Watchtower Library, Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY, the Watch Tower Publications Index, and Braille transcription.
84. As more publications become available in a language, it will be necessary to have enough trained personnel on hand to care for digital publishing. Training material for this specialized work is available. If additional training is needed, please contact the Writing Committee.
85. Additional personnel is needed to produce the Watch Tower Publications Index. Those working on research libraries should not be assigned to work simultaneously on a translation project team.
86. Computer Support: The individual(s) providing computer support need to be familiar with WTS and other programs used by the translators. He may be a part-time volunteer but still must be reachable whenever the translators need help. He should be willing and helpful.
87. He maintains the Translation Department’s computer program data files. He ensures that the production files are backed up every day. He trains all personnel to use the translation programs provided by the organization. It is his responsibility to see that everyone has reliable computer support so that the team can be as productive as possible.
88. Audio Technician: Audio technicians need to be familiar with the equipment and the software used to produce audio recordings for our publications. If at all possible, they should know the language of the recordings they are editing. [30]



Finding New Translators

89. Only baptized publishers in good standing are used as translators.
a. Check to see if there are full-time servants who may qualify.

b. Check new applications (A-8) for prospective translators.

c. Meetings held at regional conventions for those interested in full-time service provide a good opportunity to locate prospective candidates. Those interviewing the prospective applicants should be alerted to the need for translators.

d. When looking for part-time volunteers, give consideration to former full-time servants who have experience and skills in translation. [31]





Evaluating Prospective Translators

90. To evaluate prospective translators, have them work for short periods of time alongside experienced translators. [32]
a. The spirituality of the applicant must be carefully assessed. Humility and modesty are essential.

b. The prospective translator must be able to work in a team environment.

c. It is rare to find a translator who is skilled as a translator, checker, and proofreader. Usually, people have particular ability in only one of these areas.

d. The testing process should reveal whether an individual has potential in one of the areas. Training will be required, since it is not expected that fully qualified translators will be found. Individuals who have good basic skills can be trained.

e. When searching for sign-language translators, look for individuals who have keen insight into the way deaf people think and communicate.





Training New Translators

91. Potential translators who show aptitude during the initial evaluation may be invited for a longer training period.
             New translators may at times be assigned to work on a project team as a fourth member.

             After an initial training period, qualified translators meet with the language overseer to decide whether the trainee exhibits sufficient progress to warrant further training.

             If it becomes clear during the initial training period that the trainee does not have the necessary aptitude, the training should be stopped and he should go back to his previous assignment. It drains valuable resources to train someone who does not have the aptitude.

             Even though someone has good potential, it may take him or her 12 to 24 months to develop the needed skills in order to make a substantial contribution.


92. Training too many people at the same time places an unreasonable load on experienced personnel.



Replacement and Backup Personnel

93. When a member of the Translation Department needs to be replaced, it normally takes some years before the replacement reaches the desired level of proficiency. This can take a heavy toll on the other members of the department and on the quality of translation.
94. Even if the team already has its full complement of full-time servants, backup individuals, such as part-time commuters, should be given training. They may be available to help out on a temporary basis when a regular member of the team is sick or away. They would therefore be able to fill in should someone leave unexpectedly.
95. When a department member gets married and asks to remain at Bethel, the Branch Committee should seriously consider what can be done to retain him or her if the prospective mate qualifies for Bethel. It requires much training to replace any experienced translator. There must be available accommodations for the couple and a work assignment for the mate. Even if a translator leaves Bethel, the branch should consider whether it is possible to retain his or her services as a part-time volunteer. If there are plans to reassign a qualified technical support person (compositor, digital publisher, computer support, or audio technician), the Branch Committee must first notify the Personnel Committee; it may be that another branch needs that person’s services.



Training Members of the Department

96. All in the Translation Department need ongoing training, since it is important that they do not get into a rut and stagnate in their abilities.
             The language overseer and his substitute are responsible for directing and monitoring the training of every individual under their oversight.

             Please ensure that you select those who have specialized skills or, at least, have the aptitude to serve as compositors, translators, checkers, proofreaders, secretaries, computer support, digital publishers, audio technicians, coaches, or overseers.

             Project teams should keep up-to-date with their language, the source language and, more important, with the truth as revealed through the faithful and discreet slave.

             All must have direct access to the training materials provided by the Writing Committee.

             Compositors must stay up-to-date with the latest methods and style adjustments made by the Writing Committee.

             Special emphasis should be placed on providing training to part-time volunteers, even if they live far from the translation office or if they are used only occasionally. Their skills and abilities should be kept sharp and up-to-date. [33]





Training at Weekly Meetings

             Material from translation questions and answers, translator comments, current translation problems, policy letters from the Writing Committee, and Translating for Our Publications and its appendixes can be considered. [34]

             Letters and comments from the field on the quality of the vernacular translation, as well as feedback from field-testing translated publications, should be regularly discussed.

             Refresher courses on how to use WTS, research tools, and reference materials should be presented by experienced individuals.

             Suggestions that would improve work habits, productivity, accuracy, and so forth should be scheduled for general discussion.

             In addition to initial training, members of the department should be helped to stay up-to-date with the latest computer tools, policies, techniques, and directives from the Writing Committee.

             The language overseer should arrange that all, including part-time volunteers, receive adequate training to make sure that they are familiar with the latest techniques and tools.


97. Those working on the Watch Tower Publications Index, the Research Guide, and Watchtower Library need to review carefully all aspects of their work for every new edition they produce.



Training Resources

98. The Writing Committee arranges for training on translation techniques, digital publishing, workflow, composition, audio recording, and organizing the department. The Branch Committee may ask the Writing Committee to provide this or other specialized training. The Writing Committee arranges training for new translation teams and for Bible projects.



REMOTE TRANSLATION OFFICES (RTOs)

99. Ideally, a translation team should be situated where the translators can attend meetings in their language, where they are exposed to that language, and where support by part-time commuters can be provided. When considering facilities for teams outside of the branch, please consult the Remote Translation Office Facility Guidelines. [35]



Overseers at a Remote Translation Office

100. The Branch Committee should assign qualified elders in each RTO to serve as a language overseer, a home overseer, and a maintenance overseer. These elders do not function as an official committee, but each cares for his respective area of responsibility. [36]
101. The language overseer ensures that the translation work is well-organized. The home overseer cares for the personal needs of all individuals serving at the RTO. He is also responsible for purchasing, cleaning, and meals. The maintenance overseer cares for buildings, security, and property. The home overseer and the maintenance overseer will usually be part-time commuters. For large facilities hosting multiple language teams, it may be necessary for one of these brothers to work full-time at the RTO, depending on the need.



Part-Time Volunteers

102. Part-time volunteers, often regular pioneers, may help with the translation work done at an RTO by serving as part-time commuters (BBV) or remote volunteers (BRV) on an ongoing basis.



Full-Time Servants

103. The branch arranges for living quarters for full-time servants. If rooming at the RTO is limited, priority should be given to the language overseer and other members of the translation team. Whenever a recommendation is made to the Personnel Committee for someone to serve as a full-time commuter (BBL), the branch should include a recommendation for an appropriate allowance to cover housing, transportation, and personal expenses.



Spiritual Programs

104. Ensure that all the Bethel spiritual programs are provided at the RTO. Morning worship and the Bethel family Watchtower Study should be conducted regularly. Where possible, RTOs can be tied in with the branch office for these programs.​—See 7:94-96.



LIST 8.1
Bracketed References:
A copy of the following documents can be found on the Publication Processing Documentation (PPD) site.
1. Letter dated HSC:HWB October 14, 2015, No. C-41384W, page 1, point 1; letter from Service Committee dated HSA:HSQ December 18, 2015, No. C-43031S.
2. Letter from Service Committee dated HSA:HSQ December 18, 2015, No. C-43031S.
3. Letter dated HWB:ETA November 10, 2016, No. C-49379W.
4. Letter dated HSC:ETA November 5, 2015, No. C-41854W, points 1 and 10.
5. Letter dated GED:ETA June 29, 2010. Letter dated ETA:ECD March 19, 2015, No. C-36467W, provides suggestions on translating material with highly technical language. Letter dated HWB:ETA March 9, 2017, No. C-51414W, outlines directions for translation of JW Broadcasting.
6. Letter dated HSC:ETA November 12, 2015, No. C-42103W.
7. Document Guidelines for Bible Translation.
8. Letter dated HWC:HWB December 1, 2015, No. C-42570W.
9. Letters dated HWC:HWG June 1, 2017, No. C-52836W and HWG:HWF July 11, 2017, No. C-53531W.
10. Document Caring for the Needs of the Blind and Visually Impaired. Letter dated HWC:HWG November 4, 2016, No. C-49298W.
11. Letters dated HWC:HSC November 18, 2015, No. C-42246W and HWC:ETA October 20, 2016, No. C-49062W.
12. Documents Guidelines for Preparing Lyrics for “‘Sing Out Joyfully’ to Jehovah,” Composition Guidelines for “Sing to Jehovah” (EHA February 14, 2009), and Translating “Sing Out Joyfully” to Jehovah Into Sign Language. Letters dated HWC:HWG March 2, 2016, No. C-44702W and HWC:HWG March 3, 2017, No. C-51308W.
13. Appendix Outlines Nos. 12 and 13.
14. Letter dated HWB:ETA March 9, 2017, No. C-51414W.
15. Letter dated GEA:ESA October 17, 2007, provides comments on handling correction notices. See “Application of corrections” guidelines dated HWG August 15, 2012. Letter dated HWG:EHA October 9, 2012, No. C-11673W, explains how to process correction notices for older publications. Letter dated HWC:HWG October 17, 2013, No. C-22385W, explains when and how to update audio publications. Letter dated HWB:ETA February 18, 2015, No. C-35724W, provides guidelines on applying corrections to vernacular editions of the New World Translation.
16. Publishers’ Page Information Guidelines dated HWG April 20, 2017.
17. Note dated HWC:HWG July 18, 2014. Letter dated HWG:EMA February 9, 2015, No. C-35540W, outlines how often to update publications for the JW Library app.
18. Letters dated HWC:HSC August 6, 2015, No. C-39809W and HWB:HSC November 26, 2015, No. C-42468W.
19. Letters dated HWB:ETA July 9, 2014, No. C-30231W and HWB:HWG April 24, 2017, No. C-52110W.
20. Letter dated HWC:HWG March 4, 2013, No. C-15758W.
21. Letter dated GEA:ETA October 10, 2007, explains how translators benefit from translation questions and answers provided for other languages.
22. Letter dated HWC:HWB June 10, 2016, No. C-46648W.
23. Letter dated HSA:HSE August 10, 2017, No. C-54029S and Appendix Outline No. 2h.
24. Information on maintaining the team dictionary can be found in the Appendix outlines.
25. Letter dated GED:ETA May 17, 2010, regarding Internet access for translators.
26. Letter dated HWB:ETA May 26, 2017, No. C-52731W.
27. Letter dated HWC:HWB June 20, 2013, No. C-18924W.
28. Letter dated HSC:HWB October 14, 2015, No. C-41384W.
29. Translation Workflow, Step 9; letter dated HWB:ETA December 14, 2015, No. C-42906W. Audio and Video Publications Workflow document.
30. Letter dated HWB:ETE June 15, 2017, No. C-53083W.
31. Letter dated HLA:HLC November 7, 2015, No. C-41914L.
32. Letter dated HWB:ETA January 22, 2015, No. C-35147W.
33. Letter dated HSC:HWB October 14, 2015, No. C-41384W, page 1, point 2. Letter dated HWB:ETA February 25, 2015, No. C-35914W, outlines how part-time commuters may be used on a permanent basis.
34. Letter dated GEA:ETA October 10, 2007, explains how translators benefit from translation questions and answers provided for other languages. Letter dated GEA:ETA September 8, 2009, explains how to use translator comments. Letter dated GEA:ETA June 26, 2003, includes the documents Translating for Our Publications and Appendix 1 and provides instructions on using the appendixes in weekly team meetings.
35. Letter dated HSC:HWB October 14, 2015, No. C-41384W, page 1, point 3. Letters dated HWB:ETA July 20, 2011; HPA:HT July 3, 2012, No. C-8894P; and the Remote Translation Office Facility Guidelines provide direction on establishing and supporting RTOs. Letter dated HT:HBB February 1, 2012, No. C-4195P, sets a preapproved budget for short-term rentals of RTOs. See also the document Remote Translation Office Computer Equipment Guidelines.
36. Letter dated HWB:HSC November 10, 2015, No. C-41968W.
CHART 8.1





Priority List Guidelines
The information below will help clarify the chart “How to Identify Language Needs.” These guidelines are provided to help you decide what publications may be requested for every printed and audio language that you translate. Separate information is provided about sign-language translation.
Please do not make a list of all languages in your branch territory with the goal of providing literature in each language. Rather, let the field determine in which language publications are needed and what is needed. Each language group has its own unique needs. For example, some languages need only audio publications, while others additionally need printed publications. Also, some languages need only publications for field service, while others also need publications for meetings. These guidelines will help you balance literacy, education levels, language needs of individuals, priorities for the ministry, priorities for meetings, and several other factors. Focus on languages where people want to learn the truth in their language and where our publishers are getting results in the field.
The priority list is divided into the following five groups:
Group 1: Publications to introduce people to the good news and to invite them to Public Meetings

Group 2: Publications used to conduct Bible studies and direct students to Jehovah’s organization

Group 3: Publications to deepen people’s love for God and assist them to make a dedication

Group 4: Publications to strengthen the congregations and help the brothers grow to maturity

Group 5: Deeper study books and the Bible


Explanation of the questions at the top of the chart
1. Can most benefit from another language?
Some language groups are familiar with the main language of the country, which they may learn at school, or with a lingua franca that they use to communicate with people from other language groups. Although they use their own language when conversing with each other, they can easily use publications in another language for reading and during meetings.
2. How many can read their own language?
Many individuals in some language groups cannot read at all. Also, some language groups use their own language when conversing with each other, but they prefer to use the “school language” for reading. This question is to determine whether the majority of speakers of that language can read or not, and thus whether we need to provide audio publications. It is important to recognize that some languages will never need any printed publications, but they will need audio publications.
3. Are there congregations in this language?
If there is very little response from a language field and there are no congregations in that language field, we will provide minimal material.
Priority Lists
Every language has its own priority list (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, or H) that is determined by a variety of circumstances. Here is a brief explanation of each of these priority lists:
Priority A: This language group needs all publications (audio, video, print). This language may have thousands of publishers, many congregations, and circuits. The publishers are readers, and the majority are completely dependent on publications in this language.

Priority B: This is a new language field. No congregations have been formed. Only basic publications for the field are needed. If this field remains unresponsive, very few publications need to be provided.

Priority C: The publishers and public do not read their own language. This is an audio-only language.

Priority D: We are just starting to cultivate this field, and there are no congregations. This is an audio-only language.

Priority E: Even though they are literate in their own language, this language group is not strictly dependent on their own language for spiritual food. They can comfortably use publications in another language for meetings. (For example, language groups that are fluent with the official language of the country, such as Spanish, Swahili, or French.) However, if there are many established congregations and circuits, the Branch Committee should assess the situation and decide whether to recommend publications in the language.

Priority F: This language group is not strictly dependent on their own language. There are no congregations. We are just starting to cultivate this field. They are quite comfortable with publications in another language. At this point it is not necessary to provide publications for meetings in this language.

Priority G: Few can read their own language, but they can read printed literature in another language. There are few or no secular printed publications in this language, and/​or illiteracy rates are high in the field. Publishers need audio publications for the ministry. Although there are many congregations using this language for the ministry, they use printed publications of another language during the meetings.

Priority H: People of this language group cannot read their own language. No congregations have been established. They need only a few audio publications for the ministry.


What Publications to Translate
Translation in new languages starts from the top of the list. Generally, most of the publications in Groups 1-3 will be translated, but it is not necessary to translate all the publications of a group at once. Months might elapse between translation sessions of part-time translators to allow the field to respond. Temporary translation teams convene to translate the next publications on the priority list only when the field provides sufficient evidence that additional translation is needed.
Translation Personnel
             Only part-time volunteers are used to translate the publications in Groups 1-3.

             Although permanent translation teams are formed according to the number of publishers, not more than one new team is formed at a time.


First Translation Effort
Candidates with some potential to translate are invited to convene at a facility close to where they live, such as a Kingdom Hall, Assembly Hall, RTO of another language, branch office, or another available facility. The branch sends an experienced trainer who teaches them how to translate, field-test, and record basic publications. After three weeks or so, when the project is completed, the candidates return to the field and the translated publications are produced and used in the ministry as directed by the Service Department.
Before recommending that additional publications be translated, the Service Department should request from the circuit overseers answers to the following questions and then pass on the reports of the circuit overseers to the Branch Committee:
             What is the response from the field?

             How many Bible studies are being conducted using publications in this language?

             How many attended the Public Meetings that have been held in this language?

             Are the publishers who speak this language attending the meetings and preaching in the field, thus showing their commitment to develop this language field?


If the response is good, the Branch Committee may recommend translating additional publications.
Note: If there is no response from the field, do not continue to translate into that language.
Second Translation Effort
After obtaining permission to translate more publications, the branch sends a trainer who assembles candidates as done previously. He may train the same candidates or, if more suitable ones became available, he trains them and produces the approved publications in a few weeks. As before, the translators return to the field and the translated publications are used in the ministry as directed by the Service Department. Again, the Service Department will communicate with the circuit overseers to monitor the response in the field and will pass on the reports of the circuit overseers to the Branch Committee.
Further Translation Efforts
Depending on the proficiency of the translators, the response from the field, and the availability of translators, the trainer may convene the part-time candidates after the branch obtains permission to produce additional publications. After two or three translation cycles, the following questions need to be answered to determine whether translation should continue:
             How many Bible studies are being conducted?

             Are students progressing to baptism?

             How many meetings are regularly conducted, and how regularly do the students attend meetings?


Note: If there is limited response from the field, do not continue to translate into that language.
If the response from the field is good, the Branch Committee should recommend that publications that can assist people to progress toward baptism be translated.
If brochures are translated, only one brochure at a time should be translated. Afterwards, the team members should return to the field. By that time, the trainer should have a good idea of the potential of the part-time translators.
Where practical, and if there is a demand, more than one team of part-time translators can work on brochures. If there are no part-time volunteers available, translation will be suspended until such time as they are available.
Note: The Teach Us book does not have to be translated in one sitting. It may be translated chapter by chapter as brochures, or the summary sheets can be translated separately. Photocopies of the translated materials can be made locally and used until the whole book is translated.
Note: None of the part-time volunteers will work permanently in translation. When they complete a project, they return to the field and may be invited to convene again some time later.
As the field grows to more than 100 publishers and more publications are provided, a permanent team may need to be appointed to translate dated publications, such as the Life and Ministry Meeting Workbook and the study edition of The Watchtower.
Permanent Teams
Appointing a permanent team is a major step for a language. Before recommending translation of dated publications, please answer the following questions:
             Does the language have a considerable number of congregations needing literature for the meetings?

             What evidence convinces you that the language group needs the study edition of The Watchtower in its language?

             Are the ones attending the meetings completely dependent on the literature in their language in order to prepare for meetings and to have a meaningful share in the meetings?


When a permanent translation project team is formed, the team will still operate from the Kingdom Hall or other available facility. The permanent team can be supplemented with part-time volunteers, according to their availability and circumstances.
The housing and working quarters of permanent teams are provided according to the guidelines provided by the Worldwide Design/​Construction Department.

