Campaign to Advertise the Memorial Begins March 1
 1. When will we begin to advertise the Memorial, and why is the campaign longer this year?
1 On Friday, March 1, we will begin our annual campaign to invite others to attend the Memorial with us. The Memorial will be on March 26, which means that the campaign will be a little longer than in past years. This will give more people an opportunity to receive an invitation, especially if they happen to live in an area where the congregation has a large amount of territory.
 2. What are the arrangements for obtaining copies of invitations and covering the territory?
2 Getting Organized: The elders will give direction on how the territory will be covered, including whether the invitations should be left at not-at-homes. If invitations remain after finishing the house-to-house territories, they may be distributed through public witnessing. The service overseer will make sure that a supply of labeled invitations is placed on the literature or magazine counter for the publishers to take, but the invitations will not be put out all at once. We should take only the amount that we will need for one week at a time.
 3. What should we keep in mind when offering the invitation?
3 What Will We Say? It is best to be brief, as this will allow us to reach as many people as possible. Page 4 has a sample presentation that we can tailor to our territory. Of course, we do not need to rush away if the householder is friendly or has questions. When sharing in the distribution on the weekends, we should also offer the magazines when appropriate. On March 2, we will focus on distributing invitations rather than on starting Bible studies.
 4. Why should we have a zealous share in the campaign?
4 We hope that many will join us for the Memorial. The talk will explain who Jesus really is. (1 Cor. 11:26) It will outline how his death helps us. (Rom. 6:23) And it will highlight why it is important that we remember him. (John 17:3) May we have a zealous share in the campaign!

