Watching the World
China and the U.N.
◆ A commission appointed by President Nixon recommended that the People’s Republic of China be admitted to membership in the United Nations, ending American opposition. However, it also recommended keeping a seat for Nationalist China on Taiwan. Observers state that such a ‘two Chinas’ policy is unacceptable to Peking.
Government Influence Expands
◆ The influence and control of public affairs by the federal government in the United States is constantly growing. In the ten years between 1960 and 1970 the population grew 13 percent. However, government spending rose ten times as fast, by 130 percent, and federal taxes increased by 113 percent. Also, the number of employees working for the government jumped 51 percent, about four times the growth in population.
Welfare Up, Jobs Down
◆ New York city’s woes continue to grow. The number of persons on welfare rose to a staggering 1,195,603 at the end of March. This was an average monthly increase over the last nine months of more than 13,000, compared with an original estimate of 5,500. At the same time, the number of jobs in the city declined.
No ‘Peace Dividend’
◆ The withdrawal of American troops from Vietnam during the last two years has cut in half the cost of the Indochina war. But due to inflation and the rise in other government spending, any savings that could have been diverted to more urgent needs have all but vanished, concludes the Brookings Institution. Even with reduced war costs, large deficits are foreseen for the federal budget in the present and coming fiscal years.
Arms Spending at Peak
◆ World military spending reached an all-time peak of about $204 thousand million in 1970. That is the equivalent of a year’s income produced by 1.8 thousand million people in the poorer half of the world.
High Heroin Use
◆ After visiting Southeast Asia, two congressmen report that heroin addiction among American troops in Vietnam is of epidemic proportions. Officials indicate that 15 percent, or more, were using high-grade heroin, and that between 40 and 60 percent use some form of drugs.
Army in Lowest Esteem
◆ Former Army Chief of Staff and NATO Supreme Commander General Matthew Ridgway stated: “Not before in my lifetime has the army’s public image suffered so many grievous blows and fallen to such low esteem in such wide areas of our society.” Some reasons are the massacres of Vietnamese civilians by American troops and planes, high military spending, embezzlement charges against senior army men, awarding of battlefield decorations to officers for acts not performed, and the sentencing of a former general, the army’s top law-enforcement officer, to jail for criminal acts.
Car Repair a Problem
◆ Two Wall Street Journal reporters deliberately made defective a 99-cent part in an automobile’s motor. They took the car to twelve repair shops to see if widespread reports of overcharging were true. Mechanics at three failed to find the trouble. Mechanics at six others fixed the part but added an array of unneeded parts and labor to raise the bill, one charging over $54. Of two high estimates, one said repairs would cost $130. Just one fixed the trouble and charged only for that.
Record Car Imports
◆ Sales of foreign cars in the United States set a record in April. About 144,000 were sold, 16 percent of the total. This shocked American manufacturers who had hoped their own recently introduced small cars would cut down imports. Leading the imports was Germany’s Volkswagen, with over 54,000. Following was Japan’s fast-increasing Toyota, at over 24,000, and Datsun at nearly 19,000.
Abortion Rate Climbs
◆ In 1968 California’s abortion rate was 15 for every 1,000 live births. Toward the end of 1970 the rate rose to about 300. In Japan the rate is said to be 912, and in Hungary 1,356 for every 1,000 live births.
Fat Babies​—Fat Adults?
◆ Researchers suggest that people who were fat as infants will likely stay fat as adults. Dr. Hans Neuberg, a New York obesity specialist, says the cure rate for such obesity “is worse than the cure rate for cancer of the stomach.” If a baby is overfed, the number of fat cells can triple or quadruple during the first few months of its life. Those cells appear to stay permanently, which causes the problem later on.
Transfusions Caused Rare Infections
◆ For several months, doctors at the National Institutes of Health at Bethesda, Maryland, were mystified as to the source of an outbreak of severe bacterial infections among patients. Seven patients contracted a rare disease, and one of them died. After persistent detective work, the source of the infection was found​—transfused blood. It came from a donor who made a profit by selling his blood for money about twice a week during the past four years. He was not aware that he had a serious bone infection that was transmitted to others through the blood.
More Evidence Against Marijuana
◆ Two Philadelphia psychiatrists report a consistent pattern of mental disarrangement in 38 young people who habitually smoked marijuana. None of them had experienced mental problems before. Those who smoked marijuana four or five times a week had gross nervous disorders, including slurred speech, staggered gait, hand tremors, thought disorders and disturbance in depth perception. Even those who smoked two or three a week experienced disorders. Of the 18 girls in the study, none had been sexually promiscuous before smoking marijuana. But, afterward all of them were, seven becoming pregnant and four others contracting venereal diseases. Five engaged in homosexual activities and three attempted suicide.
Addicted to Petrol
◆ An eleven-year-old Australian boy was admitted to a psychiatric hospital because he was hopelessly addicted to inhaling petrol (gasoline) fumes. He told police that under the spell of the fumes he could see “monsters, animals and distorted faces.” The child became addicted after inhaling fumes from petrol taken from a lawn mower. He said that he could not stop inhaling the fumes because a voice inside him kept saying: “Sniff the petrol, sniff the petrol.” When he attempted to stop further inhaling, he said the “voices” overpowered him so that he continued.
Swordfish Called Dangerous
◆ The American Food and Drug Administration warned the public to stop eating swordfish. More than 90 percent of samples tested contained excessive amounts of mercury.
Asbestos Fabric a Hazard
◆ Coats made from a fabric that included asbestos were termed a health hazard by Dr. Irving J. Selikoff of New York. About 100,000 such coats already have been distributed. It is said that asbestos can be responsible for lung cancer and tumors. The danger is great to garment workers, for brushing or rubbing the material can produce asbestos levels in the air 10,000 times what is normal.
Advanced Degrees Losing Appeal
◆ Many youths attending high-prestige colleges are losing interest in advanced degrees. A declining percentage want to go on to graduate school. Harvard and Radcliffe report that some of their graduates are driving cabs, selling organic foods and working as telephone linemen and cabinet-makers. Contributing to the new mood are declining job opportunities for those with Ph.D. degrees, the ending of draft deferment for those in graduate schools, drying up of fellowship funds and a lack of desire for vocations that would get them into the executive-type ‘rat race.’
Colleges Closing
◆ Colleges in the United States have fallen on hard times financially. In the last two years, 39 have closed, branches of 7 others have shut down, and 28 have merged with others to stay open. Many others are cutting faculties, dropping courses and suspending building programs in an attempt to cut budgets. Dr. Allan Cartter, chancellor of New York University, said to a congressional committee: “There is hardly a college, public or private, that does not find itself over-committed in terms of its suddenly diminished real resources.”
Teacher Caught Cheating
◆ Some teachers in American schools have been caught cheating. They gave out answers to test questions before they gave out the questions. While a student’s test scores may be improved temporarily this way, the child is the real loser. By not studying to get his own answers, he is not cultivating the ability to learn. As these children go through the school system, and life, they will be increasingly handicapped. As it is, an estimated 7,000,000 schoolchildren cannot read properly now.
Wave of Burglaries
◆ Figures supplied by the Federal Bureau of Investigation show that between 1960 and 1969 daytime burglaries in the United States increased 286 percent. Nighttime burglaries increased 108 percent. There is now one burglary every 16 seconds throughout the country.
Robbers Executed
◆ Nigeria’s first public execution of robbers took place in the capital city, Lagos. Tens of thousands witnessed the event.
London’s Subways Dangerous
◆ London’s Underground, its subway system, is growing more dangerous. The Guardian Weekly quotes police as saying: “We have lost, perhaps forever, any right to the claim that the Underground is safe at any time of the day or night. . . . The number of assault and rob cases, the number of bloody, vicious attacks on travellers and station staff are on the increase.”
Truck Thefts Soar
◆ Thefts of loaded trucks, either at terminals, warehouses and docks, or hijacked while on the highway, are a growing problem in parts of the United States. New York city hijackings have nearly tripled in two years, from 119 to 318, and thefts of loaded trucks parked or unattended grew from 1,850 to 2,323. In Miami, truck hijacking is four times what it was three years ago. Most thefts are carried out by professional thieves, since disposing of the cargoes is a complex affair.
Art Thieves Busy
◆ Artworks in Italy are being stolen at the rate of one a day according to officials there.
Sick World
◆ Columnist Jim Bishop spoke of the time gone by “when daddy was the font of knowledge at the dinner table; when peace and security were the norm; when an academic argument was a pleasure; when respect was accorded unasked.” But, he said, “it’s gone, and I extend an empty hand to an empty world.” He noted that now the world was filled with international tension, suspicion and hate, adding that “we have lost the definition of truth and justice. . . . Where is truth? What is justice?” This brings to mind the prophetic words of the Bible writer Isaiah, who foretold: “Justice has come to be far away . . . and the truth proves to be missing.”​—Isa. 59:9, 15.

