Are You a Loyal Proclaimer of God’s Kingship?
“All your works will laud you, O Jehovah, and your loyal ones will bless you. About the glory of your kingship they will talk, and about your mightiness they will speak.”​—Ps. 145:10, 11.
 1. To that extent did Jesus proclaim God’s kingdom?
SINCE the time of Abel Jehovah God has always had some loyal servants on earth to praise him. The outstanding loyal one of Jehovah, his only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ, took the lead in telling of Jehovah’s mightiness and kingdom that will be for the benefit of all mankind. Jesus came as the Sent One, the foretold descendant of Jesse and David, the designated King, and he made God’s kingdom the foremost doctrine of his teaching. (Isa. 11:1, 10; Matt. 21:1-17) He brought the good news of the Kingdom. Because he was present among the people, he was able to tell them of the nearness of the Kingdom as represented in him, the King-designate, and to teach his followers to seek first the Kingdom. (Luke 17:20, 21) When teaching his disciples how to pray, he emphasized the coming of the Kingdom and that it would mean the sanctifying of God’s name, with God’s will taking place on earth as it is in heaven.​—Matt. 4:23; 6:9, 10, 33.
 2. How did he move others to become involved in the issue of Jehovah’s kingship?
2 Jesus invited others to join with him in talking about the good news of the Kingdom that was to come. (Luke 9:1-6; 10:1-12) Jesus’ followers understood that his presence as king would be in the future, as we can see by the question they asked in Matthew 24:3: “Tell us, When will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence [or, parousia, Greek] and of the conclusion of the system of things?” And Jesus went on to identify the time of his presence as a special time for talking about the Kingdom, pointing out that this would be done in all the inhabited earth for a witness. We know that the presence of Jesus as a king in power, ruling in the midst of his enemies, has been a fact since 1914, because we have seen “the sign.”​—Ps. 110:1; Heb. 10:12, 13; Matt. 24:14.
 3. How did Paul share in proclaiming God’s kingship?
3 “To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts and the glory of the splendor of his kingship. Your kingship is a kingship for all times indefinite, and your dominion is throughout all successive generations.” (Ps. 145:12, 13)
Disciples of Jesus were outstanding in pointing people to the kingdom of God by Jesus Christ. A fine example of this is recorded at Acts 28:23, 30, 31, which tells of Paul’s preaching the Kingdom while a prisoner in Rome. He previously had written to the Corinthians that Christians are “ambassadors substituting for Christ” and that they are helping people to “become reconciled to God.” (2 Cor. 5:20) As an ambassador Paul was expected to speak out in favor of the Kingdom and the King that he represented, and he did so. Have you reached out for such royal service? If so, then do you continue to speak out on behalf of the King and the Kingdom?
 4. What things did Paul and John say and write that we can now make known as loyal worshipers of Jehovah God?
4 As Paul explained Kingdom teachings he would show the relationship of Jesus Christ to Jehovah God in the Kingdom arrangement and that Jehovah is the great Sovereign of the universe. “The head of the Christ is God.” (1 Cor. 11:3) Paul also told of what takes place at the end of the 1,000-year reign of Christ. (1 Cor. 15:24-28) Toward the end of the first century C.E., the loyal apostle John likewise wrote down words pointing forward to future mighty acts of Jehovah, showing the splendor of his kingship. (See Revelation 12:9, 10; 19:6; 20:10, 14; 21:3, 4, 22-24.) These are things that we today, as loyal worshipers of Jehovah, can make known to the sons of men, emphasizing the importance of God’s kingdom and what it will do for mankind, all to Jehovah’s praise. The Kingdom must be described and explained to the sons of men, letting them see that God’s kingdom is their only hope. It is going to last and endure throughout all successive generations.a
 5. (a) What do Jehovah’s servants often have to face? (b) In spite of opposition during World War I, what have Jehovah’s people been able to do since then?
5 Under the alphabetic letter samekh, the 15th letter in the Hebrew alphabet, Psalm 145:14 goes on to say:
“Jehovah is giving support to all who are falling, and is raising up all who are bowed down.”
Those who loyally worship Jehovah and proclaim his kingship often meet up with opposition and difficulties because of their loyalty to Jehovah. (Gen. 3:15) But evidence from the past shows how Jehovah, true to his promises, gave support and help to those who were his worshipers and raised them up when they were under oppression. (Gen. chap. 15; see also many examples in the book of Judges.) In this 20th century down to the end of 1980 we have seen how Jehovah delivered the anointed remnant and the “other sheep” from Babylonish oppression. There was great pressure upon the anointed remnant during World War I. But Jehovah raised them up by his spirit and word of truth. Shortly thereafter, at their 1922 convention in Cedar Point, Ohio, they loyally determined to advertise the King and Kingdom. Jehovah has been guiding them since then, so that his name and kingdom have become known worldwide.
 6. What provision of food does Jehovah make for his people?
6 “To you the eyes of all look hopefully, and you are giving them their food in its season.” (Ps. 145:15)
In particular do the loyal worshipers of Jehovah need their spiritual food these days. They are “conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matt. 5:3) Hopefully they have looked to Jehovah’s arrangement for providing rich spiritual sustenance. (Matt. 24:45-47) The hopes of God’s servants in this regard are indeed being abundantly satisfied and they are confident that Jehovah will continue to provide the spiritual food they need so regularly, “in its season.”
 7. How is Jehovah the Provider, especially in connection with the matter of worship?
7 In line with that, Psalm 145:16 goes on to say:
“You are opening your hand and satisfying the desire of every living thing.”
Jehovah God is the one person in all the universe who is without limit as a Provider. He is the heavenly Father and Life-Giver. His generosity and loving-kindness are seen in all his creative works and in the good provisions he has made for man and all other creatures on earth. Having endowed us with the need to worship, Jehovah generously has revealed himself and his purposes to mankind, and those who dedicate themselves to Jehovah God, and who share in his worship and service, have experienced Jehovah’s openhanded generosity more and more. All such experiences are very reassuring and we may have confidence that Jehovah will continue to give his spirit to his servants and never stop satisfying them with reminders, guidance and spiritual help, even in these difficult last days.​—Ps. 119:129.
 8. How does Jehovah manifest loyalty?
8 Because we are loyal to Jehovah he is loyal to us. Hence,
“Jehovah is righteous in all his ways and loyal in all his works.” (Ps. 145:17)
Having become dedicated servants of Jehovah and loyal supporters of his kingship, we can always have confidence in God. He deals justly and graciously with his servants. His wonderful qualities do not change. So once we take up the worship and service of Jehovah we are assured he will never let us down. He truly is “loyal in all his works.” And so here we have another good reason to be telling others about Jehovah and his marvelous qualities and inviting them to join us in a dedicated life of praising Jehovah loyally.​—Compare Psalm 107.
 9. What part does faith play in calling on Jehovah, and how is this calling on Jehovah to be done?
9 Accordingly, we can proclaim the following words to his praise:
“Jehovah is near to all those calling upon him, to all those who call upon him in trueness.” (Ps 145:18)
Calling upon Jehovah is important. It must be done in true faith. (Rom. 10:10-15) The psalmist stresses how near Jehovah comes to those who call upon him in the right way, which includes exercising faith. (Heb. 11:6) And this calling on Jehovah is not something secret, but it is really a public declaration before men that we have faith in Jehovah and rely upon him. Paul stresses the need of declaring the “good news” of good things and preaching for the benefit of others. The shout of praise to Jehovah by those calling upon him grows as increasing numbers of faithful preachers of the “good news” tell still others about Jehovah. By acquainting them with Jehovah and his glory and greatness, as well as his kingship, the praisers build up faith on the part of these people so they too can join in calling upon the name of Jehovah and draw near to him. The way of salvation is open for all who wish to reach for it, there being no distinction on account of race, color or nationality, and there is no disappointment for those who put faith in Jehovah and call on him in trueness. How wonderful of Jehovah to allow us to have a relationship with, and a nearness to him! Especially is this so in these difficult last days when it becomes clearer than ever that it is necessary to rely completely upon Jehovah, the God of salvation.
10. Why will Jehovah perform the desire of those fearing him?
10 “The desire of those fearing him he will perform, and their cry for help he will hear, and he will save them.” (Ps. 145:19)
Those truly fearing Jehovah dedicate themselves to him and their desire is to do his will. There is every reason for us to trust in Jehovah as the source of our help and salvation, as we are trying to carry out his will. “And this is the confidence that we have toward him, that, no matter what it is that we ask according to his will, he hears us. Further, if we know he hears us respecting whatever we are asking, we know we are to have the things asked since we have asked them of him.” (1 John 5:14, 15) We are aware that, in this day, it is Jehovah’s will for us to proclaim the good news of the Kingdom and carry forward his pure worship. Our desire should be to let people know the great issue involving Jehovah’s sovereignty in the universe, even though there is considerable opposition to our doing so. The opportunity is thus open for people of all kinds to accept Jehovah’s message and put faith in him, learning of his patience with the human family and his desire to see mankind come to repentance and gain salvation.
11. How does Jehovah answer cries for help from his servants?
11 So it is our keen desire to see this Kingdom work carried out. We do not do the work alone. We are servants of Jehovah and are working together with him. In these difficult “last days” we must call on him for help, and when we come down to the climax of the issue and “Gog of the land of Magog” makes his attack, as foretold in Ezekiel 38 and 39, we will have to rely upon Jehovah and call upon him in order to be protected and saved. King David was saved in outstanding ways when the enemies were pursuing him. Christ Jesus had to give his life in connection with Jehovah‘s purpose, but he experienced a resurrection by Jehovah. So Jehovah is able to overcome any pressures or opposition the enemies of the truth might bring, even to the point of answering cries for help on the part of his servants who may go into death and who will need to be saved through the resurrection.
12. Why do we not need to be fearful when the wicked are annihilated?
12 So, it remains true, that
“Jehovah is guarding all those loving him, but all the wicked ones he will annihilate.” (Ps. 145:20)
Since we have come to the climax of wickedness and the “great tribulation” is just ahead, it is a blessing to have such reassuring words that Jehovah is guarding all those loving him. (Matt. 24:21) The time has come for the annihilation of the wicked ones, and they must be warned. But Jehovah’s servants as a group are destined to pass through the “great tribulation” brought upon the wicked, and in that way see the salvation of Jehovah toward them. Jehovah truly loves those who are loyal to him and will not forget them in the time of his great anger against the wicked. Numerous are the examples in the Scriptures of Jehovah’s mighty acts in preserving and delivering his people at the very times that he brought punishments against the wicked ones. Truly, we are eagerly awaiting the time when the annihilation of the wicked will occur and those who oppose Jehovah’s kingship will be removed from the scene.
13. (a) How has Jehovah guarded his modern-day servants? (b) What does Jehovah have in store for those loving him?
13 All through this period of the “last days” Jehovah’s servants have been calling upon him for help and have shown their love for him. Jehovah has preserved and guarded his servants through many difficulties, especially during the period of World War II when many bans came on the work in different parts of the world and there were thousands in concentration camps and prisons. Mob violence occurred in many parts of the earth as well. But the proclamation of the Kingdom good news went forward, and Jehovah was kind to his servants, adding increase, giving comfort by multiplying their numbers throughout the world. It is Jehovah’s purpose that the Kingdom rule by Christ Jesus extend over all the earth. There will be subjects of that kingdom living on the earth as the “great crowd” of “other sheep” pass through the tribulation, thereafter to be joined by the many coming forth from the graves in the resurrection. Thus the annihilation of the wicked ones will not mean disaster for Jehovah’s servants. Rather, Jehovah will respond to the love shown to him by his servants and will guard them and show his love, mercy and kindness to them. And in his love, he has in store for his “other sheep” a wonderful earthly paradise where they may enjoy everlasting life. (Luke 23:43) The settling of the great issue over Jehovah’s universal kingship means only blessings for lovers of Jehovah and will provide an opportunity to appreciate Jehovah more and more as the years go by. How marvelous it will be to live in the time of the fulfillment of the last verse of Psalm 150 when “every breathing thing” will praise Jehovah and all the wicked will be gone!​—Ps 150 Vs. 6.
14. Of what blessings from Jehovah can we speak?
14 Look back if you will and see the many blessings Jehovah has given us. See how he has satisfied us with rich spiritual food. Appreciate even more the wonderful privilege he has given us to be servants of his now and all the wonderful prospects for the future. Since there is a prospect of being Armageddon survivors, rejoice in looking ahead to the time of the resurrection and the wonderful work of then informing and educating those who come out of the graves. Many of them will have to learn of the Great King Jehovah for the first time. They will have to know to whom they are indebted for being alive once more. Who is going to tell them? Would not each of us rejoice to be able to do so? Yes, we do look forward to praising Jehovah forever.
15. What privileges with regard to God’s kingship are ours?
15 But what of the immediate present? What are you doing about the great issue of Jehovah’s kingship? Are you among the loyal ones who trust Jehovah and talk about the glory of his kingship from day to day? May each one of us be a loyal supporter of Jehovah’s kingship by means of his enthroned Son, Jesus Christ, the Greater David, and may we be as wholehearted in our personal determination to praise Jehovah publicly as was King David, who said:
“The praise of Jehovah my mouth will speak; and let all flesh bless his holy name to time indefinite, even forever.”​—Ps. 145:21.
[Footnotes]
Since Psalm 145 is an alphabetic psalm, each successive verse beginning with the successive letter in the Hebrew alphabet, the New World Translation, 1971 edition, has this footnote: “A verse beginning with the Hebrew letter nun is missing after the mem verse. In some Hebrew manuscripts the nun verse reads: ‘Jehovah is faithful in all his words, and lovingly kind in all his works.’ This is confirmed by LXXVgSy.”
[Picture on page 21]
Loyal ones talk about the glory of Jehovah’s kingship

