From Our Readers
Santeria  You begin your Awake! article “The Lure of Santeria” (July 8, 2000) by implying that Santeria is uniquely prominent in Cuba and that it is from Cuba that Santeria has been gradually introduced into other countries. And yet buried within the article, we see that Santeria was carried to all the Caribbean islands by African slaves from Nigeria. This article was not written by a Cuban but by someone from Mexico. This is what is called yellow journalism, and it damages your credibility.
V. R., United States
We had no intention of implying that Santeria is “uniquely prominent in Cuba.” On the contrary, we showed that Santeria is widely practiced in other parts of the world, including Mexico and the United States. As for the spread of Santeria, the “Encyclopædia Britannica” says that Santeria is a “religious cult that originated in Cuba and spread to neighbouring islands . . . It developed out of the traditions of the Yoruba people (of modern Nigeria and Benin).”—ED.
Endometriosis  Thank you very, very much for the article “My Struggle With Endometriosis.” (July 22, 2000) I too was diagnosed as having endometriosis and have had a very rough time. Some of my Christian brothers never understood why I was always so sick. But after reading the article, they now have a different view.
G. S., Jamaica
Reading about Deborah Andreopoulos was like reading my own life story! I have suffered for many years, and this article was an answer to my prayers. It provided much-needed encouragement.
J.C.F., Ireland
Two and a half months ago, I was diagnosed as having endometriosis. What I am most grateful for is knowing that I am not alone and that many women are going through the same thing.
A. W., Guatemala
Thank you for addressing the impact that this disease has not only on the patient but also on friends and family. Seeing your article made me feel that Jehovah really cares and understands what we are going through.
N. A., Canada
In just a few days’ time, I will undergo surgery, and the experience of Deborah Andreopoulos was an encouragement to me. Now I think I can face my problem with a better spirit.
M. B., Italy
Antarctica  The article “Antarctica—The Last Frontier” (July 22, 2000) was read and reread. Our Awake! writer in Australia and the layout artist did a magnificent job! It brought back memories of things past. During the International Geophysical Year some 45 years ago, a group of U.S. scientists were assigned to study Antarctica. It took three large bound volumes to chronicle their work. As a free-lance graphic artist, I was hired to do the layout work. Today I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and I am in my 16th year as a full-time evangelizer of the good news. Still, I am surrounded by Antarctica, having many photos and maps of Antarctica on display in my studio. Thanks so much for the article!
C. M., United States

