Vol XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., SEPTEMBER 15, 1918 


No. IS 


THE NEW COVENANT 

"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a New Covenant with the house of Israel 
and with the house of Judah." — Jeremiah 31:31. 


The new covenant is the Scriptural name for the new arrangement
 between God and man which will be instituted at 
the beginning of the age to follow this, and by which God purposes
 to receive the world of mankind again into favor with 
himself. The covenant relationship which Adam originally enjoyed
 with his Maker, and its resultant harmony with him, 
was based upon contingent obedience to the expressed will of 
God, and was forfeited by disobedience. 

This covenant relationship with God was renewed typically 
at Mount Sinai, with Israel. (Exodus 19:1-9; 24:3-8) Through 
Moses as mediator, God promised that if Israel would keep his 
law they should have everlasting life. The inauguration of 
that Law Covenant was effected by their mediator, six months 
after Israel left Egypt, through the sacrifices of bulls and of 
goats; the children of Israel solemnly agreeing to their part 
of the covenant. These Atonement Bay sacrifices were repeated 
year by year continually; for the blood of bulls and of goats 
could never take away sin. (Hebrews 10:1-9) Israel failed to 
gain the blessing promised in their Law Covenant. God foreknew
 that Israel would fail; but through their endeavors he 
was giving an object lesson which would in the future be a 
lasting blessing to Israel and to the world. 

The mediation of the old Law Covenant brought Israel into 
a typical covenant relationship to God. The mediation of the 
new Law Covenant will bring not only Israel, but all mankind
 who will have come into line with the kingdom arrangements
, into actual covenant relationship. Then each individual 
will be finally tested by Jehovah, as Adam was in the beginning
, to demonstrate whether he is worthy of everlasting life. 
None who fail to stand the test will be permitted to enter upon 
the eternal ages of blessing to follow. 

THE EFFECT OF THE "BETTEB SACRIFICES" 

God will introduce this new Law Covenant through the 
Mediator of the New Covenant, Christ Jesus, in whom the entire
 arrangement centers, and through whom it will be carried 
out. For a period of a thousand years this Mediator will do a 
work of mediation for mankind. And he will not only be 
Mediator, but will be Priest, Prophet. King, Judge. As 
priest, he will uplift and bless humanity and receive the^r 
offeringa* (See Tabernacle Shadows, pp. 93-100) As king he 
will rule mankind in righteousness; as prophet he will teach 
them; as judge he will decide and pass sentence, favorable 
or unfavorable. It will require the full thousand years to 
bring the people out of their condition of death and degradation, 
to restore whosoever will of all mankind to the image and I'kenes
^ of God, lost by Adam in Eden. 

The basis of mediation on the part of the better Mediator 
will be the "better sacrifices" of this Gospel age. Let us notice
 the Apostle's declaration regarding this matter. In referring
 to the type, he says, "It was therefore necessary that the 
patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these ; 
but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than 
these." (Hebrews 0:23} The words "heavens" and "heavenly 
things" as used in tins text do not refer to spiritual things; 
for nothing spiritual is secured by these better sacrifices. Only 
human blessings, human rights, are thus secured. The word 
"heavens" means "heaved up, or higher"; and in order fro understand
 its specific meaning in any text, the word must be 
defined in harmony with its context. St. Paul is here contrasting
 the types of the Jewish age with the antitypes of 
the Gospel dispensation. 


In the an ti typical arrangement the sacrifices will never be 
repeated. They are offered once for all. Through the "better 
sacrifices" the an ti typical Mediator will have the power to 
start the world with a clean slate, as it were. Then the work 
of uplift, of restitution, will begin. As the Lord declares 
through the prophet, "I will take away the stony heart out 
of your flesh and give you a heart of flesh." — Ezekiel 30:26; 
11:19. DEATH UNDER THE NEW ORDER 

Thus Adam's Bin and ^condemnation, which came to mankind
 by heredity, will no more be remembered by anybody; 
that is to say, it will be no more a torturing remembrance. 
While the lessons learned by the world through their experiences
 with sin and death will never be forgotten, nor their 
benefits lost, nevertheless these experiences will cease to distress
 mankind. The joys which will then be theirs will swallow 
up the sorrows and tears erf the past; and the minds of mankind
 will be filled with the wonderful truths, the wonderful 
blessings, the glorious new projects and prospects continually 
opening before their widening vision. To all eternity the perfected
 earth will be filled with a race of happy, perfect beings 
in the human likeness of their Lord, 

The work of taking away the stony heart, and the giving 
of a heart of flesh will be gradual, however. Many will awake 
to shame, in proportion to their wilfulness in sin in the past. 
But the disciplinary processes of the kingdom will gradually 
relieve all who are amenable to the influences of righteousness
 and to the work of reformation then instituted. By degrees
 their hard-heartedness will disappear, and they will become
 more and more tender-hearted and affectionate. No member
 of the human race will longer be held accountable for 
Adam's sin. In Ezekiel 18:2-4, we read of present conditions
: "Tile fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children
's teeth are set on edge." But during the next m^p the 
effects of the sour grape of sin will be gradually eliminated. 
Under the new order, whoever dies will die for his own sin, not 
for the sin of his fathers. 

Since all mankind are in a condition of imperfection, all 
will in that day still bo liable to commit sin. The only arrangement
 by which they can attain to everlasting life will be 
by their adoption into the family of the Mediator — the Christ 
— who will quicken their weak mortal bodies. Although no 
divine condemnation will hold over against them from their 
past, yet only such as come into proper relationship with the 
Mediator will receive the divine blessing. Under the New 
Covenant the special favors of the Lord will be only for the 
obedient. Whoever rejects the opportunities then offered will, 
at the close of the first hundred years , be destroyed from 
amongst the people. — Isaiah 65:20, Leeser. 

THE SEALING OF THE NEW COVENANT 

God cannot consistently enter into a covenant with people 
who are under his own sentence of death. Under the typical 
arrangement of the Law Covenant, the death of bulls and of 
goats was accepted as a sacrifice to God ; and the people of 
Israel, thus typically cleansed, were enaibled to enter into a 
typical relationship with him. This did not mean that the 
•blood of bulls and of goats was sufficient to take away sin ; 
but that it was a typical representation of the real sacrifices, 
under the Grace Covenant, the Covenant of Sacrifice. 

If the New Covenant were now sealed, then all the Wood 
of the covenant must have bee© previously prepared, must have 


[6324] 


KkptSmbsr 15 ( 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


{27G 


been already fully shed. If this were true, then we could have 
no chance of sharing in the death of Christ. It is evident, 
then, that the New Covenant is not yet sealed. The antitvpical
 bullock has been slain, and his blood taken into the Most 
Holy. The an ti typical goat is in process of being slain. When 
its sacrifice shall have 'been fully completed, its blood will be 
sprinkled upon the heavenly Mercy Seat by the great Hkfh 
Priest, as was the blood of the builock. In other words, the 
merit of Jesus, now in the hands of Justice, will then be free 
from embargo, and will be applied by our High Priest as an 
offset to Adam's sin. At the end of this Gospel age, now about 
closed, all the sacrificing will be over, and the great Mediator 
will be ready to do the work assigned to him for the world. 

Tlie first work of the new dispensation will be the application
 of the blood upon the antitypieal Mercy Seat, in heaven, 
to make reconciliation for the sins of "all the people" — the entire
 race of Adam. Until that shall have been done, the New 
Covenant cannot be inaugurated. This -second presentation of 
tlie blood of Jesus, of the merit of his sacrifice, will effect the 
sealing, or making valid, of the covenant. 

NEW COVENANT BENEFITS WORLD-WIDE 
For many centuries the New Covenant has been promised 
(Jeremiah 31:31-34), but it has not yet gone into effect. As 
soon as the blood of the Atonement shall have been applied for 
the sins of all the people, the New Covenant will become operative
. At the beginning of the new dispensation the world 
will begin life anew, so to speak. The condemnation resting 
upon them for six thousand years will have been canceled. Satisfaction
 to Justice will have been made for Adam and for his 
posterity, who fell in him. All the resultant blessings are to 
come through the Redeemer's hands, as Mediator. Throughout 
the Millennium, all who ever would have life must obtain it 
through this great Life-giver. (John 5:21} None can receive 
a share of the blessing provided save by the terms of the New 
Covenant and by endeavoring to live up to thera. All who 
do so will be helped and grante 1 graee sufficient through the 
Mediator, 

The sprinkling of the blood upon the heavenly Mercy Seat 
on behalf of all mankind will take place before restitution begins
, before the legal right to live can be given even to the ancient
 worthies. Nevertheless, although the sins of the past 
will be fully canceled, whoever would have God's blessing, 
God's approval must become "an Israelite indeed" — must become
 a believer in God, by believing in the'Mediator, who will 
be God's Representative, and by nlacing himself in the hands 
of the Christ for training and uplifting. This law of the New 
Covenant will be applicable to every son a-nd daughter of 
Adam. Whoever would attain life everlasting must accept 
Christ and join this earthly kingdom class; for Christ's kingdom
 will rule the world until all sin and all wilful sinners 
are destroyed. 

The entire race of mankind will receive some benefit from 
the New Covenant, irrespective of their acceptance of Christ, 
in that they will be awakened from the tomb and be brought 
to a knowledge of the truth. (1 Timothy 2:3-6) The Scriptures
 tell us that as by the offense of one man condemnation 
passed upon all, so by the obedience of one man the free gift 
comes to all, unto justification of life. (Romans 5:12, 18) 
Because of the application of Christ's sacrificial merit for all 
men, it will be just for God to awaken the world from death 
and give all an opportunity to attain justification to perfect 
life. This free gift of God through Christ does not guarantee 
eternal life to any except upon specific conditions. We would 
say, therefore, that the benefits of the New Covenant will be 
applicable to everybody in a limited sense. If God had foreseen
 that nobody would adopt this arrangement, that fact 
would no doubt have altered his plan. 

THE SIN TTNTO DEATH 
At the introduction of the new age, all the accounts against 
humanity will have been canceled by divine Justice, and mankind
 will be turned over to the Mediator; for if they were 
kept under divine Justice, they would immediately be condemned
 again, because of their inability to do perfectly. Therefore
 the Father will not take cognizance of sinners. For a 
thousand years they will be left under the merciful provisions 
of the New Covenant. Those who will obediently do their best 
will receive all the blessings of the kingdom; and those who 
will not become obedient under those conditions will go into 
the second death. 

During the Gospel dispensation, the only ones who can 
commit the sin unto death (1 John 5:16), blasphemy against 
the holy Spirit (Matthew 12:31, 32), are those who have 
t>een enlightened of the holy Spirit. St. Paul says, "As touching
 those who were once enlightened, and tasted of the heavenly
 gift, and were made partakers of the holy Spirit, and 
tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the age to 


come, and then fell away, it is impossible to renew them unto 
repentance." (Hebrews 6:4-0. Rev. Ver.) Their sin would be 
wilful; for it would be ''blasphemy against the holy Spirit.*' 
Therefore only the church are on trial now. We who have 
been begotten of the holy Spirit are on trial for life or death 
eternal. Those who now die the second death will have no opportunity
 in the future. (Proverbs 21:16) If those now begotten
 of the holy Spirit are faithful, they will be granted to 
be members of the glorified bride of Christ. Tnose of the spiritbegotten
 wiio fail to attain a place in the bride class will, if 
overcomers, eventually receive life on a lower plane. They 
will be of the great company, the virgins who serve the bride. 
(Psalm 45:13, 15) But if they fail to attain either of these 
positions, all that remains for Ihem is the second death. 

As for the world, their day of judgment, as individuals, has 
not yet fully come. They are still in condemnation through 
father Adam — not recognized as having any rights at all. Some 
of the world are excellent people; but even these have neither 
part nor lot in the salvation of the present time. The blessed 
arrangement for them is in the Millennial age, when, it they 
yield full obedience to Jehovah's Anointed, their sins and their 
iniquities will be forgotten. 

As the sins of the church are now canceled, so likewise will 
the whole world go absolutely free from the condemnation of 
Adamic sin ; and they will have all the kingdom opportunities 
and privileges, it they accept of Christ, the great Mediator. 
Nevertheless, they will suffer stripes, as a result of the deeds 
done in the present life — not as a punishment for their sins, 
which have during that time all been remitted, but because of 
the habits previously formed, the character developed; for 
the weaknesses of the fallen nature will have left wounds, 
which will require more or less rigorous treatment in order to 
their healing. With the world it will then be true, as now 
with the church, that if they shall sin against the spirit of holiness
, the holy Spirit knowingly and wilfully, the penalty 
will be a second condemnation — to the second death, destruction
. 

While our Lord Jesus said that all manner of sin would be 
forgiven except blasphemy against the holy Spirit, yet the 
Pharisees, to whom these words were addressed, could not 
commit this sin, because they had not the fulness of knowledge
.— Matthew 12:31, 32; Acts 3:17. 

FORGIVENESS OF ADAMIC SIN ABSOLUTE 
When God recognizes the satisfaction of justice and cleans 
the slate for the sinner race, this does not mean that he has 
merely transferred the account to Jesus, who will hold it 
against them. Our Lord will not hold against mankind the 
things which the Father has forgotten. On the contrary, as 
the Representative of the Father, the Lord Jesus will be glad 
to give to men the benefit of that forgiveness, merely holding 
them at a distance from the Father during the period of their 
imperfection, standing between as Mediator, to give whosoever
 will of (mankind time for restoration, development of character
, etc., and taking away the stoniness of their hearts and 
giving them hearts of flesh. 

The Lord through the prophet says, * 'Their sins and their 
iniquities will I remember no more." The Apostle Paul call.* 
attention to this statement. He points out that under the Law 
Covenant this was not done, but that the =iins remained; for 
although atonement was made afresh for Israel year by year. 
nevertheless the inferior sacrifices could not take away sin. 
{Hebrews 8:10-12; 10:1-4, 16, 17) This New Covenant in 
Christ, however, will absolutely take away sins. See Jeremiah 
31:31-34; Ezekiel 36:25-29. When mankind becomes n part 
of Israel, the promises made to Jews will apply to Gentiles 
a-lso- "PBINCES IN ALL THE EARTH'* 

The Scriptures tell us that "out of Zion shall go forth the 
law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem." { Isaiah 2:3; 
Micah 4:2) When the kingdom is set up the ancient worthies 
will be made "princes in all the earth." (Psalm 45:16) This 
arrangement will appeal first and primarily to the Jew, who 
would naturally be the first to come under the new regulations. 
We may not say that all the Jews w T ill do so, but that this will 
be true of at least a considerable number of them. In time 
others of the world will join. There are many well-meaning 
people who have not taken the vow of consecration to the 
Lord, but who would like to help rather than to hinder others
. Such will in due time attach themselves to the kingdom, 
which shall be "the desire of all nations." — Haggai 2:7. 

In the case of the ancienr"worthies, the earthly "princes ?' 
their freedom from imperfection will make them conspicuous 
amongst mankind. As the world come to know about theBe, 
they will say, "Are not these God's people?" Mankind will perceive
 that God has rewarded the ancient worthies by giving 
them an instantaneous resurrection to perfect life, and will 


[6325] 


27S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Hrooki.vn, N. Y. 


learn that their "better resurrection" was given because of 
faithfulness in the past. 

EXPIATION OP WHJTJL SIN 

Our Lord Jesus, having laid down the ransom price for 
the sins of the whole world, has placed it in the hands of Justice
 as a deposit, to be held during this Gospel age for the 
benefit of the church class. At the end of this age he will apply
 it to the cancelation of the claims of Justice against Adam, 
which will include all sins due to the fall. Jehovah God will 
accept the price and will remit the Adamic sins. There will 
be some sins, however, which will not be covered by this great 
Sin-offering. These are wilful sins conumtted by members of 
the race. As wilful sins are not covered by the Sin-offering, 
but only Adam's sin and those sins resulting from Adamic 
weakness, God has mercifully arranged that the sufferings of 
the great company class, the "scape-goat" class, necessary to 
the destruction of their flesh, which they had covenanted to 
sacrifice, will be utilized as an expiation — not as a sin-offering 
—for these wilful sins of the world. — Leviticus 16:8, 10, 20-22. 

When the great company shall have finished their course, 
the Atonement for sin shall have been fully accomplished, 
and the account against the world upon the books of Justice 
shall have been fully squared. Divine condemnation will be entirely
 lifted from the race, the new covenant of blessing will 
then be inaugurated. Then it will be the part of the people 
to come up to the requirements of the New Covenant, by 
earnestly striving to do their best. If, however, because of 
imperfection they unwittingly violate God's Law during the 
Mediatorial reign, they will not be amenable to that law ; for 
the Mediator will stand between them and that law. 

COVENANT EELATIONSHIP WITH GOD CONDITIONAL 

The Mediator will not, as we have said, hold against any 
one the transgressions of this present life. But it will require 
long, patient effort to regain the perfection from which the 
first parents of the race fell. Some of mankind have fallen 
much further down than others, because of having inherited 
greater depravity, or because of a more perverse disposition 
and of a less effort to control their fallen nature. But under 
the gracious arrangements of the New Covenant, the great 
Mediator purposes to grant the necessary assistance, by nelping
 the people individually to understand the requirements of 
the new arrangement, by v p r <> m ptly punishing any attempt to 
do wrong, by rewarding every effort to do right, and by supply* 
ing strength, physical and mental, to meet the requirements 
of his righteous rule. 

By the close of the Mediatorial reign those who respond 
and make earnest efforts to advance, will be brought to a condition
 of human perfection and of covenant relationship with 
Jehovah, as was Adam at the beginning. Then they must be 
subjected to the same test of loyalty as was Adam, with no 
mediator between them and God's justice, How many will 
maintain that relationship, and how many will lose it and 
suffer destruction, we cannot know. That some will prove unworthy
 of life and meet this extreme penaltv of wilful sin — 
the second death — is clearly shown. See Revelation 20:7-9: 
22:14, 15. 

The ancient worthies are to be at the head of the earthly 
phase of the kingdom. They will form its nucleus, ruling 
under the glorified churoh, which will be invisible. These 
worthies cannot come forth from the tomb until divine justice 
has been satisfied for the world; for they also were members 
of the fallen race. After the Mediator has made this satisfaction
, the ancient worthies will be the first to be blessed by 
the New Covenant, and will be raised from the dead as perfect 
men, in the image of God, as Adam was originally created. In 
their resurrection they will receive complete restitution to 
human perfection; for during their previous lifetime "they 
had this testimony, that they pleased God." — Hebrews 11:5. 

Soon after the awakening of their faithful prophets of old, 
the Jews then living who still retain their faith in the New 
Covenant promises made to them (Jeremiah 31:31-34; Hebrews
 8:7-32), and who have waited for their Messiah, will 
begin to see clearly, and will join themselves to these ancient 
worthies. Then the world will gradually come to see, and will 
also come under the terms of Israel's New Law Covenant by 
becoming a part of Israel, a part of Abraham's earthly seed.— 
Romans 4:17, 18; Isaiah 49:6-12. 

Covenant relationship with God means perfection, either 
actual or reckoned. During the thousand years of Messiah's 
kingdom, mankind will be approaching actual perfection. But 
they will not enter into it as a race until the close of the 
thousand years. Then the Mediator will turn them over to 
God; and they will be privileged to enter into covenant relationship
 with him, and must stand or fall individually. As we 
read, at that time Satan shall be "loosed for a little* season"; 
and all who love unrighteousness in their hearts, whatever 


[6326] 


has been their outward course during their trial time, will be 
manifested. They will be deceived by the adversary. 'These 
shall go away into everlasting punishment I Greek, kolasis, 
cutting off or cutting short], and the righteous into life 
eternal." (Matthew 25:46) The one class passes into life; 
while the other class is cut off, restrained, from life. The reward
 of the righteous will be everlasting life; the reward of 
the wicked — "the devil and his angels," his messengers, all who 
are of his spirit — -will be everlasting death — destruction. Those 
who are of the Millennial "sheep" class, who go to the King's 
right hand of favor, will, after the final testing at the hands of 
God, enter upon the ages of glory beyond, the blessings of 
which are not revealed in the Scriptures. 

THE OHXTRCH NOT TJNDEB NEW COVENANT 

The church of Christ is not under the New Covenant. 
Therefore it is not proper to speak of the church as being 
blessed by this covenant, although the church receives a great 
blessing and privilege in respect to it. If there were to be no 
New Covenant, there would then be no need of a Mediator, and 
no need of the "better sacrifices" whereby it is to be instituted. 

St. Paul's statement that God has made the churoh "able 
ministers of the New Covenant" indicates that the Lord's people
 have something to do with its preparation. (2 Corinthians 
3:6) Unless there were the "better sacrifices," there would be 
no basis for that New Covenant. The sufferings which the 
church undergo at this present time are a blessed privilege 
to us ; for we are ministers of that New Covenant in the sense 
that we are serving it by training for future service, for service
»after it shall have been inaugurated. 

While a great building is in process of erection, the men 
working upon its construction might be said to be greatly 
benefited bv that building. That would not mean that they 
would be benefited ,bv the use of it in the future, but that 
they were being benefited during its construction. So now the 
church receives certain rioh blessings and privileges in connection
 with the New Covenant. Later, the entire world will be 
blest by it, in a different way. 

During this Gospel age, God is dealing merely with the 
church, not with the world. There is, however, some resemblance
 between the divine blessings now coming upon the 
church and those coming upon the world by and by. Then, 
the Lord will rewrite his law in the hearts of mankind, as it 
was originally written in Adam's heart; and men will have 
new hearts. At the end of the thousand years all mankind 
will be fleshly images of God, and ready for their final testing
; for those who have refused to make progress to perfection
 will have been destroyed during the Messianic reign. But 
the church have new hearts now, right views of things, right 
sentiments. In the case of the church, however, there is not 
a taking away of the stoniness of heart and a making of it a 
heart of flesh; but there is an entirely new nature. This new 
nature of course has something to do with the flesh; for the 
flesh is now the servant of the new creature. The law of God 
is recognized in the flesh, under the compulsion of the new 
creature. GIFT OF THE CHRIST TO THE WORLD 

The New Covenant, with all that goes with it, is the blessing
 w T hich the Christ gives to mankind. It is God's Covenant; 
and he has arranged that it shall go to the world through this 
Christ class, Head and body. If, then, the church are to give 
these blessings, they must first have had them. No man can 
give away what he does not first possess. This thought that 
the New Covenant is a testament, or gift, of Christ to the 
world is made very prominent in the Scriptures. It is a gift 
in which the church shares; for every member has relinquished 
his restitution rights with Christ. "If we suffer with him, 
we shall also reign with him; if we be dead with him, we shall 
live with him," and all things are ours because we are his. — 2 
Timothy 2:11, 12. 

These glorious things are clearly set forth in various types 
in the Old Testament, as well as plainly stated in the New 
Testament. For instance, St. Paul explains that Isaac, the heir 
of Abraham, was a type of the Christ, Head and body. Isaac 
did not receive his inheritance by a new covenant, but by the 
original covenant with Abraham, as does the church. — 
Galatians 3:8, 16, 29; 4:22-28. 

In Micah 4:1-4, we read that "in the last days, the mountain
 Tkingdom] of the house of the Lord shall be established 
in the top of the mountains [kingdoms of earth], and many 
people shall flow unto it. And many nations shall come and 
say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, 
and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of 
his ways, and we will walk in his paths." The succeeding 
verses of the chapter depict the influence that will be exerted. 
The blessings and prosperity will then be with those who will 
be in harmony with God. 

Now it is different. "All that will live godly in Christ 


SsrntMBSR 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(279-280) 


Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Timothy 3:12) They 
"shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake." 
(Matthew 5:11) These things indicate that all who are faithful
 to God during the present age will have more hardship 
than do those who are unfaithful. Many of the worldly, even 
the wicked of the world, have great prosperity in the present 
time. The world think that Christians, true followers of 
Jesus, are making their lives miserable by the course which 
they pursue. But the world is greatly mistaken in this matter
. On the contrary, we are enjoying ourselves greatly; we 
are having a good time ! We have much advantage every way, 
in spite of our afflictions; for we know that in a very little 
while our trials and afflictions will all be over, that the glorious
 Kingdom of Messiah in which, if faithful, we are to share, 
is about to be set up in the earth. 

In the future dispensation, God tells us, the tables will be 
turned. None of the wicked will prosper. Then whoever is 
unrighteous shall suffer, and whoever does righteously shall 
receive a blessing. (Psalm 37:1, 2, 7-17, 22) Very often now 
the wicked prosper, and the poor and needy and the good of 
earth are oppressed. When the times of restitution come to 
the world, all will be changed. The blessing will be of God; 
and the only way to gain that blessing will be by coming 
into harmony with the new order of things in the kingdom of 
Messiah. 


PERSECUTION AN AID TO CHRISTIAN CHARACTER CRYSTALLIZATION 


"All that will live godly in Christ Jesus 

Persecution is a word that primarily means the infliction 
of an injury as a punishment for adherence to some opinion 
or course of conduct which cannot properly be regarded as 
criminal; such as a religious creed or mode of worship. Not 
all who have been persecuted have been hanged or crucified or 
burned at the stake, however. Some have been persecuted by 
being put into prison; others have been persecuted by bitter 
words, which the Scriptures liken to arrows shot out by the 
wicked. (Psalm 64:2-4) Although with the advance of 
civilization matters have changed considerably, nevertheless 
the statement of our text is still true. Adventists, Baptists, 
Methodists, Presbyterians and others have in turn been persecuted
 for their religious beliefs. These persecutions have taken 
various forms; sometimes they were public whippings, etc. 

We are now living in a day when gross, vile persecution is 
not so popular as in olden times. Today public sentiment is 
too high for any one to attempt such persecutions as Nero 
practised; such as throwing to the lions or other wild beasts 
those who incurred his ill-will. Nor will it permit the putting 
to death of those who differ from popular creeds as to the interpretation
 of the Scriptures, or who hold different opinions 
along other lines of thought or practise. But nevertheless 
persecution continues to be practised in various more refined 
forms. There is a kind of social boycott which is popular. People
 will separate from their company those who think differently
 from themselves along religious lines, and will have 
nothing to do with all such. They will cast out the names of 
such as being evil, and will speak lightly of even their best 
endeavors to live as consistent Christians. 

In our text the Apostle declares that some form of persecution
 will attach to any one who would live a godly life. He 
explains that the infliction of injury might come directly upon 
an individual, or he might suffer indirectly by being associated 
with those who are persecuted. (Hebrews 10:32-34} Here he 
shows that those who become companions of those who Are 
persecuted for righteousness* sake are themselves also suffering
 persecution. Other Scriptures indicate the same thought. 
"Whether one menuber [of the body of Christ] suffer, all the 
members suffer with it." (1 Corinthians 12:26) Whatever 
injury is done to one will affect all who are of the same class, 
not only in the way of arousing their sympathies and causing 
them mental pain, but also in their being associated with the 
class thus treated and sharing in the contumely to which they 
are subject. 

Having seen what persecution includes, and knowing that 
all who would 'be acceptable to God must endure it in some 
measure, we remember that St. John said, "Marvel not, my 
brethren, if the world hate you," and that the Master assured 
his disciples of what they would have to share as his disciples, 
saying, "Ye shall be hated of all men for my sake." (1 John 
3:13; Mathew 10:22) In a general way everybody belonging 
to the world is in opposition to the Lord's people — everybody 
who might be included in the world, everybody who might be 
worth anything, everybody whose opinion is valued by the 
world, everbody who is honorable in the eyes of the world. 
WHAT COKST1TUTES GODXiY IJVIHO 

To live godly means to live after the manner which God 
would approve, to live in opposition to sin and in harmony 
with righteousness, endeavoring to do that which is right, that 
which is in accord with the divine law — practising the Golden 
Rule, doing unto our neighbor as we would wish done unto 
ourselves. 

In the world there are two companies; one under the banner
 of Satan, and the other under the banner of God. The first 
class is of darkness, of sin, over whom the prince of darkness 
has an influence. The other class serve the right. Whoever 
walks in the light of the Word of God will find that the darkness
 opposes the light. Nevertheless, we who are under the 
Lord's banner are to walk in the light. Our Lord exhorted 


shall suffer 'persecution" — 2 Timothy 3:12. 

us to let our light so shine before men that they may see our 
good works and glorify our Father in heaven. In other words, 
we are to let the world see what godly living means. 

In some respects the world has attained to a very good 
standard. The laws of the civilized world have been just. We 
are glad that we are living in a time when the laws are so 
just; we are glad to have these special favors that belong, 
we believe, to our day more than to any previous day. At the 
same time there is on the part of many an endeavor to avoid 
the spirit of the divine law. Because of the selfishness which 
prevails in the world, there is a disposition to take advantage 
of a neighbor, to cheat him, to take from him more than is 
right, to give him less than is just. In a general way, therefore
, whoever stands for what is right will find himself in 
conflict with the majority of people. If he adheres closely 
to principle the greater number will be against him, will 
esteem him to be a mean man, hard to get along with, etc. 
Those who are of the darkness hate those who are of the light. 
There is a feeling of condemnation which the world experiences 
when in the presence of the godly. They are never comfortable 
when such persons are present. This is not because the godly 
ever do to them wrong, but because they recognize the fact 
that the godly maintain a higher standard of living than do 
they. 

LIVING GODLY Iff OHEIST JESUS 

To live godly in Christ Jesus means much more than merely 
the keeping of the Ten Commandments. Not to blaspheme, 
not to do harm to another, etc., is to be on the right side. But 
to live godly in Christ Jesus is something far beyond this. 
The Leader, the Head, of the church laid down his life in selfsacrifice
 ; and those who are seeking to follow his example are 
also sacrificing their earthly interests, they are ambassadors 
for God, and therefore will proclaim his kingdom which is soon 
to be established — set up — in the earth. The message of the 
kingdom will necessarily be out of harmony with all others. 

Those who proclaim God's message of the coming kingdom 
will be opposed by those who claim that the kingdom is already 
here. They will also be opposed by those who say, "Why do 
you not get out and do slum work? The present Bocial order 
is very well established. We are trying to make the people 
see that God's kingdom is already in power. We are trying to 
lift the churches to a higher level and to do those things which 
will make a greater outward show, and which will deeply impress
 the people. But if you continue to talk about higher 
conditions, etc., you will put us in a bad light before the world, 
and will gain nothing by so doing; for they will merely think 
that you are unbalanced." 

So those who would live godly in Christ Jesus have a narrow
 path to travel, a difficult way. This is because they are 
going contrary to nominalism, contrary to all the things of 
the world, contrary to the devil. Those who faithfully pursue 
this course bring tribulation upon themselves — the persecution 
to which our text refers. But all who are loyal to God and 
to the truth must thus suffer. They must expect persecution; 
for doubtless they will receive it until the last member of the 
church shall have finished his course in death. Whoever submits
 patiently to this opposition must not only sacrifice his 
natural preferences for the friendship of the world and for 
the pleasures of the present life, but he must learn to endure 
hardness in whatever shape it may come, while he is endeavoring
 to do the Lord's will and his work of advancing the interests
 of his kingdom. 

In order to be really in the service of the Lord we must 
study carefully and continually his plan of the ages, in order 
to imbibe its spirit of loving self-sacrifice and to possess an 
enthusiastic zeal for its accomplishment. Moreover, we must 
be active to the extent of our ability, in its service, at whatever 
cost that activity may require. This course will bring persecution
 upon us, as the Apostle has foretold in our text. Our 


[6327] 


(280-281) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Lord Jesus Christ suffered on this account; and as the Scriptures
 explain, his people are called upon to suffer with him, m 
order that after a while they shall reign with him in glory. 
WHY PERSECUTION IS PERMITTED 

The word suffer as used in our text has the significance 
of experience. That is, those who will live godly in Christ 
Jesus shall experience persecution as a part of their lot. This 
persecution may be of one kind or of another kind, according 
to circumstances. Sometimes it will result in mental suffering
; at other times it will produce physical pain. Sometimes 
it will cause very severe suffering, protracted anguish; at other 
times the anguish will be less agonizing. But the persecution 
will be there in either case. Those who have come into Christ 
are enabled to live above the conditions, however. Those who 
have become members of the .body of Christ have become such 
by full consecration to God and by the begetting of his holy 
(Spirit. On this account they belong to this special class that 
"will live godly in Christ Jesus.' p For them to live godly 
meana to live according to the standard which God has set for 
his people in his Word. 

There are others than Christians who may be said to live a 
pious life. Even among the heathen there are people who devote
 their lives to some lines which they consider to be pious ; 
and they are morally good people. Likewise in civilized lands 
there are people who live moral, upright lives, and to that 
extent godly lives — lives of which God would approve. Some 
Of the human race are less fallen than are others; and this 
clas3 find it natural bo live better lives than would those who 
are more injured by the Adamic fall. Therefore aanongst the 
worldly there are worthy men and women who are highly 
esteemed. For instance, Stephen Girard, of Philadelphia, is 
reputed to have been a very just man and to have given much 
alms to the poor. He provided Girard College, an institution 
for the support and education of poor fatherless white boys, 
where they were admitted between the ages of six to ten years, 
and received an education and learned a trade, that they might 
support themselves honestly. 

History affords many examples of upright men and women 
who have done much 'for 4he betterment of humanity. All 
these were godly in that they avoided the practise of sin and 
that they had an appreciation for truth, honesty and the character
 of God. But we do not hear that these people were persecuted
 for their morality. The world can appreciate that 
condition of things. But those who come into the body of 
Christ are permitted of the Lord to have a certain amount of 
persecution in order for their development. The apostles were 
noble characters; yet they suffered persecution, even as did 
our Lord himself. Evidently, therefore, it is the will of God 
that those in Christ should thus suffer, in order that their 
characters may he developed and that they may be prepared 
for the great work of the future, when all who endure faithfully
 shall reign with Christ Jesus their Lord. 

THE BLESSING FOB THOSE WHO OVEBOOME 

We would naturally expect that those who came into relationship
 with God under the special covenant arrangement of 
this Gospel age would be immune from suffering and persecution
 — that all such would be well thought of by the world. 


But the Scriptures inform ua that this would be a wrong 
expectation. For thousands of years the world has held in 
eateem a religious class of worldly people and has not persecuted
 them. Even back in the days of the Babylonian Empire
 the priestly class were regarded as very sacred. In our 
own day there are priests and preachers in the nominal church 
who are highly esteemed amongst men and who are not persecuted
. But everywhere the Scriptures call our attention 
to the fact that those who belong to the royal priesthood 
will suffer persecution if they live godly, and that whoever 
amongst this class does not thus suffer has evidence that he 
is not living godly. 

The conditions imposed upon the church are designed by 
the Lord to be crucial tests of loyalty to him and to the 
principles of righteousness. Trials, difficulties and persecutions
 are useful in demonstrating whether our covenant of consecration
 is really from the heart. Those who have made 
merely a lip covenant will in due time be sifted out, manifested
, separated from those who have covenanted from the 
heart to be dead with Christ. These the Lord purposes to 
make joint-heirs in the kingdom with his well-beloved Son. 
our Lord Jesus. It is for this reason that the call of the 
church takes place during this present age, while evil is still 
permitted to reign in the world, and while the majority of 
mankind are under the blinding influences of the adversary, 
who is not yet bound. 

As our Lord Jesus explained, the darkness of sin and error 
is in direct antagonism to the light of truth; and consequently
, when his people let their light shine, the effect upon 
the darkened world is that opposition is aroused, for the light. 
makes manifest the evils of darkness which otherwise would 
not appear, and thus disturbs those who are in sympathy 
with darkness. As a consequence, this latter class hate the 
light, and either publicly or privately oppose the children of 
the light, the light-bearers. Even those who have gotten out 
of the extreme darkness of moral pollution into the twilight 
of moral reformation cannot endure the clear, searching light 
of the true Gospel, but such prefer a measure of darkness. — 
John 3:19-21; 2 Corinthians 4:4-6. 

We can sympathize with those who see nothing of the light 
of the glorious character of' our God. Wie can also sympathize 
with those who see a little and who strive toward moral and 
other reforms, striving in various ways for sectarian prosperity
 Tather than for the upbuilding of the saints, "the 
church of the living God," those whose names are written 
in heaven. We should have patience with all such who give 
evidence that they are laboring in harmony with their convictions
; for whoever is engaged in good work of any kind 
will surely obtain a blessing as a result. But the true church 
is laboring, not merely for A blessing, but for the blessing — 
"the prize of our high calling of God in Christ Jesus." 
(Philippians 3:14) Let all, then, who see the prize, and who 
see the light of the glory of God as it shines in the face of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, be faithful to the terms, conditions, 
of their covenant of sacrifice; for all who are faithful unto 
death have the glorious promise that they shall receive the 
crown of life — immortality. — Revelation 2:10. 


THE CHRIST— "THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF JEHOVAH* 


"Thou ftkalt he called hy a new name; 


. . thou shalt also be a crown of a fort/ in the hand of the LORD, <\nd a royal diadem 
in the hand of thy God: 7 — Isaiah 62^2, 3, 


The context seems to refer this statement to Jerusalem. 
But we realize that the old Jerusalem was merely a type of 
rhe New Jerusalem; the old Zion was a type of the new Zion. 
The New Jerusalem, the new Zion, will be the church in glory. 
This church is pictured in Revelation as "the New Jerusalem 
coming down from Cod out of heaven, prepared as a bride 
adorned for her husband" — gloriously arrayed. This is one 
picture of the church, representing her queenly position. 
(Psalm 45:0) The New Jerusalem is spoken of as "the bride, 
the Lamb's wife." (Revelation 21:2, 9-11 ^ The power and 
the glory of <the Lamb are to be manifested in the Messianic 
kingdom. 

The Scriptures indicate that the name Jerusalem is to take 
on a new meaning; that the type is to give place to the antitype
. This does not mean that the literal Jerusalem will no 
longer exist; for we understand that it is to be greater in the 
future than it ever was in the past, that it is indeed to be the 
world's capital when the new age is inaugurated. But there 
is to })e a far greater and grander Jerusalem — the heavenly 
Jerusalem, the New Jerusalem. The New Jerusalem is to be 
the City of Peace, which signifies the blessed or peaceful government
. As Jesus is spoken of as the Prince of Peace, as he 
is the antitypical King of Salem. King of ppace (Hebrews 7:2) . 
his kingdom is very properly spoken of as the kingdom of peace. 


"This is the name whereby he [Christ] shall be called: The 
Lord our righteousness." The same statement is made in respect
 to the church: "The Lord our righteousness." (Jeremiah
 23:5, 6; 33:15, 16} But this expression, "The Lord our 
righteousness/' does not give us the proper thought of the original
, which would be better translated, "Our righteousness of 
Jehovah. J ' See Scbipttjbe Studies, Vol. 5, p. 42. The Christ. 
Head and body, will be called the Righteousness of God, the 
One from whom the world will receive their righteousness, their 
deliverance from sin and death, the one whom God will approve 
as being the standard of righteousness. 

THE CHURCH'S FUTURE GLORY 

We must not forget that Christ Jeflus is the Head of the 
churchy the most important member in the body, just as the 
head is the most important member in the human body. The 
church beyond the vail will be a special manifestation of the 
glory of God — something which the angels will behold and 
will see is especially approved of God ; something for mankind
 to take note of, as the ones whom God delights to honor. 
God will make known his church to the world. "Kvery knee 
shall bow and every tongue confess" to this standard of righteousness
 which Jehovah will set up. 

"Thou shalt also he a crown of glory in the hand of Jehovah
, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God*' — not in the 


[6328] 


September 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(282-28S1 


hand of our Lord Jeans, but in the hand of the Father. 
(Isaiah 62:3) Jesus and the church together, in this picture
, will be the "crown of glory." The word crown signifies 
the top, whether it be the crown of a building or of the bead 
or whatever. Upon their crowns the kings of the earth have 
-pent much wealth. All the great monarchs of Europe have 
the finest of diamonds in their crowns. On state occasions 
these jewels are brought forth, as representing the wealth of 
the sovereign who wears the crown. 

We are not to think, however, that Jehovah is to bring 
forth the crown in order to wear it himself, as though he 
would do himself honor in this way. The crown, the diadem, 
is said to be in the hand of Jehovah. Nothing is to be a crown 
to Jehovah. He himself is the abundance of that which filleth 
fill things. Nothing could add to his glory of person or to his 
riches. He is the great One, the almighty One. from whom 
proceeds all good — all perfection, all blessing. Instead of 
wearing* this diadem upon his head, he holds it in his hand, 
exhibiting it. In this way the glory and beauty of it are displayed
. It is not to bo hidden away, but is to be brought forth 
to the world, and held up to their view. 

GLOBY TO LAST THKOTJGHOUT ALL AGES 

To hold a crown in one's hand would be to show it, to let 
the Tight shine upon it — to move it about so that its beauty, 


its colors and its lustre will be discerned by all. The hand 
represents power. This diadem in God's hand will be exhibited 
throughout all eternity, and will be shown to all the different 
worlds of the great Universe. These countless millions of 
worlds are to be inhabited. Grid's Word declares of the earth: 
"He created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited." 
(Isaiah 45:18) Here the thought is implied that just as surely 
as worlds are created they are created to be inhabited. God 
would not create a world or a sun unless he had use for it; 
for he never does anything in vain. 

As the Father has used the Son always, in all of his 
mighty works, so he still purposes to all eternity to use the 
Son, Ee has exalted Jesus to the very highest plane, the place 
next to himself. He has also been gathering out through this 
Gospel age a church, to be associated with Christ in all his 
great and honored work. He is choosing those who have Jesus' 
spirit, who have been glad to lay down their lives with him, 
in devotion to righteousness, to truth. God is pleased with 
these. This will be the new name whereby she, the glorified 
church, shall be known hereafter — "The Righteousness of Jehovah
" — the illustration of what he most highly approves. The 
name of the bridegroom is given to the bride. And all who 
get Christ's new name, we may be sure, will be called upon to 
demonstrate that they are overcomere. They must all meet the 
approval of the Lord our God. 


ABRAHAM GIVING ISAAC TO GOD 

This article was a reprint of that published in issue of February 1. 1913, under title "Abraham's Faith Tested." which please 

seej 


ISAAC AND REBECCA 

[The first four paragraphs of this article were reprinted from the article entitled, "Isaac's Peaceful Career," published in 
issue of March 1, 1907. The remainder was a reprint of the article entitled, "A Peculiar Marriage," published in issue of 
February 15, 1913. Please see the articles named,] 

A little while! Tis ever drawing nearer — A little while, blessed expectation! 

The brighter dawning of that glorious day. For strength to run with patience. Lord, we cry. 

TCI est Savior, make our spirits' vision clearer, Our hearts up-leap in fond anticipation ; 

And guide. O guide us in the shining way! Our union with the Bridegroom draweth nigh. 


GOD'S GUIDANCE OF THE 

mi My times ore in thy 

In the above words the Psalmist no doubt spoke in a primary
 sense, for himself. He had consecrated his life to Godnot
 in the same way as does the Christian, but nevertheless as 
fully as was possible for any one in his time. All of bis interests
 he placed in the bands of the lord; and in the many 
and varied experiences of his eventful life his confidence in Jehovah
 never failed. David had strong faith, and the many 
beautiful and touching expressions of his faith have through ail 
the centuries since his day been an inspiration and blessing to 
the saints of Cod. In times of his greatest trials and afflictions 
— and he had many — his tnut in the "Lord remained steadfast 
and firm. He was one of God's heroes, and his name appears 
on the roll of honor read to us by the Apostle Paul in Hebrews 
11. 

But we may assume that in a special way King David spoke 
prophetically for the Christ, Head and body: for "holy men 
of old spake as they were moved by the holy Spirit": and we 
know that their utterances were especially "for our *»d monition
, upnn whom the ends of the ages are come," and more 
or less for the saints throughout the Gospel aire. The Psilm 
from which our text is taken is a very precious one. and seems 
to be peculiarly applicable to the spirit-begotten children of the 
Lord. Verse 5, we remember, gives the dying words of our 
dear Redeemer. The saints of this age are a particularly consecrated
 class, with clear knowledge of the purpose of their consecration
, this being the time during which Christ and the 
church have been called out to prepare for a glorious work yet 
to be inaugurated by Jehovah. 

The word "times" has here the sense of years. The Scriptures
 "speak of the times of restitution- the times of the Gentiles
, and the seven times of Israel's chastisement under the 
Gentile kingdoms. The term ,( my times'* would mean all my 
years, including the thought of all my interests, the use of all 
my talents, my opportunities for service, during these yearsall
 that might be mine to use for the Lord during the period 
of my consecrated life. As children of the heavenly King 
we have placed in his hands our every interest, in trust, in 
faith, in obedience, in consecration. 

THE SCOPE OF OUR TEXT 

Invited of Jehovah to become members of his family, we 
have gladly accepted his invitation, counting all the things of 
this life as loss and dross that we might gain the glorious 

[63 


AFFAIRS OF HIS SAINTS 

hand."— Psalm 31:15. 
prize held out to us by our God. He has made us new creatures
 in Christ Jesus — beings of an entirely new order. He has 
called us with his Son to a plane of life, the capacities, the 
powers and the glories of which far outrank those of all others 
of God's creation. We may thus have the assurance that since 
we have accepted his marvelous offer, and have placed ourselves 
fully in his hands, he will give the most careful attention to 
our training, development and preparation for the high exaltation
 to which he has called us in Christ. This he has pledged 
himself to do. He assures us that "all things are ours," because
 we nrc his, in this peculiar and pre-eminent sense. 

So "our times are in his hands," — our Father's hands— and 
he will overrule all the affairs of our life for our good and 
our unbuilding, so as to prepare us for the glorious conditions 
to which he has invited us. This does not mean, however, that 
our times are so entirely out of our own hands as to be beyond 
our control. We are made very largely controllers of our own 
destiny. The Lord neither compels nor coerces our will. He 
leaves it to us to will and to do according to his good pleasure, 
although he works in us to that end, after we have become 
his. Our times are in his hands to the extent that we are 
faith hi 1 to our covenant, to the extent that our trust is in 
him. 

If at any time, however, we allow self-will to actuate us, 
and are not entirely obedient and in cheerful harmony with his 
will, if we ever desire our own will or way and yield in the 
slightest degree to a spirit of rebellion, to that extent we are 
taking ourselves out of his hands; and the result will be our 
spiritual loss and the hiding from us to the same extent the 
smile of the Father's face. And we shall be permitted to do 
this if we choose, though his loving hand will follow us and 
administer necessary stripes to bring us back, that we stray 
not out of the fold. The true child of God should exercise 
great care and watchfulness that he may keep in closest touch 
with the Lord, that no earth-born cloud shall separate him 
from the Father's favor to any extent; for any wandering 
from God endangers the life of the new creature, and every 
yielding to the impulses of the old nature makes easier a 
further yielding. 

The having of our times in God's hands, under his protection
, began with us when we made our full surrender to him in 
consecration. There wc gave him our all, there we submitted 

29] 


(2S5-286) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


ourselves and became dead to the will of the flesh and alive 
to the will of God. There the new life in Christ 'began. 

THE CHILDREN Or THE SAINTS 

While, as we have said, the time of our consecration was 
particularly the time when we came into the Lord's hands, 
there is a sense in which some of us were in the Lord's hands 
before we made a personal consecration to him. Some had 
consecrated parents; and because of this our times, our interests
, while we were children, were in God's hands, in his 
care and keeping, under his protection and guidance, in a sense 
that the interests of the children of unbelievers would not 
be. The Apostle Paul tells us that iff either one of the child's 
parents is consecrated, that child is under the special care of 
the Father. 

This care of the child on account of the parent would seem 
to last only so long as the child is a minor. If, when he comes 
to years of discretion of mind, he should fail to make a personal
 consecration of himself to the Lord, he would no longer 
be counted as justified, and hence would no longer he under 
this special guidance and care. As he failed to place himself 
in the hands of God, failed to choose God for his guide, he 
would not wish the Lord to be his caretaker and instructor. 


GOD'S "HAND* 

The word "hand" 
The hand is one of the most skilful and beautiful members of 


A TEEM OF DEEP SIGNIFICANCE 

has here a very beautiful significance. 


our body. Our hands can he used in an almost infinite variety 
of ways. With our fingers we can handle, touch most deftly, 
most delicately, most artistically.- The hand is related to all 
the services we render. So when the Scriptures apeak of 
God's hand, the expression is very full of meaning. Jehova.li 
is represented as "holding the seas in the hollow of his hand." 
"The heavens are the work of his hands." These expressions 
represent the great skill, power and majesty of the Almighty 
God. He tells us, his children, "I have graven thee upon the 
palms of my hands." — Isaiah 49:16. 

So the assurance of the Word that all our times, our interests
, all that concerns us, are in our Father's hand — that his 
power, his skill, is continually exercised on our behalf — is full 
of comfort and of deep significance to the saint of God, and 
shows how fully he controls every circumstance, every experience
, for our welfare as new creatures, warding off all that 
would be harmful or injurious, overruling so as to bring us 
all the needed experiences and blessings. How blessed the assurance
 that no detail of our lives can fail to aid in the outworking
 of the glorious purposes of our God for us, if we are 
trustful and obedient children, and if his will is ever our will! 
A3 consecrated children of God, let us ever look for his leading 
in all the affairs of life. Let us never undertake anything, 
whether temporal or spiritual, without first seeking to discern 
the divine will in the matter. Thus we shall increase our 
confidence in his goodness and faithfulness. 


THE HOST OF FAITHFUL WARRIORS 


"Ten thousand times ten thousand 

In sparkling raiment bright, 
The army of the ransom'd saints 

Throngs up the steps of light: 
Tis finished! all is finished, 

Their fight with death and sin: 
Fling open wide the golden gates, 

And let the victors in. 

"What rush of hallelujahs 

Fills all the earth and sky! 
What ringing of a thousand harps 

Bespeaks the triumphs nigh! 
day for which creation 

And all her plans were laid ; 
joy for all its former woes, 

A thousand-fold repaid! 


"Oh, then what raptur'd greetings 

On Canaan's happy shore; 
What knitting severed friendships up 

Where partings are no more! 
Then eyes with joy shall sparkle 

That brrmm'd with tears of late; 
No orphans there, nor fatherless, 

Nor widows desolate. 

"Bring near thy great salvation, 

Thou Lamb for sinners slain; 
Fill up the roll of thine elect. 

Then take thy power, and reign: 
Appear, Desire of Nations, 

Thy people long for home : 
Lo, in the heav'ns thy promised sign! 

Thou, Savior, Prince, art come!" 


LETTERS FROM BRETHREN 


DESIEE TO UPHOLD QUE HANDS 
Dear Brethren: — 

The church at Lynn voted to extend to the dear Bethel 
friends, through those brethren whom the Lord has placed in 
control of the affairs of the Society, their sympathy and love. 
We wish to assure you of our loyalty to the Lord and the Society
. We desire to uphold your hands. May the Lord comfort
 and bless you as you seek to carry on the work which remains
 this side of the vail, and may he give us all an abundant
 entrance into his heavenly kingdom! 

With much Christian love, The Lynn Ecclesia. — Mass. 
LOVING WOEDS FROM AN ASSEMBLY OP GOD'S PEOPLE 
Dear Brethren: — • 

On July 4 the Louisville church and surrounding classes 
met for a one day convention at JofFcrsontown. We had a 
glorious day, thinking and talking about what the heavenly 
Father has in store for them that love him supremely. By 
unanimous vote I was requested to convey to you our love and 
to assure you that our prayers never cease to ascend on your 
behalf. You will be glad to know that we are continuing to 
do with our might whatever our hands finds to do. Perfect 
harmony prevails among the brethren, and our meetings are 
going on as usual. 

In conclusion, dear Brethren, remember that thousands of 
prayers ascend daily on your behalf, and that all power in 
heaven and on earth is in the hands of our Father, and that 
nothing can happen to his children without hia permission. 
Oh, what a consolation this is! Courage for a little while 
longer: for we are nearing home. 

Faithfully vour brethren in the Lord, 

Per W. H. D. f Sec'v. 
NEARING THE END OF THE WAT 
Dear Brethren in Christ: 

Grace l>e to you, and peace, from God our Father and from 
the Lord Jesus Christ. In the special trials and tribulations 
through which you are passing we wish to assure you of the 
continued prayers of the St. Louis Ecclesia on your behalf. We 


rejoice also on account of the inspiring example of love and 
patience you have set for all of the Lord's people. 

Seeing now with our natural eyes so many of the things 
which we have long discerned by the eyes of faith, betokening
 the final features of the work on this side of the vail, we 
cannot fully express our gratitude to our dear heavenly 
Father for all his goodness to us. May he continue to keep 
you, dear Brethren, and to guide you along the remainder 
of the way. We wish that we might be nearer to you, so 
that we could minister to your physical needs somewhat, if 
'possible. We ask an interest in your prayers, that we too 
may remain faithful unto the end. 

The St. Louis Ecclesia, bv unanimous vote. 
A LETTER TO THE BETHEL FAMILY 
Dearly Beloved in Chbist: — 

I take great pleasure in writing these few lines to you, 
to assure you, dear Brethren, that I am rejoicing in the Lord, 
in tlie truth and in all the experiences that I am having at 
this time. They are all great blessings to me. I know that 
you have been praying for me; and the Lord has answered 
your prayers on my behalf. I thank you all for your loving 
interest in me. What a blessed thought it is to know that 
our dear heavenly Father is taking care of us. He comforts 
us through his \Vord and by his dear people. Blessed be 
his holy name. 

I cannot find words to express my gratitude to my dear 
heavenly Father for all his rich blessings toward me. It w T as 
about September, 1905, that the dear Lord sent a colporteur 
(Sister Mary L. Cobb) to Riverside, Conn., with Volume 1, 
Scripture Studies, in Italian. Dh, what a blessing that was! 
For many years I had been a member of the nominal church 
(Baptist) ; but like all the rest I" did not know anything 
about the wonderful plan of salvation of our dear heavenly 
Father for the world of mankind. But when my blind eyes 
were opened, then I saw the glorious truth of the goodness 
of God as it is presented by our beloved Brother Russell in the 
Scripture Studies ; and of course I wanted to tell it to others, 


[6330J 


^EPrSMBKR 15, 1913 


THE WATCH TOWER 


U\S6^8D 


80 that they might also be blest. And so for more than 
twelve years I have been privileged to proclaim the glorious 
message of salvation to my poor countrymen (the Italians) ; 
and by the Lord's grace a good many hearts have been made 
glad, and are now rejoicing in the Lord in the truth and in the 
trials also. 

And now, my dear Brethren, the Lord has permitted my 
liberty to be restrained for a while, or maybe altogether on 
this side of the vail. I an: rejoicing, however, for the glorious 
prospect of the blessed work in our future estate, in the 
kingdom of our glorious Lord, for the restitution of the poor 
world of mankind who for more than six thousand years have 
been under the taskmaster Satan, and under his faithful coworkers
, the clergy, who have made the world as a wilderness. 
— Isaiah 14:16, 17. 

My association with you as a meiwber of the Bethel for 
many" years has been a very great blessing to me, for which 
1 am truly thankful to the dear Lord. In a few day-s 1 e.\ 
pect to be taken to my new abiding place, the Federal Prison 
at Atlanta, for ten years. May the dear Lord's blessings be 
with you all, as you endeavor to serve him and his people in 
this trying time, ''Let not your heart be troubled," dearly 
beloved. The Lord is our helper, and he will never forsake 
us. Remember me in your prayers, as 1 also remember you 
all. 

With best wishes and love to you 1 remain 

Your brother in Christ. Giovanni De Cecca. 

AN INTERESTING VISIT 
Dear Bethel Family: — 

Love and greetings in the name of Him who does indeed 
make rich all who put their trust in Him! We have learned 
to put our trust in Him as never before, and never has he 
failed us. Every day he grows nearer and dearer to me! 

Strenuous indeed has been each day since we came here ; 
and not until now has there been time for messages, although 
our thoughts have been with you daily, our prayers also. I 
confess that you have been missed very keenly. I did not 
realize how closely our hearts had twined about dear Bethel 
and the loving family of God centered there. 

We had a quiet, uneventful trip South, being very, very 
tired. On the way down I slept much of the time. Sister 

R rested, but could not sleep during the daytime. At 

the station we were met by two of the brethren with their 
autos, and were taken to the home of the brother where we 
had engaged rooms. Here we were greeted by his family, and 
then ate an appetizing breakfast prepared for us in true Southern
 style. What a pleasant place the Lord had in readiness 
for us) We raised our hearts in thanksgiving. Best of all, 
we are with the Lord's own people, 

In the afternoon we went out to see the brethren. The 
rules for visiting the Federal Prison are very strict, and necessarily
 so. Only the immediate relatives are permitted to 
visit prisoners, and then only once in two weeks. But being 
newcomers, and having just arrived from New York, we were 
privileged to see them for three successive days, having one 
hour's talk with them each time. Upon our arrival we were 
shown into a good-sized private room, where we greeted our 
dear ones and then were seated with a table between us, the 
guard meanwhile seated at the head of the table. We delivered
 all the good messages you dear ones had sent; and told 
them how they were loved and missed. Then we laughed at 
our husbands in their blue suits, broad-brimmed hats, etc,, 
until they were cheered and rested by the little change. Both 
are looking and feeling well. 

During our second interview we were granted more privileges
 than during the first. Of course we did not take advantage
 of these privileges. The Lord's people are law-abiding 
under all circumstances ; else we could not truly be his people. 

Some of the brethren have ibeen assigned to the tailoring 
department. One of them made such good buttonholes that he 
was complimented by the head tailor. Some of the brethren 
room in pairs, together. This privilege is very much appreciated
 by them. The time goes very quickly. They are asking 
for no favors whatever, but quietly trying to obey every rule 
and trusting the Lord through every experience. Thus they 
are being greatly blessed. Everything is scrupulously clean. 
The food is plain, but plentiful. 

The brethren all send love, and we join with them. May 
the Lord bless you and keep you under the shadow of his 
wing! The friends all send love to the Bethel family. "God 
be with you till we meet again." 

Your sister in the Lord, L. T. Van Amburgh. 

DIVINE GRACE EVER SUFFICIENT 
T>early Beloved Brethren: — 

Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father and 
from the Lord Jesus Christ. We wish to use this opportunity 

f63 


to express our heart-felt Christian love and sympathy, and to 
assure you of our appreciation of your loving service not 
only to us, but to all the dear saints still this -*iue of the vail. 

We do indeed thank our dear heavenly Father for the 
angel of Revelation 8:3, which came and stood at the altar 
and had a golden censer; and we wish by his grace to assure 
you of our loyal support and co-operation, and to encourage 
your hearts by calling to mind the loving words that divint 
grace is sufficient in every time of need, "and that our LorL 
Jesus Christ is with us always, even unto the end of the age. 

It is a comfort to us that even though we are separated 
in the flesh, yet wo are all gathered together in "the secret 
place of the Most High," and are abiding under the shadow 
of him in v\hom is everlasting strength, and are trusting in 
the covert of lm wings. We pray daily for you all, and" for 
our brethren in bonds, two of whom it was our privilege 
to know and love personally for many years. May we all ba 
faithful, waiting patiently on the Lord, "that we may be ready 
when by his grace the door uf service opens. 

With much Christian love in all, 

The Cmmcn at Scraxton. 
ALL THINGS WORKING FOR OTJR HIGHEST GOOD 
Dear Brethren: — 

At our regular meeting a vote was taken, and carried unanimously
, that the church send to the Bible House our love and 
greetings, and that we assure them of our continued support. 
We believe that the Lord is with you, arid that all things will 
result in our highest good. We continue to pray for the dear 
ones at the Bible House every day. 

Yours in Christian love, 

The Binokamton Church, — N. Y, 
DAILY REJOICING IN THE LIGHT OF TRUTH 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

After having keen fifteen years in the truth, and thirteen 
years an Elder, having taken the Vow soon after it first came 
out, (but now for the first time informing you of that fact), 
a little explanation may !be needful now. when I arn sending 
in my answers to the V. IX M. questions. These questions I 
considered unnecessary, as the church, who elect their own 
elders, should ask and know what those about to be elected 
believe — especially as the questions do not include the covenants
, the sin -offerings, etc. 

Recently we thought, as Elders in Manchester, that it would 
help some members of our class to answer the questions, as a 
personal examination of belief, etc. This we could scarcely 
recommend, unless we all had ourselves so done, Ho 1 gladly 
fall in line, and I have been blessed in the answering. I trust 
that they are to your complete satisfaction. 

Daily I rejoice in the beautiful rays of liirht that stream 
forth from the Word of God, through the Studies, Towers, 
etc, I am fully determined, hy the grace of God, to hold 
fast; for I can see nothing better, look where I will. To 
my judgment no views of the Scriptures so beautifully exalt 
the Creator and so humble the creatures as the "Ransom for 
all" does. Having proved then for some fifteen years the 
power of the knowledge of the truth to be a magnet, drawing 
me nearer to God, the weaning influence from the world, 
giving victory over inbred sin, and an ever-deepening desire 
to be more Christ-like in spirit, T consider that I should be 
committing spiritual suicide were I to neglect the channel 
which God, by his holy Spirit, has so graciously used! 

With warm Christian love and tender sympathy to you all 
at Bethel, and with the hope that we all may meet "at Home" 
in the morning, I am 

Your brother under Christ Jesus, our Head, 

J. W. V?.— England. 
PROMPTNESS AN ELEMENT OF OHAEAOTEB 
Dear Brethren: — 

There is a matter of which I wish to speak, yet hesitate 
to do so lest I should seem to be speaking evil of one of the 
Lord's people. Yet I feel that the matter is of grave importance
; for it has to do with character development, and 
we are so near the goal of the church that we cannot afford 
even to seem to come short in any respect. It is this: 

Our leader is a very fine brother in many respects, but 
he has the serious fault of seldom being on time at meetings. 
On some occasions he arrives as late as a whole hour after 
the time set for the meeting to begin. We love this brother 
dearly, and do not wish to offend him in the least. But we 
know of nothing else to do to awaken him to a sense of his 
deficiency in this respect. Will you kindly suggest something 
which may help him and us as well? 

With Christian love, I remain 

Yours in the Master's service. 

OTJB KEPLT 

The criticism in the aibove letter is one which .has come 
to us from various classes. We hardjv know just what sug- 
31] 


(_T4-29n 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


gestion to make in such cases ; for there are two ways of 
looking at the matter. One of these is the fact that the elder 
may be unable to meet at the hour set by the church. In 
that case the spirit of a sound mind would suggest the change 
of the hour of meeting to one which would be convenient 
for the leader. On the other hand, if the tardiness be the 
result of thoughtlessness, lack of character development or 
some similar reason, the spirit of a sound mind would prompt 


us to elect a leader who had the interests of the church so 
much at heart that he would keep his engagements witli the 
same degree of carefulness that he would exercise in the matter
 of any other business arrangement. In The Watch 
Tower of Dec. 1 ; 1016, there is an article which deals wish 
this very matter of punctuality — "Decorum in the House of 
God." It would be well for all who are habitually unpunctual 
to consider earefullv its contents. 


IMPORTANT NOTICE 


The circulation of the following books and papera is completely
 suspended during the period of the war: 
The Finished Mystery 

Special Edition, March 1st, Watch Tower (ZG) 
All Bible Students' Monthlies 


All Kingdom News 
Any classes or individuals holding any of the above literature
 belonging to The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society
 are hereby instructed to hold the same, subject to outorders
;. This is a confirmation of notice sent you last March. 

