How to Reach Your Spiritual Goals
 1. What spiritual goals do many young Christians have?
1 As a young Christian, no doubt your goals in life are influenced by your love for Jehovah and by Jesus’ words to all Christians to ‘seek first the kingdom.’ (Matt. 6:33) Your goal may be to expand your ministry by serving as a pioneer or to serve where the need for Kingdom proclaimers is greater. Some may have in mind volunteering for international construction work, for serving in a branch, or for working in the missionary field. What fulfilling and commendable goals these are!
 2. What can help you to reach your spiritual goals?
2 An aid to reaching your spiritual goals is to put them in writing. The July 15, 2004, Watchtower said: “An abstract idea takes on clarity and form when [you] choose words to express it. [You] may therefore wish to commit [your] goals and the strategy for reaching them to paper.” In addition, intermediate goals can help you to measure your progress and maintain your focus as you pursue a long-term goal.
 3. Name some short-term goals that can help one to qualify for baptism.
3 Short-Term Goals: If you are not yet baptized, consider what you need to do in order to reach that goal. You may need a better understanding of basic Bible teachings. If so, make it your goal to study thoroughly the Bible Teach book, looking up all the cited scriptures. (1 Tim. 4:15) Set a goal also to read the entire Bible from Genesis to Revelation, as Bethelites and Gilead students are required to do. After that, maintain a regular program of daily Bible reading. (Ps. 1:2, 3) Imagine how that would help you to grow spiritually! Open and close each period of Bible reading and study with heartfelt prayer, and always seek to apply what you learn.​—Jas. 1:25.
 4. What short-term goals might a Christian set who has the long-term goal of Bethel or missionary service?
4 If you are already baptized, what further goals could you pursue? Do you need to improve your preaching skills? For example, could you make it your aim to become more adept at using God’s Word in the field ministry? (2 Tim. 2:15) How might you expand your ministry? Set specific short-term goals that are in accord with your age and circumstances and that will help you to reach your long-term goals.
 5. How did setting short-term goals help one brother to reach his goal of serving at Bethel?
5 A Success Story: When 19-year-old Tony visited a branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses, a desire was awakened within him to serve at Bethel. However, his lifestyle had been wayward, and he had not even made a dedication to God. Tony decided to harmonize his life with Jehovah’s ways and made it his goal to qualify for baptism. After achieving that goal, he reached out for auxiliary pioneering and then regular pioneering, writing on his calendar the dates he wanted to start. Imagine his joy when after pioneering for some time, he was invited to serve at Bethel!
 6. What can help you to reach your spiritual goals?
6 You too can reach your spiritual goals as you seek Kingdom interests first. Keep “your works” before Jehovah in prayer and strive diligently to attain them.​—Prov. 16:3; 21:5.

