Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting June 12
Song 218
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the June 15 Watchtower and the June Awake! In one of the presentations, demonstrate offering the magazines in an informal setting.
20 min: “Our Ministry​—A Work of Compassion.”a As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
15 min: Trusting “the Faithful and Discreet Slave.” Talk and audience discussion based on chapter 3 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
Song 47 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 19
Song 21
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: A Word at Its Right Time Is O How Good! Talk and audience discussion based on the January 1, 2006, Watchtower, pages 16-19. In an introductory talk, highlight the four benefits of commending others, discussed under the subheading “Positive Effects.” Then invite the audience to comment on the following questions: Who is foremost in deserving praise? Why are fellow worshippers deserving of appropriate commendation? What opportunities do we have to offer commendation in the congregation? Why is it beneficial to commend family members, and how can we do so? How have you been encouraged or strengthened by commendation that you have received?
15 min: “Show Personal Interest​—By Offering Commendation.”b Include a brief demonstration in which a publisher listens carefully to the householder, offers sincere commendation, and then builds on what the householder said by sharing an appropriate scripture.
Song 96 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 26
Song 63
15 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the July 1 Watchtower and the July Awake! At the conclusion of each presentation, the publisher raises a thought-provoking question that can be answered on the next visit using the Bible Teach book.
15 min: Serving With a Foreign-Language Congregation. Talk based on the March 15, 2006, Watchtower, pages 17-20. Include comments on the Organized book, page 112, paragraph 2. Make local application of the material. One or two brief interviews of those who are seeking to expand their ministry by learning another language may be included.
15 min: Presenting the Good News in July. What subjects are of general interest to people in your territory? Briefly interview one or two publishers who have made effective use of the Bible Teach book and perhaps have started a Bible study. Then demonstrate a house-to-house presentation of the offer, using a presentation that has proved effective in your territory.​—See the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 8, par. 5.
Song 208 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 3
Song 111
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for June if they have not already done so.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “How to Reach Your Spiritual Goals.”c Invite the youths in the congregation to comment on their spiritual goals and what they are doing to reach them. One or two comments may be arranged in advance.
Song 30 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

