VOL. XXIV. NOVEMBER 1, 1903. No. 21 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 403 

A Bible League 403 

General Unrest Prevails 403 

A Prominent Man's Views 404 

"Ye Know Your Calling, Brethren" 405 

"O Absalom, My Son, My Son" 409 

"The Lord Is My Shepherd" 411 

"Wine Is a Mocker" 414 

Public Ministries of the Truth 416 

Special Items: Pastor Russell's 

Weekly Discourses 402 

The "Debate" Reports 402 

Increased Price of Dawns, 4,5,6 402 

page 402 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3265 : page 402 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S WEEKLY DISCOURSES. 



The Pittsburg Gazette proposes to print Brother 
Russell's sermons every Monday hereafter, until further 
notice. Thinking that some of our readers would like 
to have these we have arranged to club the "Gazette" 
and the WATCH TOWER at $3.25 per year,-beginning 
as soon as you like. This will give the WATCH TOWER 
semi-monthly and the Gazette daily postpaid at less 
than one cent per copy. Send all subscriptions to the 
WATCH TOWER address. 

But this does not apply to territory within 100 
miles of Pittsburg where the Gazette may have an agent, 
as the agent must be protected. However, there are 
many places near at which there are no agents, and 
where agents can be found the Monday papers can be 
obtained from them. 

R3264 : page 402 

THE "DEBATE" REPORTS. 



Responses to our notice that the Pittsburg Gazette 
would publish lengthy reports of the Doctrinal Discussions 
between Doctor Eaton and Pastor Russell almost 
overwhelmed our office force as well as the Gazette's. 
Orders have come in for more than twice the number 
we guaranteed and more are still coming. 

Friends will please accept the arrival of the Gazettes 
as evidence of our having received their letters, and not 
expect other acknowledgment. Indeed, as may be surmised, 
all of our correspondence is greatly belated on 
this account, and it will require considerable time to get 
caught up;— and the less important letters may need to 
be wholly neglected, much as we should like to reply to 
them all. 

The Gazette's supply of the first report becoming 
exhausted, that journal reprinted the debate reports under 
another date, and request us to explain the reason, 
and to assure subscribers that all orders received 
will be filled promptly. Should any of our 
friends not receive the papers ordered by them, they 
should report to us by postal card. Later orders will 
be filled at once by a special edition containing the six 
debates. These latter we will supply postpaid on order 
—at the rate of 2 cents each. In lots of 50 or over one 
cent each, express prepaid. 

page 402 

INCREASED PRICE OF DAWNS IV., V., VI. 



In consequence of raise of prices for printing and binding 
just after we had reduced our price on cloth-bound DAWNS, 



we have been selling all volumes of the series at a loss for the 
past six months. The loss has been specially heavy on the 
thicker volumes, and we now feel compelled to increase the 
price on these to 40 cents, plus 10 cents postage. Subscribers' 
wholesale rate 20 cents plus 10 cents postage. These prices 
take effect Nov. 1, 1903. 

Volume VI. will have over 700 pages and is hoped for in 
December. Those who have already paid for it at old prices 
need not send additionally. 



R3263 : page 403 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



A BIBLE LEAGUE. 



A "BIBLE LEAGUE" has been organized in 
the Methodist Episcopal Church, with the 
avowed purpose of driving out destructive 
Higher Criticism. Its president is Bishop Mallalieu, 
and the promoters hope to establish branches in 
every Methodist Conference in the country."— 
Exchange. 

We are glad to see that the situation is being 
partially realized. It is much more dangerous than 
many might be willing to believe. No words can 
more graphically describe the results than the words 
of Scripture themselves, viz.: "A thousand shall 
fall at thy side." (Psa. 91:7.) A thousand to fall 
to one who will stand means a great "falling away" 
from faith. Our Master's question is pertinent here, 
"When the Son of Man cometh [at his second advent] 
shall he find faith on the earth?" 

The cleavage or separation on this subject can 
only result favorably so far as the gathering of the 
Lord's "jewels" is concerned. Those who will cling 
to the Bible honestly and intelligently will give it 
more careful examination than ever. And their 
longings will not be satisfied by the interpretations 
and creeds of the dark ages, ruled by superstition 
and the spirit of persecution. Nothing short of "the 
faith once delivered to the saints," which now rejoices 
our hearts with its lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of divine love and provision, will 
satisfy them. These will be but a "little flock" in 
all, however. We will be glad to greet Bp. Mallalieu 
among them, but we do not forget the Apostle's 
words, that not many rich or great or noble are being 
chosen now, but chiefly the poor and ignoble, 
rich in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom. 



That the battle above referred to has commenced 
is shown by the press dispatch:— 
"CHICAGO, September 10. 

"The Outlook, an official publication of the Methodist denomination, 
has made a sensational attack upon the Methodist 
universities. That the doctrines of "Tom" Paine are being 
taught by Dr. Milton S. Terry, professor of Theology in 
Garrett Biblical Institute, and by Dr. Hinckley G. Mitchell, 
of the Boston University School of Theology, is the charge. 
Methodists are advised not to send their sons and daughters 
to schools 'where such teachers are allowed to remain on the 
faculty.'" 

GENERAL UNREST PREVAILS. 



"Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of 
war draw near; let them come up: Beat your plow shares into 
swords, and your pruning hooks into spears; let the weak 
say, I am strong."— Joel 3:9-16. 

The whole world is growing restless— preparing 
to fulfil the above prophecy, of which we quote only 
the introduction. The people of Macedonia and 
Bulgaria are impatient of the Turkish rule, and fomenting 
rebellion and bringing upon themselves the 
brutal vengeance of their rulers— the only kind of 
reprisal and suppression known to the Ottoman. 

France is still in a warfare with the secret 
orders of the Roman Catholic Church, in an attempt 
to free the rising generation from the incubus of 
superstition, which it realizes has for years been opposing 
the Republic by misrepresentations of the 
facts of history. In a word, the French Government 
is seeking to turn the religious schools built by the 
people into free public schools, similar to those of 
the United States. They refuse to have these taught 
by garbed nuns and priests, and the golden hours 
of childhood given specially to studying the Roman 
Catholic Catechism. In no sense is it a movement 
to curb the freedom of the Roman Catholic conscience 
to believe and teach as it pleases outside the 
public schools. This warfare is so absorbing to the 
French that other questions are no more than secondary. 
The clerical party would even favor war 
in hope of reviving monarchy. 

In England a very similar question is before the 
public mind. Parliament has recently put the control 
of public-school education into the hands of the 
Church (Episcopal), and other denominations are 
fearful of the results. 

In Austro-Hungary partisanism runs high. 
Both nations desire to exercise controlling influence, 
yet both realize that division would injure both 
dreadfully. They maintain a union of hatred and bitterness 



R3263 : page 404 

that bodes an open warfare at the opportune 
moment. 

Russia, according to the London Times, is keeping 
from general publicity her dreadful internal disorders, 
which may eventually force her into war to 
offset the restless spirit and give it employment. It 
says in part:— 

"The murderous assault made on Prince Urussoff by the 
peasants of his estate, in the province of Tchernigoff, has its 
parallel in the similar crime perpetrated on the person of 
Prince Gagarin, his wife, and their guest, Prince Sherbatoff, 
in the province of Riazan, hundreds of miles further north. 
The governor of the province of Ufa has been murdered under 
the shadow of the Urals; and the prisons of St. Petersburg 
are filled with political prisoners, who largely belong to 
that most dangerous of all classes, the intellectual proletariat. 
The very forces of the state are not themselves untainted. 
There were military trials at Moscow not many weeks since 
for revolutionary agitation in the army, and it is even alleged 
that several members of the crew of the imperial yacht, 
including some non-commissioned officers, are at present in 
detention in the capital for being in possession of forbidden 
literature on board the Standart, (the Czar's yacht) herself. 

"The government appear to have been attempting to practise 
a double policy toward the labor movement, which now 
for the first time is growing conscious of its strength. On 
the one hand, M. Witte seems to have attempted more than 
two years ago to solve the problem by discovering the real 
wants and wishes of the artisans and factory hands. As the 
result of a conference instituted on his suggestion, the men 
obtained the right to elect spokesmen who might confer with 
the manufacturers and government inspectors. But the new 
scheme has not been fairly applied, while a childish attempt 
has been made by the reactionaries to convince the workingmen 
that their best friends are the bureaucrats and their 
worst enemies the enlightened middle classes. In several 
cases the men have elected their representatives, only to see 
them subjected to summary arrest, while any combined action 
by the men employed in different factories is severely punished. 
On the other hand the secret police of St. Petersburg 
have been endeavoring to educate the workmen in loyalty to 
the existing institutions of the country by telling them that the 
French Revolution led merely to the triumph of the bourgeois, 
bought by the blood of the proletariate, and that the Government 
are eager to meet them half way. Naturally these devices 
have not produced much effect, but neither, so far, have 
the repressive measures of M. de Plehve. The problem remains 
unsolved and perhaps insoluble, and the fact may not 

R3264 : page 404 

be without its influence on the foreign policy of the empire, 
both in the Balkans and elsewhere. In the face of such enigmas 
foreign adventures have been undertaken before now as 



a diversion, but history shows that the remedy has often 
merely aggravated the disorder." 

It is thought by some that the chief danger of war 
between Russia and Japan lies in the internal unrest 
of Russia, the supposition being that war might 
be esteemed an advantage if it would serve to unify 
the nation or give excuse for radical measures as 
war necessities, giving malcontents the appearance 
of open rebels. 

Germany is so full of the factional spirit and so 
verging on to socialism that some are sighing for 
war to unite and cement them as was the case thirty 
years ago. The Deutsch Wacht says: 

"No inglorious (faul) peace! And inglorious to the core 
has become that peace which, armored in steel and bristling 
with weapons, now lies upon our portion of the globe and beneath 
the weight of which we Germans have had to endure so 
much. The eternal repetition of peace twaddle has unmanned 
our ears; love of peace, emphasized on all occasions, has 
inspired in our enemies an impression that we are weak, and 
has already robbed some part of our nation of its confidence in 
our strength. The campaign in China was a flaming forth of 
the old warlike fire, but the blaze was soon extinguished. 
When we now make a movement to display our fist in faraway 
Asia, the feminizing breath of peace is felt with enervating 
effect in Europe in order to make the sword drop 
nimbly from the hand. 

The peace that we now enjoy has damaged us because we 
value it above everything else, and have forgotten that readiness 
for peace brings honor only to those of whom it is known 
that they can be strongly stern, and are in a position to strike 
and make the splinters fly. 

"The peace of this post-Bismarckian period has made us 
inglorious at home as well. We Germans can not maintain 
our sense of strength without the impulse of pressure from 
above, without a sharp, powerful summons at the moment we 
are to stand united. Such a summons has been wanting. Under 
Bismarck we were constantly being roused. We knew 
that honor might require us any day to grasp the sword 
again and fight foes outnumbering ourselves. This knowledge 
united us, or at least suppressed the divisions among 
the German people. We have no such influence at work now. 
Ever since the adoption of the policy of obsequiousness, the 
Philistines have evidently nothing to fear from a foreign foe. 
We are, in fact, good friends with everybody, as fine speeches 
and flattering telegrams have testified a hundred times. And 
the same tone prevails as regards German unity. Mighty 
has been the upstart growth of Ultramontanism under the 
protection of inglorious peace. It has already divided Germany 
into two camps, between which there is such total alienation 
of sentiment as makes concord impossible. Daily widens 
the rift made by Social-Democracy between the classes 
among our population, aided by the circumstances of the inglorious 
peace. Daily the blind masses are more and more set 
on by agitation. To our people this peril, which has a foreign 
intellectual origin, grows more dire, and it could carry out 



its mission of destruction only beneath a rule of inglorious 
peace. 

"He only fashions a sword who has never felt fear. But 
the German people, God save us, have been made fearful since 
1888. Then may Heaven make us see the dread perils which 
glower down upon us from within and without. Thus may 
we free ourselves from the enervating, inglorious peace, and 
once more, in unity and strength, win the proud self-consciousness 
which inspires our saying 'Many enemies mean 
much honor!'" 

A PROMINENT MAN'S VIEWS. 



Hon. Whitelaw Reid, for many years editor of the 
New York Tribune, speaking to the graduates of 
Vassar College and their friends, said in part: 

Of specific excesses toward which our Democratic institutions 
seem to be tending, perhaps we do not need now to 
speak in any great detail. It may be enough to recognize that 
the American who colonized the Atlantic Coast and the great 
Middle West, who framed the Constitution, started the Government, 
developed the country under it, and fought a gigantic 
civil war to preserve it, is not the American who 
leads the popular movements of today. The type is changing; 
the beliefs are changing, and the aims. 

He is neither Puritan any longer, nor Cavalier. He may 
outwardly deny the decay of faith, but he inwardly feels it. 
Nothing is more noticeable at the great centers of population 
and of national activity, or in any large section of what 
calls itself, and is often called, our best society, than this disappearance 
of the old foundation of character and action; 
this loss of profound, enduring, restful faith in anything. 
It is a laissez-aller age; an age of loosening anchors and drifting 
with the tide; of taking things as they are, with cordial 
readiness to take them hereafter as they come; of an easy indifference, 
whose universal attitude toward each startling departure 
from old standards is "What does it matter, anyway?" 
—an age, in short, marked by a refined, "up-to-date" adaptation 
of the old Epicurean idea that there is nothing in this 
world to do but to eat, drink and make merry, for tomorrow 
we die. 

The loss of faith brings us by this short cut straight to 
the loss of purpose in life— of any purpose at least beyond 
purely material ones. To those who need money, the duty 
of getting it first, and above anything else, becomes the gospel 

R3264 : page 405 

of life. To those who feel the need of position, whether 

in society, business or elsewhere, their gospel drives them 

to all means within the law to obtain that. To those who 

have both money and position comes the only remaining purpose 

in life, that of using them for an existence of amusement 

and enjoyment. Is it too much to say that never before 



in our history have such aspirations so completely dominated 
and limited such large classes? 

WHAT MANY FIND LEFT IN LIFE. 

But this craze for mere amusement and enjoyment, like 
other perverted appetites, grows by what it feeds on. The 
amusement soon becomes wearisome, the enjoyment soon 
palls, unless constantly more and more spectacular and bizarre. 
Perpetual change and constantly increasing variety of 
extremes seem to be the ever-rising price of keeping amused. 
One never is for long where one wants to be, or doing what 
one desires; there must be incessantly a rushing to and fro, 
and a change of pursuits, all under the glare of electric lights 
and the blare of brass bands. If in the country, one must 
hasten to the city, where something is going on; if in the 
city, one must fly to the country, where the crowd is not so 
mixed and where pleasanter house parties can be gathered; if 
in one's own land, one longs for the boulevards or the Alps; 
if abroad, one is eager to try the new steamer back; if at the 
seashore, one wants suddenly to know what the mountains 
are like, and can only find amusement in going to see when 
clothed in leather jackets, protected by masks and goggles, 
and powdered with dirt, rushing through the dusty air on the 
highways at forty or fifty miles an hour in a Red Devil, and 
leaving the luckless rustics in the way to go to a fiend of any 
color they like. 

Even then this vehement vacuity is not amusing unless it 
is talked about. One must be forever before the footlights and 
if possible, in the center of the stage. Privacy is deadly dullness. 
Not to have your name every other day in the newspapers 
is to be out of the world, to be bored to death. Not 
to see every intimate fact about yourself or your friends 
thrust naked and shameless under the public eye is to feel 
that you are dropping out of the swim. 



The public seems to be slowly awakening to the 
realization that the far-sighted Jesuits have been 
working their representatives into the Associated 
Press, which supplies general news to many newspapers 
all over the world. The effect seems to be to 
give prominence and good tone to things Roman 
Catholic and to suppress as much as would be wise 
of contrary news. Young Catholics are trained to 
this service and quietly and unostentatiously pushed 
into controlling positions— unsuspecting Protestants 
often unwittingly assisting in the scheme. 



R3265 : page 405 

"YE KNOW YOUR CALLING, BRETHREN." 



"But ye are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, 
a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises 
of him who hath called you out of darkness 
into his marvelous light."— 1 Peter 2:9. 

"VOCATION" is the term that describes 

the special business of any person, while 

the word "avocation" describes an occasional business; 

as, the Apostle Paul's vocation was that of 

a minister of the Truth, while his avocation, or occasional 

employment when necessary to provide 

things honest and decent in the sight of God and 

men, was tent-making. Similarly all of the Lord's 

people should consider that their vocation or calling 

is of God, and relates to the special or spiritual 

ministry in which he privileges us to engage as fellow 

servants of our Lord Jesus Christ. In order 

to provide the necessities of life for ourselves and 

those dependent on us, it is necessary that we should 

have some earthly employment also; but this we 

should always regard, not as our vocation— not as 

our chief or principal business in life— but merely 

as our avocation, or temporary engagement incidentally 

necessary to our chief business. Of course 

it would not be wise for the Lord's people to speak 

of spiritual things from this standpoint to worldly 

people. Our Lord warned us against so doing, saying, 

"Cast not your pearls before swine"— attempt 

not to tell the deep and precious things that belong 

to you as spiritual New Creatures in Christ, and 

which you only can understand and appreciate 

through the holy Spirit (1 Cor. 2:14), to those who 

have not the Spirit and who cannot comprehend 

your teachings and who would be disappointed in 

the matter, as swine would be disappointed if you 

gave them pearls which they could not appreciate, 

instead of corn which they could appreciate. In our 

own hearts, however, and amongst the "brethren," 

this thought should always be uppermost; namely, 

that our calling, or business, or vocation is of God, 

—that we are called to be members of the Royal 

Priesthood. 

We are viewing our text just now specially 
from the standpoint of the Priesthood, or new race, 
or new nation, different from the remainder of mankind 
in that God has invited them to become joint-heirs 
with his Son in the great Royal Priesthood 
which he designs shall ultimately bless all the families 
of the earth. The royal feature of the matter 
belongs to the future; we have no royalty yet. It 
is only in prospect; it will be attained after we have 
faithfully performed the service which belongs to 
this present time and have thus proven ourselves 
worthy, according to the divine terms, to be members 



of the glorified Priesthood through our Lord 
Jesus' merit, and under him as our Head. Meantime 
it behooves us to learn distinctly what is expected 
of us as respects our vocation in the present 
time; what obligations attach to us as those who 
have made the consecration and have been respectively 
accepted to this Royal Priesthood and anointed 
with the holy Spirit in anticipation of our attainment 
of the goal. 

The Apostle Paul (Heb. 8:3) declares that 
"Every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: 
wherefore it is of necessity that this man 
[the man Christ Jesus] have somewhat also to offer." 
The thought is that the High Priest serves,— is as an 
offerer or sacrificer to God. True, the Apostle is 
speaking here of our Lord Jesus and not of us, but 
from his own words elsewhere we will know that it 
is expected of all the members of the body that they 
shall be joint sharers with their Lord and Master 
in the sufferings and sacrifices of this present time, 
that they may be counted worthy to share with him 
the glories of the future. And the same Apostle explains 

R3265 : page 406 

that he (Christ) is our Head, and that we are, 

as members of his body, "filling up that which is behind 

of the afflictions of Christ," walking in his footsteps. 

The lesson, then, to each member of this 

Royal Priesthood, is that the special mission of their 

office, vocation, calling in the present time, is to 

sacrifice. 

In the light of the Apostle's explanation we can 
see that our Lord Jesus as the Head Priest had 
something to offer to God, and that he did offer it in 
that he offered up himself a sacrifice. (Heb. 7:27.) 
We can see how his sacrifice could be acceptable to 
God, because in him was no sin— he was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners. But how 
can we, who "by nature are children of wrath even 
as others,"— how can we fulfil our mission as priests 
to present some offering to God when we have 
nothing which is our own that would be acceptable, 
because all we have and are is by nature tainted with 
sin and under divine condemnation? The Scriptures 
answer that "that which God hath cleansed," his 
people are no longer to consider common or unclean; 
they tell us that God has justified us freely 
from our imperfections through the merit of Christ's 
sacrifice; they tell us that we are acceptable to God 
"in the Beloved." 

The Apostle carries this same thought further, 
and emphasizes it, saying, "I beseech you therefore 
brethren, by the mercies of God [no longer aliens, 
strangers, foreigners, but redeemed and accepted of 
the Father], that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, 



holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable 

service." (Rom. 12:1.) Here the entire 

matter is summed up. We are not to consider any 

longer that, after being justified by faith, the Lord 

esteems us unholy and unacceptable, but are to 

understand that the very object of our present justification 

by faith was to make us acceptable to the 

Father, to make us to be priests, to furnish us opportunities 

to do the work of a priest in this present 

time; namely, to sacrifice— to sacrifice ourselves 

—to present our bodies living sacrifices to God 

through Christ's merit. What a wonderful plan! 

what a wonderful privilege to be permitted to be 

priests! what a gracious arrangement! It gives 

us opportunity of completing the priestly service of 

sacrificing now, to the intent that by and by we 

may enjoy the privileges of the other part of the 

priest's work, connected with the glory and royalty 

of the Millennial Kingdom. 

If then God ordained the High Priest to offer 
sacrifices, and that was the particular feature of his 
calling while on earth, so likewise it is the particular 
feature of the calling of all those who would walk 
in his steps— ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices 
to God. The Apostle Peter calls this same matter 
to our attention in a verse preceding our text (v. 5), 
where he declares the Church "A holy priesthood to 
offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ." Ah, but, says one, the Apostles differ 
respecting what shall be our sacrifices. The 
Apostle Paul declares, "Present your body a living 
sacrifice," while the Apostle Peter here declares that 
we should offer up spiritual sacrifices, and our bodies 
are certainly not spiritual bodies. We reply that 
the word "spiritual" in this text is not found in the 
oldest Greek manuscript, known as the Sinaitic. Apparently 
some scribe of about the fourth or fifth 
century must have concluded that the Apostle had 
left his statement of the matter incomplete, and that 
there would be danger of some understanding him 
to mean that the Royal Priesthood should offer bullocks 
and goats; and to hinder such a construction 
of the Apostle's language, the no doubt well-meaning 
copyist added the word "spiritual." 

But in the light of Present Truth we can see that 
he erred in attempting to assist the inspiration which 
guided the Apostle to a proper statement of the matter. 
We can see most clearly that our Lord Jesus 
did not offer a spiritual sacrifice, but a human sacrifice 
for sin— that for this reason it was necessary 
that he should leave the spiritual condition in which 
he previously existed and should take upon him 
human conditions,— become a man,— that he by the 
grace of God might taste death for every man. 
Adam was not a spirit being when he sinned, hence 
God's sentence was not against a spirit being, but, 



"Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." 
Hence it was necessary that the Lord Jesus should 
become the man Christ Jesus; that as by a man came 
death, so also by man should come the resurrection 
of the dead. And as our Lord's sacrifice was not 
a spiritual sacrifice but a human one, so it is also with 
our sacrifice: we are not to sacrifice our spiritual natures 
nor our spiritual interests nor anything else 
that is spiritual; but we are to sacrifice our justified 
human natures, our justified flesh, as the Apostle 
urges, "Present your bodies living sacrifices, holy, 
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable 
service." 

The question should now properly arise in the 
minds of all who realize themselves as consecrated 
to the Lord, as members of the Royal Priesthood, 
to what extent am I fulfilling my present priestly 
office, and performing daily as I may have opportunity 
my appointed work of sacrifice— laying down my 
life for the brethren? Too many, alas! under the 
false teachings of Babylon, both in word and in custom, 

R3266 : page 406 

have come to consider that money getting and 

honor getting and ease getting and general self-preservation 

constitute the reasonable service of the 

Lord's people. Sacrificers are looked upon as deluded 

fanatics— especially in proportion as the sacrificing 

is done for the Truth's sake in the interest of 

spiritual things. We are not, however, to be taught 

of the world, nor by a cold worldly-wise churchianity; 

but we are to hearken to the voice of the good 

Shepherd, to hear his Word, to learn of him if we 

would be prepared by him in the school of Christ 

for the glorious things promised us as his joint-heirs 

in the future. "If we suffer with him we shall also 

reign with him," is the message. 

We can see how the Apostle, even though finding 
it at times necessary to engage in the business 
of tentmaking, might be considered as a priest 
whose time, energy, talents were all sacrificed to the 
Lord and given freely in serving his people— in doing 
good unto all men as he had opportunity, especially 

R3266 : page 407 

unto the household of faith: but how can 

others who have not the opportunity, not the talents, 

not the open door for such special service as his— 

how can those who must provide for their own 

household according to the Lord's Word, be sacrificing 

priests, when as a matter of necessity nearly 

all of their time must be given to tent making, shoe 

making, housework, or whatever other employment 

providence seems to have opened before them as 



their avocations? When it is necessary to spend 
nearly all of eight to twelve hours per day continuously 
in the service of our avocations, how can we 
consider or serve the interests of our vocation, the 
priesthood? 

The Lord has very graciously made arrangements 
adapted to this very condition. He assures 
us in his Word that it is not the amount we shall 
accomplish in his cause, but the spirit, the desire and 
the effort which we manifest that in his esteem would 
indicate the degree of our self-sacrifice. He graciously 
declares that if our hearts be given to him, 
whatsoever we do may be done as unto the Lord, and 
if done as unto him will be accepted by him. From 
this standpoint we can see that the work which the 
Apostle Paul did upon the tents passed to his credit 
as a part of his priestly sacrifice, just as much as the 
other part of his time which he spent in more congenial 
methods of proclaiming the gospel. Similarly, 
we can see that the shoemaker working at his 
bench, or the tinner at his labor, or the butcher in 
his shop, or the housekeeper, if at heart fully consecrated 
to the Lord, would be seeking to do their 
work as unto the Lord, and that if careful to use his 
opportunities for proclaiming the Truth, for serving 
the brethren, for doing good unto all men as opportunity 
afforded, the improvement of the few opportunities 
coming to them and their willingness to 
sacrifice personal tastes and convenience for the service 
of the Truth and for the brethren, would be 
counted by the Lord as a full sacrifice, because such 
a disposition in respect to little things would imply 
an equal faithfulness in the presence of larger 
opportunities. Luke 16:10. 

This does not mean that the Lord's people are 
to be content with the usual routine of daily life in 
the home or in the shop, and are to say to themselves, 
"God accepts my labor as thoroughly as 
though it were given directly to him in some other 
more desirable form," but it does mean that each 
person so situated should day by day carefully scan 
his earthly duties and obligations to see in what 
manner he could justly and properly cut off moments, 
hours or days from the service of earthly 
things and earthly interests, that now might be given 
to sacrifice for spiritual things and spiritual interests 
of himself or others. The consecrated heart, 
the sacrificing priest, is the one who will improve the 
moments as they swiftly fly, using them as far as 
possible in the Father's business. For instance, a 
workman may not take his employer's time to talk 
religion to his mate, for that would be unjust and 
contrary to the divine arrangement; but in the noon 
hour he may improve opportunities, and instead of 
engaging in worldly or foolish conversation or rude 
jest, he will seek to use opportunities to tell the good 



tidings to others; or if he have no such opportunities, 
finding no hearing ears, he will use the time in 
spiritually uplifting himself by study of the teachings 
and principles of the divine Word. In the evening 
he may not neglect duties of a social nature 
toward his wife and children, but will remember that 
under the divine arrangement he has some obligation 
toward them in respect to their mental and spiritual 
development as well as for their temporal necessities, 
and he will seek to use a part of his time in 
their service, perhaps sacrificing an inclination to 
read some story or light literature, or to indolently 
while away the time doing nothing. In addition to 
thinking of his obligations toward his family, he will 
think beyond them of his own spiritual needs and of 
the Lord's family and their necessities, and will endeavor 
to judge of the mind of the Lord in respect 
to how each moment shall be used. He consecrated 
every hour, every moment, when he presented himself 
a living sacrifice to the Lord; and the opportunities 
of laying down moments and hours in the interests 
of his New Creature and in the interests of 
spiritual brethren, etc., are coming and going daily, 
and the Lord is looking to see to what extent he 
was a sincere covenanter, sacrificer. These sacrifices 
on behalf of neighbors, friends, wife, children, 
husband, parents, are accepted of the Lord if done 
as a result of consecration to him, and as a result 
of the believing that these are the opportunities 
which his providence has opened for exhibitions of 
the self-sacrificing spirit. 

The same opportunities, though in a different 
form, come to the youth who is under age and subject 
to his parents, and to the wife surrounded by 
family cares and duties. If the consecration be to 
the Lord, then every sacrifice of our just rights and 
interests on behalf of ourselves as New Creatures, on 
behalf of husbands or children, father or mother, 
neighbors or friends, brethren in Christ, is counted 
of the Lord as so much done to him; whereas if the 
very same services were rendered from any other 
standpoint— by any one unjustified, and not consecrated 
to the Lord, or merely done to the individuals 
and not as a sacrifice unto the Lord— these things 
would not count to us as priests, as our sacrifices; 
but when viewed from the standpoint of consecration 
to the Lord, and faithfully performed as being our 
best judgment of what would be the Lord's will concerning 
our use of our time, interests, talents, etc., 
they are sacrifices wholly acceptable to God, our reasonable 
service. 

We are to remember that abstaining from immoralities, 
from sins, is not sacrificing. Nothing 
can be acceptably sacrificed to the Lord that is not 
of itself right, just, proper. It may be imperfect, as 
all that we have and do are necessarily blemished by 



reason of our share with the race in its fall; but unintentional 

blemishes of proper things are all covered 

by the merits of our Redeemer's sacrifice, as we 

have just seen. Another form of sacrifice frequently 

not discerned by the Royal Priesthood is the opportunity 

of renouncing our own ways or plans, our own 

methods or preferences, and in the interests of peace 

R3266 : page 408 

accepting instead the plans, the preferences of others 
—where it is merely a matter of personal preference, 
and where we believe the Lord will be as willing to 
have the matter one way as another. We can in the 
interests of peace sacrifice our preferences to the 
wishes of others if we see some good can be gained 
by such a course; as, for instance, the preservation 
of the peace of the home or the opportunity of winning 
our opponent to the Truth, or any good cause. 
Such sacrifices are pleasing to the Lord, who instructs 
us through the Apostle that, so far as in us 
lies, we should live peaceably with all men; and 
that we should rather suffer wrong and take injury 
from a brother in Christ than take the matter before 
the world of unbelievers and thus risk a general 
odium upon the Lord's cause.— Rom. 12:18; 
1 Cor. 6:7. 

We have known cases, however, where dear 
brethren in the interests of peace and harmony 
yielded their rights— and properly enough where no 
principle was involved— but who, nevertheless, held 
a kind of grudge against those to whom they had 
yielded, feeling that somehow or other they had 
been defrauded of their rights. This is wrong, 
and indicates that the sacrifice was not fully made. 
If the matter in dispute had been fully sacrificed, as 
unto the Lord, there would surely have been no room 
for feeling that it had been taken from them. Under 
such circumstances the Lord's dear followers would 
do well to make haste to cast out of their minds anything 
akin to resentment and the feeling that they 
had been deprived of their just rights, and, instead, 
to take into their hearts that they had fully, freely, 
absolutely given up the matter in the interests of 
peace and it was dead, buried forever, with no resentment 
toward any one, but, on the contrary, with 
the feeling of joy and rejoicing that this matter had 
been sacrificed to the Lord, to the interests of the 
home or the Church or what not, because they believed 
that it would be pleasing, acceptable to him, 
and, therefore, their reasonable service. 

We are to remember that we have each but one 
sacrifice; that it is to be rendered to the Lord day 
by day in the improvement of every opportunity, as 
it comes to us, to serve him and his. We are to 
remember that while it consists of many little sacrifices, 



some of them too small to mention or even 
to consider, nevertheless it will require all of these 
to complete the one sacrifice which we made at the 
beginning of our induction into his family. When 
we gave our wills, our hearts, we gave our all; and 
any holding back in any of the little affairs of life — 
any refusal to sacrifice that which we think would 
please the Lord— is a keeping back of that much of 
what we have devoted to him. 

The Lord is very patient toward us, and gives 
us repeated opportunities to accomplish the work 
of sacrifice; but it must be accomplished, our wills 

R3267 : page 408 

must be slain, must be submitted to the Lord's will, 
else we shall never attain to joint-heirship with 
him in the Kingdom— never become members of the 
overcoming Royal Priesthood. He graciously gives 
us line upon line, lesson upon lesson, respecting this 
subject; shows it to us in his Word from different 
standpoints, impressing upon us the necessity of being 
dead to self and alive toward God through Jesus 
Christ our Lord— the necessity of developing the 
various graces of the Spirit which are implied in this 
sacrificing work. Every one who will be a sacrificer 
must of necessity be meek, humble, teachable, 
else very shortly he will get out of the way. He must 
also learn to develop the grace of the Lord along 
the line of patience, because it certainly requires 
patience to deny ourselves and to submit at times to 
injustice where there is no proper means of avoiding 
it without doing injury to the Lord's cause or to 
some of his people. It also implies a cultivation of 
brotherly kindness and, in a word, the development 
of the whole will of God in our hearts and lives; 
namely, love, which must be attained in a large and 
overcoming measure ere we shall have completed 
our earthly work of sacrificing. 

In our studies of the "Tabernacle Shadows of 
Better Sacrifices," we saw that every one who took 
part in the priesthood was required to wash his 
hands and feet at the laver. We saw that the laver 
represented the Word, or message of God, and that 
the water, therefore, represented the Truth; and thus 
it is the Truth which is to cleanse the Royal Priesthood 
from the defilements of the flesh. As a whole 
we are clean, being covered with the robe of Christ's 
righteousness; but in our contact with the world we 
are to seek to put away the defilements of earth 
which come to us in connection with our daily walk 
and service, represented by our feet and our hands. 
And the Apostle, in the verse preceding our text, is 
not forgetful to mention this cleansing which all 
must have in order to be acceptable as members of 
the Royal Priesthood. In the verses 1 to 3, inclusive, 



he mentions that those who would be Royal 
Priests must lay aside "all malice and all guile and 
hypocrisies, and envies and all evil speakings." As 
the sacrificing requires all of the present life, so the 
washing requires all the present life; and only those 
who both wash and sacrifice will be accepted into 
the glorious Royal Priesthood of the future. 

It will be noticed that the Apostle does not represent 
that these priests will wash themselves from 
murders and gross sins, for those who have been begotten 
of the holy Spirit are necessarily far removed 
from any sympathy with any of the grosser forms 
of sin. What he does show is the more refined forms 
of evil which still infest the flesh, even of those who 
have the new mind, and which require to be mortified, 
rooted out, cleansed away. How "close girdling" 
are these sins that are mentioned— how many 
of the prospective members of the Royal Priesthood 
find that they have defilements along this line, malice, 
guile, hypocrisy, envy, evil speaking! It is safe 
to say that every one has some, if not all of these 
weaknesses in the flesh to contend with— especially 
at the beginning of his entrance upon the priestly 
vocation. How carefully all should seek to put all 
these away! how each should scrutinize, not only 
every act of life and every word and every thought, 
but, additionally, every motive underlying his words, 
thoughts and actions, so that they may be more and 

R3267 : page 409 

more purified from the earth defilements and be 
more and more acceptable to the Lord! 

With our very best endeavors we may never get 
entirely free from all of these "close girdling" sins 
while still in the flesh; but one thing is sure— the 
heart must be free from them, else we can never be 
accepted as members of the glorious priesthood. The 
heart must be so completely filled with the love of 
God that it will feel a repugnance to all of these evils, 
which are repulsive to the divine mind; and happy 
for us it is that God has promised to accept such a 
condition of our hearts, and that knowing the imperfections 
of the flesh with which we contend, he is not 
requiring that we shall attain to absolute flesh perfection, 
but that we shall be pure in heart in order 
to see him and to share in the glory which he has 
promised to his people. 

What we have seen respecting the perfect love 
which must dominate our hearts in order to enable 
us to complete our sacrifice in the Lord, is not so 
different from the Lord's requirements respecting 
all his creatures. There could be no angel of heaven 
acceptable to the Father without this spirit of love, 
of devotion, which, if the conditions in heaven were 
similar to the conditions now in the earth, would 



prompt and inspire all of the Lord's faithful angels 
to do good to the needy ones even at the cost of 
self-sacrifice and inconvenience. We can see that 
the same law of love must ultimately be required of 
the world of mankind who shall be developed under 
the training of the Millennial age, the world's school 
time. They also must ultimately reach that degree 
of love which, if the conditions were similar to those 
which now prevail, would lead them to sacrifice in 
the interest of the needy. Nothing less than this 
could be considered as a recovery on man's part of 
that which was lost— the image and likeness of God. 

The peculiarity, then, of this present time and of 
the Church's position in it, is the fact that we are 
begotten to the new mind, the new will, the new 
spirit and law of love, while still sin and death prevail 
around us. Hence to us living under present 
conditions, in contact with the weaknesses and imperfections 
and trials of others, it becomes, necessarily, 
an evidence of the new mind that, seeing 
these conditions, we should be permitted to make 
sacrifices on behalf of the brethren and on behalf of 
all men as we have opportunity. These indeed are severe 
testings and trials, which will come to the world 
of mankind during the Millennial Age, when all conditions 
will be favorable to the development of the 
new mind of love. They are more severe testings 
also than are brought to bear upon the holy angels, 
who, although possessing this love, have not the 
weaknesses and imperfections of the flesh, the fallen 
nature, to contend with in its exercise, and who, 
therefore, can gain no such victory as the Church of 
Christ is called upon to fight for and by the grace of 
her Lord to win. 

It is on this account that the Lord has attached 
to this "little flock," now being selected under these 
self-sacrificing conditions, so great a reward; as it 
is written,— "Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things 
which God hath prepared for them that love him." 
(1 Cor. 2:9.) Even though God hath revealed these 
things to us by his Spirit, which searcheth all things, 
even the deep things of God, nevertheless it is not 
possible for us to comprehend, know fully. As the 
Apostle says, we now see these glorious things of 
the future through a smoked glass, obscurely; but 
by and by we shall see face to face and know as we 
are known, and appreciate fully the wonderful things 
which God has declared to us through his Son and 
his faithful apostles. Then the royal feature of this 
priestly office will be added, and they shall be indeed 
priests, royal, sons of the Highest, and shine 
forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father. 

This royalty, while it will have great dignity, 
majesty and power, is not attracting us by any illustrations 
we have in earthly royalty, with its pride 



and often selfishness and pomp and show. It is attracting 
us, however, by the glorious things which 
God hath spoken respecting the work of these Royal 
Priests— the work of ruling, blessing and uplifting 
the world of mankind. This glorious hope inspires, 
encourages and revives the fainting priests who are 
now sacrificing, and the Lord has so intended. In 
view of these things let us remember our calling, 
brethren, and not mistake the avocations of life for 
the great vocation which God hath set before us in 
the Gospel. Let us see to it that every day shall witness 
our faithfulness to our priestly ordination of 
cleansing, priestly sacrificing, and thus preparing 
ourselves under the direction of the great High-priest 
for the glorious work that the heavenly Father 
has arranged for us in his wonderful plan. 



R3267 : page 409 

"O ABSALOM, MY SON, MY SON!" 

-2 SAM. 18:24-33. -NOVEMBER 8.- 

GOLDEN TEXT:-"A foolish son is a 
grief to his father."— Prov. 17:25. 

UTTERLY surprised and unprepared for Absalom's 
unfilial conduct was King David, 
when he learned of his son's rebellion and 
realized its extensiveness and how the hearts of the 
people had been stolen from him by his son's perfidy. 
He at once perceived that no other course 
was open to him than that of flight. It was a time 
of peace, and he had not a large retinue of soldiers 
at the Capital, but merely what might be termed a 
body guard. With these and the loyal officers of the 
court he fled across the Jordan, where he had time 
and opportunity to gather a few reinforcements 
and where he might feel comparatively secure in the 
small but strongly fortified city called Mahanaim. 
Meantime Absalom displayed his contempt for his 
father and his household and thus, so to speak, 
showed the people that the rebellion was one in 
which no quarter or reconciliation was to be expected. 
With a large army which had cast in their 
fortunes with the rebellious prince and expected 

R3268 : page 410 

under his patronage to reap large results of honor 
and influence and power as successors to the officers 
of the kingdom, Absalom pursued King David with 
haste. There seems to have been no doubt whatever 
that he was bent on capping the climax of his 



disgraceful course by the murder of his father. His 
pursuit with a large army meant this. 

Although King David's army was much the 
smaller of the two, they probably had the advantage 
in that many of the King's guard were men of special 
ability and large experience as warriors, according 
to the methods of their time. The King was persuaded 
not to go with the army, whereupon he divided 
it into three parts under three of his ablest adherents. 
These met Absalom's army, and attacking 
it from different quarters, the battle resulted in 
the slaughter of 20,000 of Absalom's forces and the 
routing of the remainder, including Absalom himself, 
who, being caught by the "head" in the low 
branches of a tree, was unhorsed and left helpless, 
and was slain by Joab, the chief of King David's 
generals. 

Here our present lesson opens. Near the watch 
tower of the wall of Mahanaim King David awaits 
news of the battle, while the watchman in the tower 
reports that he sees a messenger running, and, later, 
another. The first he recognizes as the son of his 
friend the priest, and according to the custom of the 
times he interpreted this to mean that the tidings 
were good, because a good man had been sent with 
them. This custom should still be in force amongst 
the Lord's people— that a good man would always 
seek to bear a good message. The words of the 
mouth and the meditations of the heart of all who 
are loyal to the Lord should be good— only good, 
ever good. Thus it is that God chooses not the 
worldly wise neither the worldly great, but those 
who are loyal at heart to him as his mouthpieces; 
and it should more and more be recognized that 
the bad tidings of great misery are not of the Lord, 
that those who bear them are not bearing the Lord's 
message, and that if they had the right attitude of 
heart toward the Lord, and the right spirit of love, 
they would not have the disposition to bear an evil 
message which maligns the divine character in a 
manner that even the depraved would resent if it 
were charged against them. 

When the first runner arrived he announced in 
a general way the success of the King's army. Then 
the King— in harmony with his parting words to 
the soldiers, that they should spare Absalom in any 
event— inquired first of all, "Is the young man Absalom 
safe?" As we are shocked with the unfilial 
conduct of Absalom toward his father, we are deeply 
impressed with the father love of David for his erring 
son, who sought not only his throne but his 
life. What was the difference between the two 
characters? which was the more noble, the more 
honorable, the more admirable? There could be but 
one answer from any quarter on this subject; even 
David's enemies could not read this record without 



an appreciation of his grandeur of soul. He was 
more anxious for Absalom than for his throne apparently 
—yea, and for his own life. The difference 
between the two characters can be accounted for in 
only one way, namely— that David was a man after 
God's own heart, one who had passed through trying 
experiences and learned profitable lessons, one in 
whom the spirit of love had been considerably developed. 
Absalom, on the contrary, is an illustration 
of selfishness and ambition which stooped to 
anything to accomplish its ends. David, although 
not a member of the house of sons of which Christ 
is the head, was one of the noble members of the 
house of servants of which Moses was the head.— 
Heb. 3:5,6. 

Some have esteemed that the answer of Ahimaaz 
was an untruth, intended to soften the facts so as 
not to wound the feelings of the King; but we cannot 
agree to this. We hold that, according to the 
record, the young man told the truth, and we believe 
that it would be much better for everybody if all 
mankind similarly confined themselves in their replies 
to important questions to the strict meaning of 
the word "know." The reply was that he had seen 
a commotion, knew that the battle was ended, knew 
that the victory was on the King's side, but knew nothing 
more. True, he had heard Joab say something 
about the King's son, but that was hearsay and 
not knowledge, and the young man answered the 
King properly when he said that he did not know the 
answer to the query about Absalom. The Lord's 
people above all others should be particular to discriminate 
between knowledge and belief and hearsay, 
etc. 

The second runner, Cushi, or literally a Cushite 
—that is, a negro— was probably one of the king's 
household servants who engaged in the battle. He 
quickly told the whole story, and it was upon hearing 
thus of Absalom's death that the King was 
moved to violent grief, and gave utterance to words 
which stand as amongst the most pathetic on the 
pages of history. "O my son Absalom, my son, my 
son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, 
my son, my son!" 

The pity is that the King's love for his son did 
not take a more practical course at the proper time. 
He was an indulgent rather than a wise father. Evidently 
the flash and glitter of the young man's natural 
talents not only charmed the people but charmed 
his father, so that he practically had whatever he 
wanted of everything, the King failing to apply to 
his son the valuable lessons which he himself would 
learn, to the effect that the reverence of the Lord is 
the beginning of wisdom, and that true happiness 
and true prosperity are only to be found in this path, 
which wisdom indicates. His unwise love for his 



son led him to feel that the young man must sow his 
wild oats and should not be much restrained, and 
now when he witnessed the reaping of those wild 
oats his heart was convulsed with sorrow. And so 
it has been with many a father and many a mother 
who, although truly the Lord's fail to apply to their 
children the lessons which the Lord has taught them 
by distressing experiences. It is unnecessary to 
comment upon the unwisdom of such love and to 

R3268 : page 411 

point the moral to Christian parents. It points itself, 
and Solomon the wise son expresses it tenderly 
when he said, in the words of our Golden Text, that 
"A foolish son is a grief to his father," and noted 
again that "He who spareth the rod hateth his son." 
From the practical standpoint, however the matter 
may appear to the superficial observer, the essence 
of wisdom is contained in his further observation, 
"Train up a child in the way he should go, and when 
he is old he will not depart from it." Parents seem 
not to fully appreciate the fact that in the training of 
their children, either in the right way or in the 
wrong way, they are laying out for themselves either 
joys or sorrows for the future. 

King David's inquiry respecting his son, "Is the 
young man safe?" should be the inquiry of every 
father and every mother respecting their sons and 
their daughters; but let them not do as David did 
—wait until sin has sprouted and blossomed and 
brought forth evil fruitage. Let them begin by realizing 
their duty toward their posterity in their earliest 
infancy. The duty of Christian parents toward 
their children is next to their duty to the Lord,— 
indeed the Lord has indicated that parental duty 
ranks first among all the earthly obligations of the 
saints. 



R3268 : page 411 

"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD." 

Psalm 23. -Nov. 15. 

JEHOVAH is my Shepherd, is the Prophet's sentiment, 

and our Lord's explanation of the matter 

further is that the great Shepherd's Son has been 

given full charge of the sheep. (John 10:1-16.) Not 

all mankind, however, are sheep, or have the Shepherd's 

care. In the present time only those who 

have heard the Shepherd's voice and responded to 

his call to become his sheep are of his flock, and 

his word on the subject is that it is a little flock, to 



whom it will be the Father's good pleasure eventually 
to give the kingdom in joint-heirship with his 
Son, their "Chief Shepherd." Then will come the 
time referred to by our Lord when "other sheep" 
will be found. The entire Millennial age, with all 
the forces and blessings of the heavenly kingdom, 
will be devoted to the finding of the other sheep. 
Our Lord's words are,— "Other sheep I have, which 
are not of this fold [not of the little flock of this 
Gospel age]; them also I must bring [in due time to 
a knowledge of the Truth and to the full privileges 
of sheep], and there shall be one flock and one 
shepherd." (John 10:16.) Eventually all of God's 
creatures on various planes of being shall be recognized 
as one family of God, as it is written of our 
Lord, "In whom the whole family of God both in 
heaven and in earth are named." (Eph. 3:15.) And 
again, "He shall gather together in one all things 
in Christ both in heaven and on earth." (Eph. 1:10.) 
However, though it may be interesting and helpful 
and profitable to understand something of our great 
Shepherd's generous plans for the future, our interest 
centers chiefly in the little flock of the present 
time, to which alone this lesson refers in many of 
its particulars. 

Professor George Adam Smith gives the following 
interesting description of the difference between 
the shepherds of sheep in olden times in Palestine 
and the care of sheep as is known to us of the 
present day. This is an important point to be remembered, 
as it was the eastern shepherd who 
illustrated our heavenly Shepherd's care for his little 
flock. Prof. Smith says:— 

R3269 : page 411 

"An Eastern pasture is very different from the 
narrow meadows and dyked hillsides with which we 
are familiar at home. It is vast and often practically 
boundless; it has to be extensive, for the greater part 
of it is barren— in fact the Hebrew word for desert 
and for pasture is the same. The most of it consists 
of dry, stony soil, out of which, for the great part 
of the year the sun has sucked all life. In this monotony 
the breaks are few, and consist of paths more 
or less fitful, gorges or thickets where wild beasts 
lurk, and oases of pleasant grass and water. Now 
in such a landscape of mirage, illusive paths, lurking 
terrors, and infrequent herbage, it is evident 
that the person and character of the shepherd must 
mean a great deal more to the sheep than it means 
to sheep with us. With us a flock of sheep without 
a shepherd is a common experience: every day we 
may see them left to themselves in a secure field or 
scattered over a side hill, with a far-traveling wire 
fence to keep them from straying. But I do not remember 



ever to have seen in the East a flock of 
sheep without a shepherd." 

Doubtless as the Prophet David penned this 
Psalm, his mind went back to his father's flock and 
to his own experience as its shepherd, concerning 
which we incidentally have the mention that while 
protecting it he slew a lion and a bear. Under 
heavenly inspiration the prophet pictures the Almighty 
One as the great caretaker watching over 
and protecting from harm all whom he recognizes 
as his "sheep." Nothing can be farther from the 
sentiment of this prophecy and illustration than the 
growing prevalent sentiment which recognizes Jehovah 
God as the shepherd and father of all mankind, 
and which is frequently voiced in the words, 
"Fatherhood of God, and brotherhood of man." 
This view ignores man's will and also ignores the 
Lord's Word, which declares that there are goats 
and wolves as well as sheep; that while some have 
become children of God, it is through faith and 
"adoption," and that many from the divine standpoint, 
so far from being recognized as children of 
God, are referred to as "of your father, the devil, for 
his works you do." (John 8:44.) Originally our 
race, represented by father Adam in sinless perfection, 
was recognized as related to Jehovah, but the 
breaking of this relationship by man's wilful disobedience 
and departure from God is clearly recognized 
in the Scripture, so that none are recognized as 
sons of God today unless they have been begotten 
again, begotten from above. Nor is it our hope that 
any in the future will be recognized as sons of God or 
as sheep of the Lord's fold except as they shall heartily 
renounce sin, and, being granted knowledge of divine 
grace, shall heartily accept the same and "follow 
on to know the Lord." 

Applying the psalm to the little flock, all of its 
provisions fit most minutely. Because the Lord is 
our Shepherd, we shall not want. Those who are 
proper sheep will submit their wills to the shepherd's 
will and trust wholly to his guidance, and so doing 
are relieved of that anxious craving so common to 
the children of the world and which is never satisfied, 
but the more it gets the more it wants. The 
Lord's sheep appreciate the heavenly things more 
than the earthly, and their wants in this respect are 
more than supplied when they accept by faith the 
divine assurance that 

"No good thing will He withhold 
From sheep which stray not from His fold." 
They have given up every earthly interest in exchange 
for the heavenly, and, realizing their own insufficiency 
and lack of judgment, they are trusting 
to the Lord to grant them such experiences, leadings, 
trials, difficulties, blessings, etc., in this present life 
as will be for their highest good, and as would work 



out for them a share of the glorious things of the 
future to which they have been called. The wants 
of this class are not of the kind after which the Gentiles 
seek, and for which they are anxious and strive. 
They in their hearts rejoice in the sentiment expressed 
by the poet, "Jesus has satisfied, Jesus is 
mine." Matt. 6:32. 

Although the experiences of the Lord's sheep 
include many trials in the parched wilderness of sin, 
yet he graciously gives them restful experiences in 
oases of divine favor. These are not always accompanied 
with immunities from trial, as the world 
would view the matter, but certainly are seasons of 
rest and refreshment— to such an extent that the 
Lord's sheep may truthfully say that they have "the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding" ruling 
in their hearts, notwithstanding outward trials, 
difficulties, perplexities and adversities. Which of 
the Lord's sheep has not found such green pasturage 
of spiritual refreshment in his private devotions and 
studies of divine things? which of them has not experienced 
similar refreshment and rest and nourishment 
from the Master's provision that his sheep shall 
not forsake the assembling of themselves together as 
the manner of some is— for the study of the Word, 
for prayer, for testimonies of the Lord's goodness 
and mercy? All these opportunities and privileges, 
whether personally experienced or whether they are 
yet only in the mind through the medium of the 
printed page, are provisions made for the sheep 
by the great Shepherd. Those sheep which find 
no enjoyment in such privileges and blessings and 
refreshments have reason to question their faithfulness 
in following the lead of the Shepherd. And 
those sheep which, finding such opportunities, decline 
to use them, thus give evidence of lack of harmony 
with the Shepherd's gracious intentions and wisdom. 

The "still waters" are contrasted with the rushing 
torrent of the mountain slope— still, not in the 
sense of stagnancy, but rather smooth flowing. At 
the latter only could the sheep receive proper refreshment. 
So applying the thought to the little 
flock, we find that the great Shepherd leads us away 
from the strifes of worldly ambition, from greatness 
and power and riches and honors highly esteemed 
amongst men, but does not lead us to stagnancy— 
rather to spiritual ambitions which bring with them 
a restfulness and refreshment of soul obtainable 
from no other source. The streams of truth and 
grace are living, but comparatively quiet, waters. 
As the Prophet intimates, these are not to be found 
by the sheep alone; to find them requires the leading 
of the Spirit. Let us give diligence to his voice, 
remembering his Word— that his sheep hear his 
voice and follow him. Let us discriminate, discern 
his voice, with its truthful accent, so different 



from the voice of error. Strangers true sheep will 
not follow, for they know not the voice of strangers. 
They do not like its money ring, or its worldly ambition 
ring, or its priestcraft tone, or its contradiction 
of the spirit of the divine message and method. 

"He restoreth my soul." The prophet does not 
refer to a restoration of body or of physical health, 
but a restoration of soul, being. Some of the Lord's 
most precious saints have been weary and faint and 
troubled— even the dear Redeemer fainted under his 
cross, and was neither kept whole or made whole 
miraculously on the occasion. The application of 
the Prophet's words to the Christian experience 
would make these experiences, called restoring of 
soul or being, to correspond with our justification to 
life. All our lives were forfeited under the divine 
sentence, and by faith a complete restitution or restoration 
of soul is granted to the believer, that he 
might have something to offer in sacrifice to the 
Lord, "holy, acceptable" (Rom. 12:1), and that in 
this sacrifice service he may walk in the footsteps 
of the great Shepherd who lay down his life for the 
sheep. Thus are the true sheep led in right paths, 
in proper paths, advantageous to their spiritual development, 
though frequently trying and difficult to 
them according to the flesh. This favor and blessing 
and opportunity comes to them not for their own 
sakes or worthiness but through the Lord's grace— 
"for his name's sake." 

The whole world is walking in the valley of the 
shadow of death. Mountain tops of life, of affection, 
were left by the race six thousand years ago, 
when Father Adam fell from his harmony with God 
to the plane of sin and death. The valley of sin 
carries with it the shadow of death, the penalty of sin. 
In the broad road the whole human family still 
walks; and even though the Shepherd leads his flock 
upward, and in the reverse direction from the 
course of the world, nevertheless, according to the 
flesh, they are still in the world, in this valley of the 
shadow of death. However, the true sheep, hearing 
the voice of the good Shepherd who gave his life 
for the sheep, have learned to be neither careless and 

R3269 : page 413 

indifferent as are some, nor to be in fear and doubt 
and perplexity as are the majority. These on the 
contrary fear no evil. They realize indeed that the 
penalty of sin is upon the race, but they realize also 
that divine love has provided a redemption. They 
realize that the whole world is going down to sheol, 
to hades, but that God has made provision that the 
good Shepherd shall deliver his little flock from the 
power of the grave in the First Resurrection, and 
that subsequently all that are in their graves shall 



hear the voice of the Son of man and shall come 
forth to a full, fair, reasonable, proper judgment— 
the testing respecting their willingness to be his 
sheep and to follow him and to attain everlasting 
life through him. The sheep of the little flock fear 
no evil because of the Lord's favor, because he is 
with them, on their side, and has shown his favor 
in the redemption price already paid. He is with 
them, too, in his word of promise— his assurance that 
death shall not mean extinction of life, but merely, 
until the resurrection, an undisturbed sleep in Jesus. 
What wonder that these can walk through the valley 
of the shadow of death singing and making melody 
in their hearts to the Lord, calling upon their 
souls with all that is within them to praise and 
laud and magnify his great and holy name, who loved 
us and bought us with his precious blood, and has 
called us to joint-heirship with our dear Redeemer. 

"His rod and his staff, they comfort me." As 
the Shepherd's crook was used to assist the sheep 
out of difficulties, to defend it from its too powerful 
enemies and to chasten it when inattentive, 

R3270 : page 413 

and as all of these uses of the rod were for the 

sheep's interest and welfare, so with the Lord's little 

flock and their Shepherd and his rod of help, defense 

and chastisement. The true sheep learn to 

love the providences of the Shepherd and are comforted 

by them. Knowing the Shepherd's power 

and his watchful care, they realize that all things are 

working together for good to them because they are 

his sheep. Why should they not be comforted, 

strengthened, encouraged? 

The Psalm diverges here and leaves the figure 
of the sheep and the Shepherd, adopting instead the 
illustration of a mighty lord who spreads a sumptuous 
feast for his humbler friend. In olden times 
an active hospitality meant much, and for a nobleman 
to receive one as his guest meant responsibility 
for his safety; and so the thought is that we, 
as the Lord's people, are accepted of him, counted as 
friends, are made to sit down to a bountiful feast, 
secure from the enmity of those who would injure 
us— secure from the great Adversary and all the 
wicked spirits in high places mentioned by the 
Apostle (Eph. 6:12)— secure so long as we are 
under the care of our great friend, our heavenly 
Father. The bounties of our table may indeed include 
some earthly good things, better or worse 
than those of the natural average man; but all of 
these, whatever they may be, accepted with joy and 
thanksgiving, are appreciated by those who recognize 
them as part and parcel of the bounties of the 
Friend above all others. 



All religious people make more or less claim 
to spiritual food, and the various parts and factions 
of Christendom especially boast that they have much 
advantage every way, and that their tables are spread 
with divine truth, promises, etc., food from which 
they claim to receive their strength. But what a 
variety of these tables there are and how different 
are the viands, doctrinally. The food on most of 
them seems to have been spoiled in the preparation. 
Some of it is sad, some of it is sour, and much of it 
is musty. For the most part it originated in "the 
dark ages," and the dear friends who sit down to 
these tables find that they have little appetite for 
such food, and we do not blame them. Rather, we 
would attract their attention to the generous, bountiful 
supply of divine Truth which the Lord himself 
is dispensing to the household of faith, "things new 
and old," but all of them pure, sweet, delicious, 
grand. This table is open to all those who love the 
Lord with all their heart, mind, soul and strength- 
better than they love houses or lands, parents or 
children, husband or wife, lodge or society or sectarian 
system or self. 

Is it strange that those so highly favored of the 
Lord and recognized as his guests and fed at his 
table should be hated by enemies? It would seem 
strange to us if it were not for the assurance of the 
Master himself, that whosoever will live godly will 
suffer persecution in this present time, and for the 
illustration of this in the Master's own experience, 
that it was the professedly godly, influential, great 
and nominally religious that persecuted him to death. 
We are not surprised, then, to find that our table is 
spread in the midst of enemies that now surround us 
on every hand. 

The anointing of the head of the guest with oil 
was a part of the hospitality of olden times. The 
antitype of this with us is the outpouring of the holy 
Spirit upon all this class— this little flock, the body 
of Christ, of which he is the Head, Chief, the Shepherd, 
the Leader. 

The fulness of the cup, running over, has a 
double signification. It is a cup of joy and a cup 
of sorrow, and in both respects it overflows. He 
who would partake of the joys of the Lord must also 
partake of his cup of suffering; we must suffer with 
him if we would reign with him. But we count the 
sufferings of this present time as not worthy to be 
compared with the glories that shall be revealed in 
us, and hence we are enabled to rejoice in tribulation, 
so that as the tribulations will overflow the rejoicing 
likewise overflows, and with the Apostle we 
can say, Rejoice, and again I say rejoice! 

The goodness and mercy which we anticipate 
beyond the veil has its beginning here already and is 
thus to be appreciated. Whoever knows nothing of 



the joys of the Lord in the present time will evidently 
not be prepared for the joys of the Lord in 
the Kingdom, whatever blessings and joys he may 
attain to under the administration of the Kingdom 
during the Millennial age. There is then joy and 
rejoicing granted to the Lord's faithful ones, not a 
momentary matter connected with their first acceptance 
of the Lord and their consecration of themselves 

R3270 : page 414 

to him. The goodness and mercy of the 
Lord is not to be looked back to as a thing of the 
remote past, but is to be recognized and appreciated 
as a thing of the present. Day by day God's goodness 
and mercy follow us, refresh us, strengthen us, 
bless us. 

The highest hope to which we dare aspire is that 
of final union with our great Shepherd, our heavenly 
Father, and the good Shepherd his Son, in the 
heavenly state, in our Father's house on high, one 
mansion or plane of which is intended for the little 
flock, separate and distinct from the mansion or 
plane provided for the restitution class of the Millennial 
age. The end of all our highest ambitions 
will be attained, and far more than realized, when 
we shall be like our Lord, see him as he is, and share 
his glory in the Father's house. 



R3270 : page 414 

"WINE IS A MOCKER." 

Prov. 20:1; 23:20,21,29-35. -Nov. 22. 

IN THIS LESSON wine personifies alcohol, which 
in one form or another mocks every man who 
becomes its friend and companion. Realizing this, 
surely it is true that "Whosoever is deceived thereby 
is not wise." Evidently many of our race are not 
wise, for millions are thus deceived, notwithstanding 
the illustrations they have on every hand of wine's 
deceived friends, wrecked socially, morally, physically 
and financially. 

The Department of Labor in Washington recently 
issued a bulletin showing the returns made 
by employers in various industries in the United 
States regarding the drinking habits of their employees. 
Of seven thousand employers who answered 
the question whether, in engaging employees, 
they discriminated against men who drank, forty-four 
hundred replied in the affirmative and only sixteen 
hundred in the negative. The returns divided 
according to industries were as follows:— 



Discriminated Not 
against discriminated 

Mining 56 per cent 44 per cent 

Agriculture 72 per cent 28 per cent 

Manufacturing 79 per cent 21 per cent 

Trade 88 per cent 12 per cent 

Transportation 97 per cent 3 per cent 

About two thousand employers forbade any use 
of intoxicants by employees of certain grades, and 
fifteen hundred forbade it when employees were on 
duty. We quote:— 

"It is worthy of note that the grades of work in 
which employers require that no liquor shall be used 
are always those entailing responsibility. For example, 
in agriculture it was the foremen, managers, 
etc., who were required to be abstainers; in manufacturing 
it was the engineer, fireman, etc.; in 
transportation, the trainmen, motormen, etc., conductors 
and the like. It will be perceived that the 
trades most highly organized show the most disposition 
to prohibit the use of liquor. Railroads, for 
example, stand at the top of the list, and agriculture 
very nearly at the foot, though the temperance sentiment 
among farmers is vastly stronger than among 
railroad managers." 

The liquor question seems to be less a dispute 
respecting the wisdom of intoxication and 
its unprofitableness and more a question of personal 
liberty. A love of liberty is born in every 
man, no matter how depraved he may be otherwise, 
and yet it cannot be disputed that liberty can be 
used properly only under perfect conditions or under 
restraints. If all men were perfect, well balanced 
mentally, and without depraved appetite, and if the 
surroundings were all perfect, they would need no 
restraints of any kind, though they would still be 
subject to divine laws. Under present imperfect 
conditions all lovers of liberty should appreciate the 
necessity of self-control, restraint of liberty— especially 
those who, as New Creatures, have voluntarily 
placed themselves under divine instruction. Even 
those who feel the greatest possible confidence in 
their strength of will should remember that the will 
grows stronger by its exercise in opposition, and 
that where it is not thus actively engaged habit is 
apt to supplant it and become the master. Furthermore, 
seeing as we do the large proportion of the 
human family who admittedly are weak in will power 
and self-control, and realizing the force of example 
upon such, those who feel themselves strong, in proportion 
as they love their neighbor as themselves 
will feel disposed to forego the exercise of liberties 
which would have the effect of stumbling their 
weaker neighbors. A noted writer has said: 



"My reader, beware of habit! Habit is the most 
significant word to be found in the English vocabulary. 
Get an artist to paint it in letters of fire and 
hang it on the walls of your chamber, where your 
eye shall catch its message when you retire and 
where it may greet you again with the rising sun. 
Gaze upon it until it is deeply cut into the sanctuary 
of your inner being, just where the lamp of life may 
cast its ruddy light over it. Habit is to be your 
curse or benediction; it is either to conquer you or 
enable you to conquer. Today it is transforming 
you into a sycophant or a prince of freedom. Today 
you are either girding your soul with fetters of 
sorrow or building a chariot that will conduct you 
to paradise. Good habits are as potent for emancipation 
as vile ones are for slavery and anguish. One 
may resolutely form habits of purity, honesty, fidelity, 
till he breathes the air of divinity as his native 
air;— as he eventually becomes expert and master 
in melody, by years of inexorable drill." 

The power of habit is unquestionably a great 
one either for good or evil, but let us not forget that 
the human will, however strong or persistently exercised, 
can only reach its highest attainment and 
most favorable results when placed under discipleship 
to Christ— to be taught of God. 

R3271 : page 415 

The Christian Endeavor World gives the following 
information regarding the use of liquors in 
various civilized countries. From this it appears 
that although the liquor habit has reached terrible 
proportions in this land and is blighting millions of 
lives annually, nevertheless the United States is fifteenth 
in the list. We thank God that it is no worse, 
and yet long for the time when our prayer, "Thy 
kingdom come, thy will be done on earth," shall be 
answered in the establishment of the Millennial 
kingdom under which Satan shall be bound, and all 
necessary restrictions be put into operation, to the 
intent that the world of mankind may be uplifted 
everywhere and brought to a knowledge of the salvation 
made possible for all through the dear Redeemer's 
death. The quotation follows:— 

"A table recently published showing the amount 
of all kinds of liquors consumed per capita in twenty-three 
nations, throws startling but not astonishing 
light on the much-talked-of commercial invasion of 
European markets by America. 

"At the head of this list of nations, the heaviest 
in drinking in the world is the Argentine Republic. 
Close after it comes France, Italy, Belgium, Germany, 
Austria, Great Britain,— the nations that are 
feeling most keenly the commercial aggressiveness 
of the United States. Fifteenth in the list comes 



the United States, the commercial rival whose success 
is making all Europe uneasy. In other words, 
the difference between successful competition and 
failure lies largely in the difference between the 6.4 
gal. of pure alcohol in all kinds of liquors consumed 
per capita in France, the 2.63 in Germany, the 1.96 
in Austria, the 3.47 in Belgium, the 2.52 in Great 
Britain, and the 1.26 in the United States." 

"At a recent meeting in Birmingham, England, 
addressed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the presiding 
officer, Mr. Edwin Smith, said:— If we spent 
on alcohol the same per capita as America, our 
drinking bill would be about L. 66,000,000 less than 
it now is. We cannot succeed commercially while 
we are handicapped in this way to the extent of forty -eight 
per cent.'" 

The wise man does not say that a moderate use 
of alcoholic liquors brings woe, sorrow, contentions, 
complainings, wounds, redness of eyes, etc., and we 
are not to add to his words. We are to remember, 
however, that those who tarry long at the wine 
probably reach that condition through habit, that 
most of such begin with a fear of the consequences 
and the intention of becoming moderate drinkers 
only. Let us beware of the slavery of habit! Even 
the force and weight of the exceeding great and 
precious promises are not sufficient to hold our 
fallen appetites where they are being constantly fed 
and the chains of habit being forged; hence the wisdom 
of the exhortation to turn our eyes away from 
the smooth-flowing wine, to engage our attention 
and thoughts in some other direction, knowing that 
wine is a mocker, and that whatever it may promise 
of rewards and blessings at our first introduction, 
"at the last it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like 
an adder." Its tendency is to pervert the judgment 
in general, so that the eyes will see strange things, as 
in delirium tremens, and the heart will utter through 
the mouth perverse things. Surely the new nature 
could not thrive under such conditions, which tend 
even to deprave further the old nature. Hence, 
every New Creature must beware of this seductive 
influence, and resist it faithfully, as he would make 
his calling and election sure. 

Those who give way to the drinking habit become 
sottish, careless, as though a man were to lie 
down to sleep in the sea and not expect to be 
drowned, or as though he were to lie down upon the 
top of a mast and not expect to fall and be injured. 
To such ultimately the only desirable thing is oblivion, 
to be stupidly insensible to the reproof of 
friends and the blows of enemies. The waking idea 
seems to be to seek further intoxication. 

A well known temperance worker, when asked 
to address a Sunday School, desired to bring out the 
fact that the drunkards of the future must come from 



the ranks of the boys of today. "Boys," said he, 
"these men that we see all around us on the street, 
in the stores, in this church, grow old and feeble and 
sooner or later will die. Who will take their places 
and be the men then?" After a moment's pause they 
answered, "We boys." 

"Very true," answered the speaker. "Now, boys, 
you have all seen men who drank too much,— drunkards 
we call them. After a while they will die too. 
Now, boys, tell me who do you think will take their 
places and be the drunkards then?" Promptly came 
the answer, "We boys!" The thoughtless answer 
roused the whole school. Could there possibly be 
any truth in it? Alas, yes— not true of all these 
boys, but true of some of them. 

With this thought in mind, what child of God 
could feel indifferent in respect to his example and 
instruction to all boys over whom he exercises any 
influence; how carefully his own boys should be 
guided, counselled, assisted in the formation of correct 
principles, correct habits. 

A number of young men were one day sitting 
around the fire in the waiting room of an English 
railway, talking about a total abstinence society. 
Just then a policeman came in with a prisoner in 
handcuffs. He listened to the young men's conversation 
but did not give any opinion. Mr. McDonald, 
a minister of the gospel, was also in the room, 
and hearing what the young men were saying, stepped 
up to the policeman and said aloud, "Pray, sir, 
what have you to say about temperance?" The policeman 
replied, "Well, all I have to say is that I 
never took a teetotaler to York Castle prison in my 
life, nor to Wakefield House of Correction either." 



page 416 

MOTTO CARDS FOR HOME EMBELLISHMENT. 



When in London Brother Russell selected some 
very desirable motto cards; but the astonishing increase 
in every department of the office work has hindered us 
from attending to these. Even now we cannot fill 
orders for particular mottoes nor attempt a description 
of their styles, prices, texts, etc. They are of every 
variety and price and size;— all beautiful, all faith-inspiring 
all helpful. Even after paying 35 per cent, 
duty these are cheap. We can supply them at one-half 
the usual prices or less. 

For convenience we put them up in assorted $ 1 
and $2 packets,— postage included. Some of the old 
desirable styles we have duplicated, as they could not 



be better; and some are strictly new. We assort them 
in the packets; but for the sake of some who may have 
gotten several lots of the old and now want none but 
the new we have prepared packets of the new only. 
Such as desire the new should so stipulate when ordering 
but the average person will be as well or better 
pleased to get the ordinary assortment. 



page 417 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 