Changed Values—Do You Feel the Loss?
“WHAT is the most important problem facing the country?” When asked this question, the majority of people surveyed in the United States identified family and moral decline at or near the top of the list of their concerns. In this, they are not alone.
For example, the Paris daily International Herald Tribune noted: “There is a palpable yearning, especially among the young, for some kind of unifying vision, a set of acknowledged ideals with which to address and tame the mechanics of greed, of selfishness, of loss of community, which seem to be taking over the world. . . . This mounting debate about the need for a global ethic is an admission that something is missing.”
Do you feel that governments and world leaders, including business leaders, have the values needed to lead us to a happier, safer, more secure future? Do you feel a sense of loss, at least to some extent, as a result of the changing values you see around you?
One matter of deep concern may be your personal safety. Do you live in an area where it is safe to leave your home unlocked? Do you feel comfortable walking the streets of your neighborhood at night? If you have the good fortune of living in an area that is free of outright warfare, ethnic unrest, or deadly gang warfare, you may still fear being the victim of assault, mugging, home invasion, or theft. This can understandably cause feelings of distress and a sense of loss.
In addition to this, you may have lost—at least to some extent—the sense of trust in others that you once had. Through experience, perhaps both professionally and personally, you may have encountered an increasing tendency for individuals to do you wrong if it furthers their own interests, even marginally.
Government Example Needed
Throughout history, there has been an acknowledged close link between the personal values a society embodies and the values manifested by its government. Calvin Coolidge, who later served as president of the United States, said: “Men speak of natural rights, but I challenge any one to show where in nature any rights ever existed or were recognized until there was established for their declaration and protection a duly promulgated body of corresponding laws.”
In the final analysis, it is the ruling government—no matter by what means it came into power—that can promote or hinder civil rights, such as free press, freedom of assembly, freedom of religion, and freedom to speak out in public, to be free from unlawful arrest or harassment, and to obtain a fair trial.
Abraham Lincoln, who later served as president of the United States, once said: “The legitimate object of government is to do for a community of people, whatever they need to have done, but can not do, at all, or can not, so well do, for themselves—in their separate, and individual capacities.” When governments work to meet such lofty purposes, people are inclined to trust those in power.
However, cynicism and wariness seem to have replaced such confidence and trust today. One recent study in the United States reported that 68 percent of those surveyed judged the ethical practices of federal officials to be only fair or even poor. In many countries the public perception of government officials has been rocked by bribery scandals and corruption at the highest levels. Understandably, this has resulted in a sense of loss in growing numbers of people.
King Solomon’s Good Example
One ancient example illustrates just how much impact the values of those governing can have. King Solomon ruled over the 12 tribes of Israel from 1037 to 998 B.C.E. His father, King David, had been one of Israel’s outstanding kings. The Bible depicts David as a lover of truth and righteousness and, above all, as a man with implicit trust and confidence in his God, Jehovah. David taught Solomon the same values.
Almighty God appeared to Solomon in a dream and said to him: “Ask! What shall I give you?” (2 Chronicles 1:7) Instead of asking for great wealth, personal glory, or political victories, Solomon revealed the values he held dear by requesting a wise, understanding, and obedient heart, so that he could provide good government for the nation of Israel.
How did the rule of Solomon affect the people? God blessed him with wisdom, glory, and personal wealth—as long as he remained true to the nation’s spiritual values. Archaeological findings attest to the material prosperity of Solomon’s reign. The book The Archaeology of the Land of Israel states: “The wealth that flowed into the royal court from all directions, and the flourishing commerce . . . brought about a rapid and noticeable revolution in every aspect of material culture.”
Yes, Solomon’s good government brought peace, security, and happiness to his subjects. “Judah and Israel continued to dwell in security, everyone under his own vine and under his own fig tree, from Dan to Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon.”—1 Kings 4:20, 25.
King Solomon’s Bad Example
Unhappily, however, like the values of so many leaders today, Solomon’s values eventually changed. The Bible account reads: “He came to have seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines; and his wives gradually inclined his heart. And it came about in the time of Solomon’s growing old that his wives themselves had inclined his heart to follow other gods; and his heart did not prove to be complete with Jehovah his God like the heart of David his father.”—1 Kings 11:3, 4.
What effect did King Solomon’s changed values have on his people? In spite of his great ability and wisdom, Solomon became an oppressive ruler during the latter part of his reign. The high costs of his government caused an excessive drain on the nation’s economy. The work force became discontented. Political rivals resisted the king and sought to usurp his power. The nation lost much of its sense of cohesion. How ironic that Solomon himself wrote: “When the righteous become many, the people rejoice; but when anyone wicked bears rule, the people sigh.”—Proverbs 29:2.
Shortly after Solomon’s death, political unrest and distrust led to a dividing of the nation and an ensuing period of hardship, disunity, and decline. The Israelites felt an overwhelming sense of loss. Their government had changed its values, forgetting the best interests of the people. The basic fault was that their leaders had ignored Jehovah and his laws. Thus, the entire nation suffered.
Widespread Lack of Trust Today
In government, business, and religious circles today, many have paid scant attention to maintaining high values. This, in turn, has produced a sense of loss in the minds and hearts of the population in general. More and more, governments and other leaders are unable to solve their countries’ basic problems.
For example, they have been unable to bring an end to war or to curb the rising costs of health care or the bad effects of the illicit drug trade. And there has also been a breakdown in educational systems. A number of governments even sponsor organized gambling. Many business and religious leaders have likewise proved to be a shocking disappointment because of their corrupt and immoral actions. Little wonder that there is widespread lack of trust in the integrity of those to whom people look for leadership.
Is it possible for any government to protect and even take the lead in upholding basic human rights and values? Yes, it is possible. Our concluding article will explain how.
[Blurb on page 7]
‘Greed, selfishness, and loss of community seem to be taking over the world.’—INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE
[Pictures on page 8]
When King Solomon obeyed God’s laws, he imparted high values to his subjects

