Millions Will Attend—Will You Be There?
▪ WHERE? At one of the “Give God Glory” District Conventions being held at hundreds of locations throughout the world. The three-day program, arranged by Jehovah’s Witnesses, is designed to help all lovers of God to live in such a way as to bring their Creator the honor that he deserves.
The first day of the convention will focus on the theme “You Are Worthy, Jehovah, . . . to Receive the Glory.” (Revelation 4:11) “Creation Declares the Glory of God” is the title of a talk that will help us to see how Jehovah’s qualities are “clearly seen,” or “perceived by the things made.” (Romans 1:20) The encouraging keynote address, “Glorious Prophetic Visions Spur Us On!,” will urge all to keep close in mind the momentous events foretold in God’s Word for our day. “The Prophecy of Amos—Its Message for Our Day” is the title of a three-part symposium that will emphasize the modern-day relevance of this ancient prophet’s warnings. “‘The Good Land’—Foregleam of Paradise” will enhance our appreciation for the region that Jehovah gave to his ancient people.
Day two of the convention will carry the theme “Declare Among the Nations His Glory,” based on Psalm 96:3. Among the highlights will be a symposium entitled “Reflect Like Mirrors the Glory of Jehovah.” This three-part presentation will outline how we can more effectively accomplish our ministry. The talk “Hated Without Cause” will be followed by the dedication discourse and the baptism—a feature at all conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In the afternoon the talk “Beware of ‘the Voice of Strangers’” will give timely admonition regarding “false teachers” who try to deceive God’s people with “counterfeit words.” (2 Peter 2:1, 3) “Our Children—A Precious Inheritance” will conclude the day’s program. It will be a delight for parents as well as young children.
The final day of the convention will develop the theme “Do All Things for God’s Glory.” (1 Corinthians 10:31) A series of interviews will complement the talk entitled “How Youths Are Praising Jehovah.” The morning session will also include a 45-minute drama with the title “Boldly Witnessing Despite Opposition.” Since religion is constantly in the news, the public discourse will address the question, “Who Are Giving God Glory Today?” The talk “‘Keep Bearing Much Fruit’ to Jehovah’s Glory” will bring the convention to a stirring finale.
These are just some of the motivating presentations that will be heard at the “Give God Glory” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Surely you will want to be present for all three days. For the convention location nearest you, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses or write to the publishers of this magazine.

