Are You Thinking About Marriage?
If we compare the global divorce phenomenon to an earthquake, the United States would be at the epicenter. In a recent year, more than one million marriages were terminated there​—an average of two every minute. But you may well be aware that the United States is hardly alone in its marital misery.
ACCORDING to one study, the divorce rates in Canada, England and Wales, France, Greece, and the Netherlands have more than doubled since 1970.
We have every reason to believe that most couples enter wedlock because they love each other and want to spend the rest of their lives together. Sadly, however, the dream of a happy marriage often proves to be just that​—a dream. Upon waking up to reality, many have said that they married too soon or married the wrong person or both.
Why do so many marriages fail? “The main reason is a lack of preparation,” says the author of a book about courtship. She adds: “As I deal with couples in the throes of marital distress two feelings engulf me​—compassion and anger. I feel compassion because they have not discovered their dreams for a mutually satisfying relationship. I feel anger because of their ignorance regarding the complexity of the task.”
Indeed, many enter marriage with little or no idea of how to make it succeed. Yet, this is hardly surprising. One educator observed: “How many of our youth go through college studying about the behavior of rats and lizards, but fail to learn about the behavior of two people called husband and wife?”
Are you thinking about marriage​—either about a possible future marriage or about that marriage you are in now? If so, you should be aware that a real-life relationship is far different from that depicted in movies, on television shows, and in romance novels. At the same time, the marriage of two mature people who are truly in love may be considered a blessing from God. (Proverbs 18:22; 19:14) How, then, can you be sure that you are prepared to meet the demands of marriage? What factors should you consider in selecting a mate? Or if you are already married, how can you increase the likelihood of finding lasting happiness in your marriage?

