VOL. XXIV. MAY 1, 1903. No. 9 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 131 

An Astrologer's Outlook 131 

Preparations for the Millennium 131 

Only a Form of Godliness 131 

Peculiar Views of Heathens 132 

A Seasonable Word on Christian 

Science 132 

A Christian Science Prayer 136 

A United Presbyterian View 136 

Suffering as Christians 137 

"The Lord Stood by Him" 140 

Interesting Questions Answered 142 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R3185 :page 130 

THE ATLANTA CONVENTION. 



This Convention was, we feel sure, a great blessing to 
many. One dear old brother, when bidding the Editor 



"Goodbye" at the train, said, "This Convention has been 
a great blessing to me: I am a poor man, Brother Russell, 
but if it had cost me $1000 to attend I would not begrudge 
it." All faces told much the same story of appreciation 
of brotherly fellowship. We trust that the result will be 
permanently beneficial, not only to those who attended, 
but also to those at their homes whom they represented, 
and to whom they carried back some of the Convention's 
fullness of joy. 

The attendance from outside Atlanta was good, especially 
for the South,— about 100. The largest attendance 
was on Sunday afternoon, when about 600 were present at 
the Grand Opera House. Nineteen symbolized their immersion 
into Christ on Saturday. 

page 130 

CONCERNING CORRESPONDENCE. 



During the Editor's absence in Europe our friends will 
remember that he cannot be reached by correspondence, and 
that matters intended for his special consideration should be 
deferred until his return. 

In general, communications concerning business, subscriptions, 
orders, Tract Fund remittances, Pilgrim visits, 
etc., should be sent to "Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society," 
and letters concerning doctrinal and personal matters 
to the Editor. 



R3184:page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
AN ASTROLOGER'S OUTLOOK. 



WE seriously question all the claims of Astrology; 
yet the following— from whatever source the 
suggestions come, even though of the Adversary 
himself— seem remarkably true to our expectations 
based upon the Word of the Lord. For this 
reason alone we present them here,— as follows:— 
"Saturn is the representative of the great motive 
power that has dominated the mind of man up to 
the present time. The great organizations of Capital, 
attracting now so much attention, are in reality the last 
great struggle of this Saturn-god to save his throne. 
But his efforts will be futile, yet far from useless, for 
he is blindly doing service for a still greater God in 
the same way as the other planets have contributed 
blindly to Saturn's glory. 



"Jupiter, representing law, religion and morality, 
has been perforce subservient to Saturn's greater 
and more potent force. It explains why the church, 
the law, the charitable and educational institutions 
have contributed to increasing the power and prestige 
of the worldly and material Saturn, whose selfish monopolizing 
material nature must be disposed of and 
made tributary to a higher, nobler force that will carry 
out the work of human evolution. 

"Jupiter must also transfer his allegiance from the 
grasping Saturn to the newly discovered factor that 
stands for universal brotherhood; namely, Uranus. 
When Uranus and Jupiter meet in the humane sign 
of Aquarius in 1914, the long-promised era will have 
made a fair start in the work of setting man free to 
work out his own salvation, and will insure the ultimate 
realization of dreams and ideals of all poets and 
sages in history. 

"Uranus is preparing the way for Neptune, who 
symbolizes Love in its very highest form— the fulfilling 
of the law. By this, we see that Socialism, or 
whatever the new order may be called, will not and 
can not be the rule of the common or ignorant masses, 
but the leadership of the very highest developed members 
of the human family. 

"In 1903 Jupiter will be in the Sign of Pisces- 
sign of the feet, or understanding, and the synthesis of 
the new religion is Love;— Love, that words cannot 
define. We are nearing a condition where "masters" 
will be unknown— where humanity will instinctively 
conform to the injunction, 'Call no man master, 
neither be ye called master.' 

"Note— Uranus: Great commotions are expected 
when it shall take its ascendancy over Saturn." 

PREPARATIONS FOR THE MILLENNIUM. 



Polar ice, both arctic and antarctic, seems to have 
been steadily decreasing, and it may be that these 
frigid deserts shall once more blossom as the rose— 
Isa. 35:1— literally. 

The ice from both poles seems to be drifting toward 
equatorial regions, to such an extent that, in 
the north, it has become a menace to commerce, and 
it may be a work preparatory to the "times of 
restitution." 

ARCTIC ICE A MENACE TO OCEAN STEAMSHIPS. 

"Philadelphia, March 18.— (Press dispatch.)— 
Navigators of the North Atlantic are worried about 
the manner in which the arctic floe ice is drifting 
south, directly in the pathway of steamships. Captain 
Beavis of the Philadelphia Trans-Atlantic line 



steamship East Point, which arrived here today from 
London, reports passing tremendous quantities of field 
ice in latitude 43 deg. 43 min., and longitude 49 deg. 
21 min. Owing to the obstruction Captain Beavis 
found it necessary to alter his vessel's course and steam 
60 miles to the southward to avoid contact with it." 

ONLY A FORM OF GODLINESS. 



Rev. J. B. Hastings, D.D., of Edinburgh, Scotland, 
explained not long ago his views respecting the 
generally acknowledged loss of religious interest, as 
follows:— 

"Our worship in many cases has become a mere 
form. There is little apparent hungering for the 

R3184:page 132 

bread of life; and only in rarest instances a crying 

out of the heart and flesh for the living God. Not that 

there is an open antagonism to religion. There have 

been periods within our own recollection when there 

was much more of direct opposition. But there is an 

alarming deal of that subtler, deadlier quantity known 

as simple indifference, which is playing melancholy 

havoc among ever-enlarging sections of the population. 

Outside our churches there is a great army of 

men and women who have become sadly estranged; 

who have been so long away from the ordinances of 

public worship that it will be next to impossible, by 

ordinary methods, to bring them back. And inside 

our churches there are many who feel that something 

needs to be done to make our public worship more interesting 

and edifying and directly helpful to the religious 

life.... 

"I believe that the root of the whole matter lies 
in a widespread practical disbelief in the supernatural. 
There is no realization, on the part of the multitudes, 
of the spiritual world, and of the God with whom they 
have to do. There are so many interests in this material 
life that the things of the spirit are simply given 
the go-by. The whole atmosphere of God's house 
has become so foreign to the experience of their everyday 
lives, that they are no longer interested, and, as 
a matter of course, have ceased to attend. It is sad to 

R3185 :page 132 

think that so many young men and women in our 

populous cities are in this position. With churches 

galore, of all sorts and conditions (in one of which 

they could surely find congenial worship), they are 

yet standing without, spiritual starvelings, children 

merely of time, practical unbelievers in God and immortality, 



moving on their light-hearted way to the 
judgment throne and the eternity beyond." 

PECULIAR VIEWS ON HEATHENS. 



"Munich.— (Press cable.)— The papal nuncio at 
this court has ordered the Catholic papers to stop publishing 
an open letter by Bishop Pelkman, Lahore, 
East India, as it would 'distress the holy father very 
much to see the right reverend gentleman's peculiar 
views in print' 

"The paragraph in the bishop's letter to which 
exception is taken reads as follows: 

"Twenty -one thousand three hundred and eighty-nine 
persons have died of the plague; wonderful are God's 
ways! One is almost persuaded to think that the Lord 
sentenced the heathen adults to die that their children 
might fall into the hands of the missionaries and be educated 
as good Christians. The last two famine periods 
brought us several thousand new adepts.'" 



R3185 :page 132 

A SEASONABLE WORD ON CHRISTIAN SCIENCE. 

-FROM BRO. W. E. PAGE.- 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Meeting so much 
"Christian Science" out this way, I was led to 
investigate the basis of its claims by the lamp of 
the Word, and I find it a most noxious weed. First, for 
my own profit, I wrote out what I found, and have since 
remodeled and chiseled it down. You may find good use 
for it as it is, or can use it as a foundation for a criticism 
in the TOWER upon this most manifest perversion. I send it 
to you for such use as you deem best. Put it in the waste 
basket if that is the best place for it, and do not hesitate a 
moment to tell me so, if these articles bother more than 
they help. I only want to do good work, but with our 
weak judgments we cannot always discern where we help 
and where we hinder. 

The Lord is gracious to us, bearing with us in our infirmities, 
and ever and anon giving us deep draughts at the 
fountain of truth, and its blessings of peace and love in 
justification and sanctification. Oh, that this year may 
prove the one of most sincere consecration and abundant 
zeal to us all, who are of this way! 

May grace and mercy and peace be multiplied to you 
and your household, the brethren and sisters with you. 

Yours in fellowship, W. E. PAGE. 



When presenting various features of the Father's 
great "Plan of the Ages," we have not infrequently met 
professed believers in Christ who seemed to accept the 
truth, and apparently warranted expectations of full 
fellowship. However, as the acquaintance grew, an 
almost indefinable barrier to communion would arise; 
and being anxious to receive those whom the Lord 
sends (Matt. 10:40), and desiring to esteem all professed 
brethren as most worthy (Phil. 2:3), we have 
often been perplexed and in straits as to what course 
we should pursue in our association with them. The 
grounds of the older sects are so well defined that we 
have but little difficulty in understanding our proper 
attitude toward them; nor is there particular danger 
of confusion from those forms of error which plainly 
and fairly present their teachings in well defined 
terms. Since our eyes were anointed that we might 
understand present privileges and labors (Rev. 3:18), 
we have been most perplexed and confused by the 
newer forms of doctrine which, on investigation, we 
find deny the Lord that bought them (2 Pet. 2:1), 
while with much feigned reverence and humility they 
profess allegiance to him, thus falsely presenting themselves 
as angels of light— messengers of truth. (2 Cor. 11:13-15.) 
However considerate we may desire 
to be, when we meet such false, seductive teaching, 
we must, without strife and to the best of our ability, 
unmask it (2 Tim. 2:24-26), and be careful neither 
in word nor deed to wish it God-speed (2 John 9-11), 
remembering that it is required in stewards that a 
man be found faithful.— 1 Cor. 4:2. 

One of the most widespread of these later forms 
of subtle error that we meet is "Christian Science." 

R3185 :page 133 

Many of its votaries are kind, well-intentioned 
people, but they are completely blinded by the perversions 
of the system; and we believe that many 
such will gladly free themselves from this dominion 
of the Devil, when the shackles of ignorance and 
prejudice, which now bind them, are stricken off in the 
advancing light of this dawning day. As our conclusions 
and the grounds for them may be of use to 
some others of the brethren who may be perplexed as 
to the proper attitude they should assume toward this 
heresy, we have decided, with the Lord's help, to 
present what we have found. Our quotations on the 
subject are wholly from the writings of Mrs. Eddy, 
who is the chief apostle of the various forms— which 
are legion— of this doctrine. 

When setting forth to those entangled in this 
doctrine, our faith regarding the "restitution of all 
things," and God's wonderful plan for selecting the 
"Seed" which is to bless all nations, we almost invariably 



meet with the claim, "That is just what we 

believe; you must be a Scientist." The claim is so 

sincerely made that we are led to hope that we have 

met with another grain of wheat. To make sure of 

our ground, we present the ransom and its necessity, 

which seems to meet with their approval, yet from 

various remarks, especially those made in a general 

way, we are conscious of a vital disagreement, somewhere, 

on the fundamental principles of the Lord Jesus' 

work. A short investigation into Mrs. Eddy's 

work disclosed the cause for this, and developed the 

fact that her teachings are based upon private meanings 

put upon words. Hence, when we present our views 

to one of her followers, the words we employ do not 

convey our meaning to them, and until we learn this, 

and find out what interpretation they put upon our 

words, we are sorely perplexed. Mrs. Eddy very cunningly 

lays the foundation for her master-piece of 

word-jugglery as follows:— 

"Aside from the opposition to what is new, the 
greatest difficulty in introducing our metaphysical 
system is to express metaphysics in physical terms 
and then be understood physically. This difficulty is 
overcome by teaching the student the metaphysical meaning 
of terms in common use." 

What a preparation to deceive! Surely any 
teaching that must rest on special meanings placed on 
"terms in common use," should arouse the suspicions 
of those who are sincere and pure in heart. The Master 
did not find it necessary to employ so questionable 
a course, but so taught that the "common people 
heard him gladly." 

In examining Mrs. Eddy's teachings, we do not 
follow the order of her books, but take up the essential 
truths she perverts, as seems best. Among Webster's 
definitions of person we find, "A self-conscious 
being;" and being is defined as "existence, opposed to 
non-existence; that which exists in any way, whether 
it be material or spiritual;" and we submit that the universally 
accepted meaning of person today is a "self-conscious 
being." Again, we submit that to the unprejudiced 
and candid reader the unqualified teaching of 
the Bible, in language in common use, is that God is 
the great and only self-existent, "self-conscious 
being." 

But Mrs. Eddy says, "Jehovah is not a person. 
God is principle." How elusive and vague this is! 
The first meaning in Webster given to principle, and 
which is marked obsolete and rare, is, "beginning, 
commencement;" second, "hence, a source, or origin; 
that from which anything proceeds; fundamental 
substance or energy;" and third, "an original faculty 
or endowment of the soul." Ah, yes! "The 
serpent was more subtle than all the beasts of the 
field." (Gen. 3:1.) How this cunningly-laid perversion 
illustrates his full subtlety! While we stand 



aghast at the bold belittling of the great Jehovah, we 
cannot but wonder at the consummate skill shown. 
(Read Ezekiel 28:12-19.) We know that God is the 
source of all good things: he from whom every right 
thing proceeds: the self-existent, "self-conscious being," 
possessing and originating all qualities of moral 
perfection. Owing to the inexactness of language, 
the wedge of error here introduced (if, as common 
people, we follow Webster) is very slim, and not readily 
detected at first glance. If not detected, the next 
step will entangle the unwary very seriously. To the 
alert, however, the danger is not so great as it seems; 
for Mrs. Eddy does not accept the common meaning 
of the word principle, but proceeds to put a private 

R3186 :page 133 

interpretation upon it. Following her statement regarding 
Jehovah, she defines principle as, "life, truth, 
love, substance and intelligence." These (in language 
in common use) are all qualities or attributes 
of beings; and thus God is reduced to the position of 
the sum of certain qualities of conscious existence, 
and is dethroned from his rightful position as the Creator 
of all these qualities. Those misled by these 
teachings are speedily so befogged that they are utterly 
unable to discern between honest treatment of 
the Scriptures and this woful perversion of them. 
Having dethroned God, the next natural step is 
the deification of man; and this work these teachings 
do in a less subtle form, and in one more easily followed, 
although the word-twisting is dexterously 
kept up. Webster defines entity as "a real being, 
whether in thought or in fact: being, essence, existence." 
Mrs. Eddy says, "Entity signifies the particular 
nature of being; and God, without the image and 
likeness of himself, NAMED MAN, would be nonentity" 

R3186 :page 134 

—without existence. Following this we give from 
her book a series of quotations deifying man. 

"God cannot destroy man, because he is the reflection 
of God." "The science of being reveals man 
perfect, even as the Father is perfect." "If man 
went out for a single instant in death, or sprang from 
nothingness into existence, there was an instant some 
time without man, when Jehovah was without entity, 
and there was no reflection of Mind, or Soul, and Principle 
had no idea." "God, Soul, is and was, and 
ever will be; and man is coexistent and eternal with 
this Soul." "The science of man, understood, would 
have eradicated sin, sickness and death in a less period 
than six thousand years." 

Surely pride and boastfulness could assume no 
more than is here claimed. None of the "meek" would 



arrogate such position and virtue to themselves. To 
show the foolishness and the fruit of such exaltation 
of man, we quote the following:— 

Man is "the infinite idea of infinite Spirit,... 
the spiritual image and likeness of God,. ..the full 
representation of Mind; hence, the idea of Principle, 
not person. [Man is] the compound idea of God, including 
all other ideas, the generic term for all that reflects 
God's image and likeness. ...Woman is the highest 
term for man.. ..[Man is] the conscious identity 
of being as found in Science, where man is the 
reflection of God, Mind, and, therefore, is eternal; that, 
which hath no separate mind from God; that which 
hath not a single quality underived from Deity; that 
possesses no life, intelligence, or creative power of his 
own, but reflects all that belongs to his Maker." 

'"And God said let us make man in our image, 
after our likeness: and let them have dominion over 
the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and 
over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon the earth' (Gen. 1:26)— what is incapable 
of sin, sickness and death, in so much as it derives 
its esse from God, and possesses not a single 
original, or underived power: hence, cannot depart 
from holiness. Nor can God from out himself, whence 
man was evolved, engender a capacity or freedom to 
sin. In divine science God and man are inseparable, as 
PRINCIPLE AND ITS IDEA." 

Of course the enthronement of man necessitates 
a perversion of the entire Scripture teaching regarding 
his creation and fall. To allay the suspicions that 
might arise if this work were too abruptly done, the 
approach is very gradually made, and the error introduced 
under high pretentions to spirituality and learning. 
As a sample we quote the following:— 

"As crude forms of mortal mind yield to higher 
significations, the metaphysical Genesis of the Scripture 
will be hailed with head and heart. The following 
brief comments are the spiritual, or scientific, version 
of the text." 

Space forbids full quotation, and we simply give 
the "spiritual, or scientific, version" of the fall, set 
forth by Mrs. Eddy as the true meaning of the account 
in Genesis 3:1-5, as follows:— 

"The serpent is introduced into the Scriptural 
record without any specified origin; but some maintain 
he was a veritable demon, even the climax of 
subtlety and falsehood, created by a perfect and divine 
spirit.. ..Adam, or error, even the belief of mind 
in matter, began this reign of mortal man somewhat 
mildly, increasing in jealousy and falsehood until his 
days were numbered by the law of Truth, and the 
mortality of error made manifest. The garden was a 
term used to signify the body, in the first records of 
Mythology; sexuality and self-abuse the forbidden 
knowledge. Man was not to presume upon the prerogatives 



of his Creator, but to recognize God, the Father 
and Mother of us all.— Compare with 
Genesis 3:4,5. 

"This Allegory represents error in every one of 
its beliefs, always asserting itself as Truth and over 
Truth: and giving the lie to Truth, saying, I can 
open your eyes, I can do more for you than God 
(good) has done. Bow down to me, have other gods, 
admit I am right, and more real to the senses, pleasant 
to the eyes and more to be desired than Truth. 
The history of Adam, or error, is a dream without a 
dreamer; first, a supposition of assertion; secondly, 
that nothing says, I am something; and third, that 
something springs from nothing, and is life, substance 
and intelligence. The order of the allegory describing 
the mythological creation, even a creation springing 
from dust instead of Deity, is maintained in about this 
form. Mortal man, starting from chaos, or old night, 
from the lowest propensities; non-intelligence becoming 
intelligence; the basal portions of its formations of 
mind indicating the appetites and passions; its upper 
portions the sentiments, implying the hope that mind 
will sometime escape from matter, giving a material 
sense of things as the sense of mind, and matter 
having dominion over mind: body originating in non- 
intelligence, and mind afterward inserted, the creation 
a propagating principle in vegetable and animal, alias 
God in matter, or matter without God: a man's life 
consisting of the things that he eateth, and having no 
connection with God, Spirit; his senses unable to 
perceive Spirit, and matter dooming them to die. This 
mythological history of man, so unlike the scientific 
record of man as the image and likeness of God, having 
dominion over the earth, and whose Mother is 
Spirit, first creates man of dust, and without a Mother, 
afterwards giving him a Mother, who is governed 
by mesmerism, controlled by a belief called 
serpent, her origin a rib, her capacity for knowledge 
gathered through material sense and from the tree of 
knowledge, whereof if a man eat he shall die, and her 
progeny, self-constituted suicides, hastening towards 
death in pursuit of life. The word Adam, divided 
into two syllables and reading A-damn, indicates more 
closely the character and the curse of the divine spirit, 
or Mother of man bestowed upon it." 

The fall being "spiritualized" out of existence, 
and man being "perfect even as the Father," there is 
no necessity for a man, Christ Jesus, to give his "life," 
a ransom— a corresponding price—" for the life of the 
world," and to redeem the race with his precious 
blood. Hence, Christ Jesus, the Anointed Savior, simply 
becomes a fine example, a "good man." We quote 
again from Mrs. Eddy:— 

R3186 :page 135 



"Jesus was the son of a virgin mother by whom 
scientific being was so far understood that she knew 
that God was the Father of man, and man the offspring 
of a divine Principle. Jesus was the name of 
the man, and Christ but another name for God, the 
Principle and creator of that man. The signification 
of God being 'good' (?!), the term Christ Jesus may 
be rendered as good man, or God-man." 

Christ not being a ransom-sacrifice, no atonement 
work was done by him, and a new signification must 
be found for the Scripture teaching that he is the 
"propitiation [satisfaction] for the sins of the whole 
world." (1 John 2:2.) To keep the case clearly before 
us we will give Webster's definition of atonement, 
and then its "spiritual" signification as given by Mrs. 
Eddy. 

"Atonement (Webster): Reconciliation after enmity 
or controversy. Satisfaction or reparation made 
by giving an equivalent for an injury." 

"Atonement (Mrs. Eddy): The teachings, demonstrations 
and sufferings of the man Jesus, when 
showing mortals the way of salvation from sin, sickness 
and death. ...Soul's triumph over material 
sense. The supremacy of spirit asserted, man reassuming 
the image and likeness of God in his scientific 
atonement with him. Jesus of Nazareth gave the all-important 
proof that when God is understood, it will 
be seen that Soul creates its own body, and cannot for 
the smallest instant do without a body. This divine 
Science overcame death and the grave, and was Jesus' 
final demonstration that the body is the same after as 
before death: hence, there is a state of probation and 
progress, whereby to grow out of a material and into 
the spiritual sense of existence beyond the grave. 
The meek, mighty Nazarene exhibited a material 
body after the crucifixion, to show his followers the 
great need there is of spiritualizing thought and action 
to make man God-like before death, that after it 
he may be fit for the higher school of the just made 
perfect. Not death, but the understanding of Life, 
God, spiritualizes man, and determines forever his 
progress and the state of his body. Mortality disappearing 
and immortality coming to life. Self-abnegation 
and love blessing its enemies. Not blood flowing 
from the veins of Jesus, but his out-flowing sense of 
life, truth and love, so much higher, purer and more 
God-like than mankind's, shedding its hallowed influence 
on the whole human race and marking out the 
only way to heaven. Not the death of the cross, but 
the cross-bearing deathless life, that Jesus left for the 
example of mankind, ransoms from sin all who follow 
it." 

Salvation from the present "evil world" Mrs. 
Eddy thus makes a matter of works, and is not 
through faith in Jesus, as taught by the apostles. 
Thus the Adversary again undertakes to set forth 



"another gospel, which is not another."— Gal. 1:8,9. 
Again she says:— 

"The way is strait and narrow that leads to the 
understanding that God is life. It is warfare with the 

R3187 :page 135 

flesh whereby we conquer sin, sickness and death, now 
or hereafter; but certainly before we can reach the 
goal of Spirit or Life, which is God. The truth of 
man makes a new creature. Old things have passed 
away, behold all things become new. Passions, 
selfish appetites and every sensuality yield to spirituality, 
and the balance of being is on the side of God. 
Christian perfection is won on no other basis. The 
scientific unity between God and man must be wrought 
out in demonstration." 

Man being "coexistent and co-eternal with God," 
death must be an illusion, and is so set forth:— 

"Death: an illusion; there is no death. Matter 
has no life, hence, it cannot die, and mind is immortal. 
The flesh warring against spirit frets itself free from 
one belief only to be fettered by some other one, until 
all belief yields to the understanding of God. Any 
material evidence of death is false, for it contradicts 
the spiritual facts of life. The unreal and untrue. 
The opposite of God, or life." 

The fall and death being done away with, there 
cannot, of course, be any resurrection from among the 
dead, or raising of the race up to something lost in 
Adam. Hence, in this new "Science" resurrection 
becomes mere development. We quote her definition 
of resurrection as follows:— 

"Resurrection: spiritualization of thought; a 
new and higher idea of immortality, or spiritual existence. 
Material belief yielding to spiritual 
understanding." 

Those taught of God can have no difficulty in 
tracing the sinuous course of that "old dragon," in 
these unstable and unlearned perversions of Scripture, 
which soon cause their teachers to become "raging 
waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame." 
Those who have watched the effect of these doctrines 
upon those proclaiming them readily discern that the 
"evil tree" is yielding its proper fruit. 

Again, Mrs. Eddy sets forth her claimed many 
miracles of healing as the basis of her religion, and 
the proof of its divine origin. To those uninstructed 
in the way of truth, this claim is very weighty, and 
many are ensnared by it. These, seeing no wisdom 
in the permission of evil, and having no conception of 
the great things God has in store for those who, under 
the severest tests, maintain a love for righteousness 
and a hatred of wickedness, quickly fall in this evil 
day of subtle sophistries. Supposing "Godliness to 
be gain"; i.e., a means to secure present temporal 



ease in finances or social life, freedom from aches and 
pains, etc., some, in their eagerness to escape from 
the hardship of enduring unfavorable conditions, are 
blinded to the opportunity for discipline thus offered, 
and rush headlong into any specious promise of relief 
that is made, without applying the rules and tests 
provided in the "sure word of prophecy," and are 
quickly ensnared by the Adversary. Being one of the 
highest order of God's created beings, who wilfully 
left his first estate and does iniquity (Ezek. 28:12-15), 
the devil can loosen the bonds of suffering on those 

R3187 :page 136 

who give heed to his seductive teachings, until he 
gains full and complete control of their moral powers, 
and can thus use them as his pliant, even if unsuspecting, 
tools, simply releasing them temporarily to 
gain his own purposes. When these are served, or 
when the time for binding him has fully arrived 
(Rev. 20:2,3), he will execute his full malignity, 
not only upon his own willing coadjutors, but also 
upon those who have been his dupes. We unhesitatingly 
brand this whole system of Christian Science, 
so-called, as another form of spiritualism put forth 
by the father of lies, who was a liar from the beginning. 
That there is a power, even superhuman, in 
it, we admit; but we believe it is the power of Satan, 
the great deceiver of men, which will be used only for 
the destruction of man. 

[Satan's dominion is a dominion of death, and 
he undoubtedly has the power slightly to relieve the 
sick when his delusive purposes and doctrines would 
be best served thereby. (Heb. 2:14.) The fact that 
Satan's kingdom and its methods are thus divided 
and in opposition— working evil, sin and death, as 
ever, and at the same time turning in to heal the sick 
in order the more securely to bind and blind his dupes 
in subtle errors— shows that the "god of this world" 
realizes that his reign of sin, ignorance, superstition 
and death is nearly at an end.— EDITOR.] 

Let God's children beware lest they be entangled 
by this siren song. The system perverts everything 
it touches, and not even the Lord's prayer escapes its 
contamination. For the information of the brethren, 
we give the following "spiritualized" version of it:— 

"Principle, eternal and harmonious, 

Nameless and adorable intelligence, 

Thou art ever present and supreme. 

And when this Supremacy of Spirit 

Shall appear, the dream of matter will disappear. 

Give us the understanding of truth and love; 

And loving we shall learn God, 

And truth will destroy all error, 

And lead us into the life, that is soul, 

And deliver us from the errors of sense, 



Sin, sickness and death. 
For God is life, truth and love forever." 
Trusting completely in our Lord, the Anointed 
Savior, who has bought us with his precious blood, 
we can quickly escape this evil, and enter into and 
retain a present rest in Christ, and be prepared for 
that perfect and everlasting rest that "remaineth for 
the people of God."-Heb. 4:9,10; Isa. 26:3; 
Psa. 91. 

A CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PRAYER. 



The Insurance World says:— "It seems almost 
incredible that the following formula called a prayer, 
repeated by a person sick of dyspepsia is alleged by 
Christian Scientists to have a curative effect. The 
exact words read:— 

'"Shining and Glorious Verity, we recognize the 
great and splendid FACT that the moment we really believe 
the Truth, Disease ceases to trouble us; that the 
Truth is that there is no Disease in either real Body or 
Mind; that in the mind what seems to be a disease is a 
False Belief, a Parasite, a hateful Excrescence, and that 
what happens in the Body is the shadow of the LIE in the 
Soul. Lord help us to believe that All Evil is Utterly 
Unreal; that it is silly to be sick, absurd to be ailing, 
wicked to be wailing, atheism and denial of God to say, 
'I am sick.' Help us to stoutly affirm with our hand in 
Your hand, with our eyes fixed on Thee, that we have no 
Dyspepsia, that we never had Dyspepsia, that we will never 
have Dyspepsia, that there is no such thing, that there 
never was any such thing, and that there never will be any 
such thing. Amen.'" 

A UNITED PRESBYTERIAN VIEW. 



To what extent the Adversary's messengers in 
garments of light can deceive, note the following by 
Rev. A. K. Duff, a U.P. minister, published without 
criticism in the United Presbyterian. He says:— 

"In forming our judgment of Christian Science, 
the Savior's question will be suggestive, 'Think you 
that they are sinners above all others?' There is a 
basic principle of truth in the pope, faith cure, Christian 
Science, mind cure, osteopathy, etc., and only 
the wilfully blind, or unfair and dishonest writer will 
attempt to conceal it. If it were entirely false there 
could be no danger. To say that Christian Science is 
the work of the devil because it is the revival of black 
art, is all rot. It degrades the ministry in the eyes 
of well-thinking scholars of today that such utterances 
emanate from the pulpit. To assume that faith 



has no power in the healing of disease is to discredit 
a cardinal principle of the gospel. Distinction against 
Christian Science must be finely woven, and in argument 
cautiously drawn out. 

"This school of faith was organized in 1879 and 
now numbers 800 churches, 80 educational institutes, 
one million members and another million adherents. 
They have eight churches in New York city, and all are 
crowded Sabbath mornings and evenings. Last year 
they built one church in New York city costing $500,000, 
and every dime was raised before a pick was 
struck in the ground. This year they are building 
another in the same city, costing $600,000. They 
openly boast that they have no poor people, and we 
all know that hundreds of the ripest scholars in the 
land are among them. College graduates, lawyers, 
physicians, popular authors and even clergymen join 
them. 

"Here is the leading error. They say 'the Bible 
does not sanction physicians, nor recognize the beneficial 
effect of medicines,' when the opposite is true. 
'They that be whole need not a physician, but they 
that are sick' is positive endorsement of medical treatment. 
The many references to the healing virtues of 
plants and herbs, the 'balm in Gilead and the physician 

R3187 :page 137 

there,' prove beyond a peradventure our practice 
of medicine." 



Note the fact that these shepherds (preacher and 
editor) in Israel nominal are either ignorant of "the 
doctrines of Christ," "the faith once delivered unto 
the saints," or else are blinded by the "dust" of falsities 
and meaningless language. Note the words— their 
"leading error" is the denial of physicians! How 
about their denial of sin,— of a fall,— of a redemption 
from sin and death by the precious blood of Christ;— 
their practical denial of God except as general and 
particular goodness or utility— as there is good or 
usefulness in a tree, in that it bears fruit or yields 
shade or can be used to construct a house? 

These blinded men close their exhortation by 
implying that Christian Science would benefit all 
U.P's. and add,— 

"I have studied them for five years, and I never 
found such a uniformly good people in my travels. 
They are purely Christ-like. They are all willing 
to endure stripes, and go naked and hungry, if by any 
means they may save some." 

The befogged writer forgets, evidently, that in a 
previous paragraph he has set forth "that they have 



R3188 :page 137 

no poor people." How, then, did this gentleman, 
after studying them for five years, learn about their 
willingness to endure hunger and nakedness on behalf 
of others? Their efforts have evidently been chiefly 
among the well-to-do; and thus they have avoided 
their burdens and been rather un-Christ-like. 

Let us not be entrapped by Satan's deceptive garments 
of light intended to deceive, if possible, the 
very elect. Let us remember how our Lord associates 
his Word and doctrine with true discipleship, saying, 
"If any man will do his [the Father's] will, he shall 
know of the doctrine;" and again: "Ye shall know 
the truth and the truth shall make you free;" and 
again: "If they speak not according to this Word 
[but handle the Word of God deceitfully] it is because 
there is no light in them."— John 7: 17; 8:32; 
Isa. 8:20. 



R3188 :page 137 

SUFFERING AS CHRISTIANS. 

-ACTS 21:30-39.-MAY 3.- 

"If any man suffer as a Christian, let 
him not be ashamed."— 1 Pet. 4:16. 

WHEN the Apostle Paul and his companions arrived 

at Jerusalem they were cordially received 

by the brethren— they had further 

manifestations of the same loving brotherhood specially 

noted in our last lesson. The Church was called together 

that the Apostle might make a general and 

public report, and might turn over to the proper authorities 

the funds donated for their poor by the churches 

amongst the Gentiles. Apparently several of the Apostles 

still resided at Jerusalem, "James, our Lord's 

brother," being in some particular sense the leader or 

chief spokesman. Tradition tells us that the different 

apostles ultimately scattered in different directions, 

preaching the Gospel— Andrew to Cythia, Jude to Assyria, 

Thomas to Persia and India, Peter to Babylon 

and Rome. We infer, however, that they had remained 

at Jerusalem up to this time, since Paul seems 

to have been the leader in the work amongst the Gentiles; 

quite probably his report of the Lord's blessing 

upon his efforts, in conjunction with the subsequent 

persecutions at Jerusalem, led the other apostles to go 

into the foreign fields of service. 

It was now but twelve years before the destruction 
of Jerusalem, and less than half that time before the 
beginning of the factionalism and anarchy which led 



up to that destruction. The apostles quite probably 

in due time bethought themselves of the Lord's injunction 

that they must ultimately flee out of Jerusalem 

before it would be encompassed with armies and 

escape be impossible. We today are living within a 

corresponding twelve years of utter overthrow of churchianity, 

and must not be surprised if in the Lord's providence 

the bitterness and opposition against the present 

truth should become more and more open and violent, 

thus hindering our efforts amongst the professed people 

of God today, and compelling us to go more particularly 

to those who make less boast of their loyalty to 

God. 

The apostles and brethren at Jerusalem were fully 
in sympathy with the Apostle Paul, though evidently 
their minds did not grasp so clearly as did his the complete 
breaking down of "the middle wall of partition" 
which previously had separated Jews from Gentiles, nor 
did they appreciate so fully as he that the Law was merely 
a pedagogue, a servant, to lead to Christ— to his school. 
Practically the Jerusalem friends said to the Apostle: 
We are in full accord with you and the noble work 
which you have been prosecuting, and we perceive the 
Lord's blessing upon it, and recognize the true Christian 
spirit in these brethren who have come with you, 
as representatives of the work of the Gospel amongst the 
Gentiles. However, you know how great is the opposition 
here; how bitter is the hatred of the Jews, and 
that they have heard of you. Jews who have come 
from Ephesus and Corinth and other places, evidently 
misunderstood some things that you taught there, or 

R3188 :page 138 

at least misrepresented your teachings. They have 
heard that you are an enemy of the Law, while we know 
that you believe that "the Law is just and holy and 
good," and full of shadows of better things to come. 
But now, as an offset to their pernicious presentations, 
and as an object lesson to some of our own brethren 
who are not just strong along this line, and for the benefit 
also of some whom we are endeavoring to interest 
in the Gospel of Christ, we have something to propose 
to you, and to these brethren: it is that you go into 
the Temple, as a worshiper, and associate yourselves 
with some of the rites and ceremonies there in progress, 
that thus all may know that you are not disrespectful 
toward Moses or the Law or the Temple,— that their 
misapprehension and evil-speaking may be counteracted. 
Amongst us are three brethren who have made 
certain vows to the Lord, called the vows of the Nazarites, 
and we suggest that you show your sympathy with 
them and with the arrangements, acting as sponsor for 
them— paying for the sacrifices which, according to the 
Law, they must offer, etc. Thus you will be seen with 
them, and in performance of certain ceremonies, for 



about a week, in the court of the Temple known as the 
Court of the Women, and we hope that much good 
will result therefrom, and much misapprehension be 
abated. 

We can easily imagine that the bold champion of 
the truth in foreign lands would never have chosen 
such a course of his own volition, and that when the 
suggestion came to him it was not enthusiastically received. 
Nevertheless, since it seemed to be the judgment 
of the apostles and brethren in general— seemed 
to be in their interest and according to their view of 
advantage to the general cause, the Apostle yielded his 
own preference. We cannot suppose that he yielded 
to that which was wrong, yet we can easily imagine 
some one inquiring, Would it not be sin for the Apostle 
or other Christians to participate in any measure in 
sacrifice in the Temple?— were not all these sacrifices 
done away in Christ, and henceforth abominations in 
the sight of God,— sacrilegious? 

We answer, No, not at all. The sacrifices which 
pointed to Christ, and which he fulfilled, were no longer 
proper, but these sacrifices which the Nazarites offered 
in connection with their vows did not typify 
Christ's sacrifice, but rather the consecrations and devotions 
of the people, the antitypes of which will prevail 
during the Millennium. It was no sin, therefore, 
on the Apostle's part to join in this procedure, and 
yet we incline to doubt the wisdom of the course pursued. 
We incline to believe that it was rather a temporizing 
acknowledgment of the dignity of the Temple 
and its services; whereas by this time the real Temple 
and the real service had been inaugurated;— for the 
Church itself is the antitypical Temple in which God 
has been present by his holy spirit since Pentecost. 
Although it is not distinctly so stated, we incline to believe 
that the Apostle Paul and all of his associates in 
this matter took a different view of it subsequently, as 
being a compromise which, without being sinful, was 
not advantageous, and reflected no special credit upon 
any connected with it. Perhaps such a lesson was 
needed by the apostles and the Church at Jerusalem, 
that they might learn to be the more courageous in 
their presentations of the truth— that they might be less 
fearful of the Jews, more bold in their presentations of 
Christ and the New Covenant arrangements in his 
blood— the better sacrifices, better vows, etc. 

It was while the Apostle and these brethren, who 
were really Jews by nature, but who saw beyond the 
types and symbols, and appreciated the antitypes, were 
engaged in the performance of the typical, or symbolical 
rites, that the Jews recognized Paul and one of his companions, 
and became furiously incensed, either believing 
or claiming to believe that the Apostle was attempting to 
do the very reverse of what he and the Jerusalem Church 
intended— that he was attempting to discredit the Law 
and dishonor the Temple by violating, and getting others 



to violate, its holy precincts. As the excited shouts 
arose in the air a mob was quickly gathered; and as 
in Ephesus "the mob ran together, the greater part not 
knowing wherefore," so here again the mob merely 
knew that some of its leaders were frantically indignant 
at the Apostle Paul, and believed that he should be 
killed. He was dragged out of the Temple, and immediately 
the great doors of the Beautiful Gate of the 
Temple were closed— that no rioting or bloodshed 
might occur within the sacred enclosure. 

The Tower of Antonia was close by the Temple 
Court, and steps connected the two. In this castle a 
band of Roman soldiers was quartered— evidently several 
hundred, because each centurion was a commander, 
or captain, of a hundred men. The riotous commotion 
brought forth the garrison, which appeared at just 
the proper time to deliver Paul from his enemies, who 
were beating him. 

The chief captain, Claudius Lysias (Acts 23:26), 
caused the arrest of Paul and commanded that he be 
chained to two of the Roman soldiers— much after the 
manner in which now a culprit is sometimes handcuffed 
to an officer. Each Roman soldier carried, as a 
part of his outfit, an iron chain and a leather thong, for 
use in just such an emergency. While this handcuffing, 
which fulfilled the prophecy of Agabus, was in progress, 
Lysias made inquiry respecting the Apostle and 
the crime which had occasioned the commotion and 
indignation of these religious people. As a Gentile, he 
would naturally suppose that such a commotion 

R3189 :page 139 

amongst religious worshipers must have been incited 

by some atrociously evil conduct, some villainy or sacrilege, 

or that a disguised robber or assassin had been 

discovered. The multitude shouted out its various 

conjectures, and, it being impossible to judge the case 

at the time on such evidence, he commanded that Paul 

be brought into the prison. 

Lysias, the foreign officer, had probably a very 
imperfect knowledge of the language spoken by the 
Jews, which was either Hebrew or Syriac, his own 
language being the Greek. Knowing this, the Apostle 
spoke to him in the Greek language, and with such 
fluency as to cause the commander great surprise. 
From the account, he evidently had confounded the 
Apostle with an Egyptian leader of an insurrection of 
some time previous. Paul's request was that he be 
permitted to speak to the people, who were in such 
commotion and crying out, "Away with him!" He 
evidently thought that he might correct some false impressions 
and pacify the multitude. At any rate he 
would lose no opportunity for declaring the gospel of 
Christ. The Lord influenced the heart of Lysias to 
grant the request. The people quieted as they perceived 



that the commander had permitted the prisoner 
to make them an address from the stairs leading to the 
castle. Here was a most excellent opportunity for presenting 
Christ before a large number of seemingly devout 
people— Temple worshipers. Undoubtedly there 
were some grains of "wheat" in that multitude, though 
evidently the great mass was "chaff." The Apostle's 
words would be a blessing to the wheat, and serve to 
test, prove, demonstrate, that the others were without 
the real kernel of truth in their hearts, although they 
had the outward appearances of being devout worshipers 
of the true God. 

It is worthy of remark that the Apostle never allowed 
opportunities to pass by him without doing all 
in his power to use them in the Lord's praise and for 
the forwarding of the truth. The majority of us, probably, 
would have been so affected by the excitement of 
such an incident and by the bruises resulting from the 
beating, that we would perhaps have forgotten all about 
the greatest and most important work of all committed 
to our care, and might have been much less prompt 
than the Apostle to seek an opportunity to testify to the 
Lord's praise and for the opening of the eyes of any 
who might be his people amongst our assailants. Let 
us learn this lesson: let us be instant in season and 
out of season, so far as our own convenience and feelings 
are concerned, if only we can find opportune seasons 
for reaching others. The Apostle here illustrated 
his advice to Timothy, "Be instant in season and out 
of season,— preach the Word." It was in season for the 
multitude, because they were gathered there, and their 
attention was riveted upon him. Had he consulted his 
own convenience he would have said that it was very 
much "out of season" for himself;— that he was in no condition 
to speak, his nerves were excited and his body was 
bruised. But thinking of the convenient opportunity he 
spared not himself. In this he had the spirit of the Master, 
that he himself admonished us to have, saying that 
as Christ died for us we ought also to lay down our lives 
for the brethren— in season or out of season, so far as 
our own convenience is concerned. 

In a few well-chosen words he told the people the 
story of his own experience: he had, like themselves, 
been an opposer of Jesus, a persecutor of all the followers 
of the Lord; how he had been miraculously 
interrupted in this work, and led to consider the claims 
of Jesus from the standpoint of the Word of God— the 
Law and the Prophets; how he had become fully convinced 
that Jesus is indeed "the Lamb of God, who 
taketh away the sin of the world," the deliverer who 
should come out of Zion, and through whom a blessing 
should come to all that would receive his message. 
He then proceeded to tell them what should have 
brought joy to their hearts; viz., that the Lord sent 
him to be a messenger to the Gentiles, to tell them of 
the good tidings, that they also might participate, as 



well as the Jews. But their hearts being evil and selfish, 

this mention of divine favor and mercy going to 

others incensed them; they heard the Apostle in peace 

and with profound attention up to this point, and then 

all their prejudices seemed to be aroused with the 

thought that this man claimed and taught that Gentiles 

could have favor with God equal to that bestowed 

upon the Jews. They cried out against him in much 

the same language that they had used against the Lord, 

"Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not 

fit that he should live;" and while they thus cried out 

and threw dust in the air, and gesticulated with their 

arms, and threw their garments about, they made a 

wild, weird picture. The Roman commander, not understanding 

the Hebrew language, had not been able 

to follow the Apostle's discourse, and considering it 

evident that after he had had so quiet and orderly a 

hearing for a time, and now there was such a wild 

burst of indignation at what he said, it implied something 

very deep and treacherous and evil in the man, 

else his words would not thus arouse the passions and 

malice of religious people. He, therefore, ordered the 

Apostle to be scourged to make him tell a true story 

of his differences with the Jews. 

Matters are somewhat the same today, though on 
a different plane. A stranger or worldly person, hearing 
some sectarian Christian animadvert against some 
one who has been preaching the true gospel of the Lord 
Jesus, would be inclined to suppose that the message 

R3189 :page 140 

must contain something very vicious, very terrible indeed, 
else it would not so arouse those who have outwardly 
so much "form of godliness." And if, as in the 
case of the Roman officer, an audience be granted, and 
the truth be presented in their hearing, they cannot 
understand it;— that is to say, "the world by wisdom 
knows not God," knows little of his plan, understands 
little of the language of his Word— it is a different language 
from that to which they are accustomed. And 
when, after a presentation of the truth, they find bitter 
opposition and invective against it on the part of religious 
teachers— modern scribes and Pharisees and doctors 
of divinity— we must not be surprised if they are 
the more inclined to side with those who represent 
popular theology— so-called "orthodoxy," and assume 
that the true gospel, because believed and taught by 
so few and opposed by so many of influence, must 
necessarily be something very evil. 

Nevertheless, it is for us to take the Apostle for 
our guide, and to be faithful in the use of every opportunity 
to let the light shine forth, even though it arouse 
the bitter opposition and persecution and prejudice of 
darkness. The darkness hateth the light, because it is 
reproved thereby, is our Lord's explanation. Nothing 



seemed so much to incite the scribes and Pharisees of 
eighteen centuries ago as the reasonableness of the true 
gospel. The common people heard it gladly, unless 
intimidated by their religious rulers, and led to doubt 
those who had been teaching them to the contrary. 
Hence, the rulers were incensed against the gospellers: 
"They were grieved because they [the apostles] taught 
the people." They held, on the contrary, that only the 
scribes and Pharisees, the doctors and leaders, should 
be taught, and that the people should simply follow 
them blindly, and without requiring a reason and a 
"Thus saith the Lord" for their faith. 

Our Golden Text for this lesson is well chosen. 
Paul's experience illustrated it; he was suffering as a 
Christian— because he was loyal to the Lord and his 
Word. He was not suffering because of having followed 
the admonitions of the brethren in going into the 
Temple, for very evidently the hatred that was against 
them in the hearts of his enemies would sooner or later 
have manifested itself anyway, and they would have 
sought his life, as on previous occasions. We merely see 
in this incident that the attempt of the apostles to create 
a favorable impression toward the Apostle Paul and his 
work amongst the Gentiles failed, and probably brought 
the matter of his arrest, etc., more quickly to the front 
than would any other course have done. 

The Apostle was not ashamed of his sufferings, because 
he realized that they were endured for Christ's 
sake. Any man or woman would feel and should feel 
deeply pained at a public arrest and imprisonment as 
a felon, as a violator of the law. But when these things 
are experienced, and we can realize that they are coming 
to us because of our faithfulness to the Lord, in following 
in his footsteps, we may rejoice in ignominy, 
rejoice in things which otherwise would be shameful 
and detestable. If, therefore, in the Lord's providence, 
arrest or imprisonment or scourging should come to any 
who read this article, and if they can directly or indirectly 
trace their tribulation to faithfulness to the Lord 
and his truth, let them not be ashamed; let them glorify 
God on this behalf, rejoicing that they are accounted 
worthy to suffer for the name of Christ, and remembering 
that even thus also it was with our Lord 
Jesus. He was placed under arrest; he was bound; 
he was scourged; he was publicly insulted; he was 
even crucified as a blasphemer against God.— 
1 Pet. 4:16. 

Another lesson which we may learn here is, not to 
trust too implicitly in the voice of the multitude, and 
if we find the rabble shouting against any one, either 
orally or through the press, we should not unquestioningly 
accept their verdict. We should remember the 
experiences of Jesus, the experiences of Paul, and of 
the other Apostles, and how the multitude cried out, 
"Away with them!" The Christian whose mind is 
thus relieved of prejudice is the better prepared to judge 



wisely respecting whatever may properly come under 
his observation or criticism. And then, if he have similar 
experiences himself, he will be the better prepared 
for them. 



R3190 :page 140 

"THE LORD STOOD BY HIM." 

-ACTS 23:ll-22.-MAY 10.- 

"The Lord stood by him and said, Be of good cheer." 

AFTER the exciting experiences of our last lesson 

the Apostle must have felt somewhat depressed 

in spirit and discouraged. True, he 

had passed through equally great trials amongst the 

Gentiles, but here, amongst his own people, and in the 

City of the Great King, the opposition to the gospel 

would be much more inclined to make him heart-sore. 

Besides, he evidently had come to Jerusalem full of the 

thought that under the Lord's providence he might accomplish 

a considerable work amongst his kinsmen 

according to the flesh, and rescue some of them before 

the great overthrow which he realized was impending. 

It was in this time of great mental stress that the 

Lord so graciously communicated with him by a dream, 

R3190 :page 141 

as declared in the first verse of our lesson. What an 
encouragement it must have been! and the fact that it 
was given is an assurance that it was needed; for the 
Lord very rarely indeed interposes miraculously in the 
course of events unless there is special necessity. On 
two other occasions, when the Apostle was in straits, 
the Lord manifested his favor and encouraged him in 
like manner-Acts 18:9,10; 27:24. 

How much the Apostle must have felt strengthened 
by this vision, and assurance of divine care, we 
can well imagine. Nevertheless, the Lord was as truly 
with him and as fully caring for his interests as on 
other occasions, when no vision attested the fact: and 
he is with us, his followers of today, in like manner; 
and doubtless the visions granted to the Apostle were 
destined of the Lord to be an encouragement for "all who 
should believe on him through their word." The Apostle's 
visions serve us as they served him— assuring us 
also that the Lord is with his people, and is able to 
care for and protect and guide and bless our efforts today, 
as eighteen centuries ago. But to have the Lord 
thus with him and to feel good cheer in the Lord's 
presence implied the fullest sincerity and zeal on the 
part of the Apostle to do and to be all that would please 



the Master; and similarly we can enjoy his presence 
and appropriate to ourselves the message, "Be of good 
cheer," only in proportion as our hearts can realize 
that, however imperfect our labors for the truth and for 
the brethren, they are done "as unto the Lord" and to 
the best of our ability. 

The day before this vision, by order of the Roman 
commander, the Apostle was brought before the Jewish 
Sanhedrin, of which the high priest, Ananias, was president. 
The Apostle was permitted to address the Sanhedrin, 
and began by declaring himself a Jew, who 
had always lived in full harmony with the laws of his 
country— an honorable citizen. It was at this time, it 
will be remembered, the high priest, possibly thinking 
this language a reflection against himself (for he had 
an unsavory reputation), ordered an attendant to smite 
the Apostle on the mouth— an insult not at all uncommon 
in the East at that time, and, to some extent, 
even to this day. The Apostle, justly indignant, exclaimed, 
"God shall smite thee, thou whited wall; for 
sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commandest 
me to be smitten contrary to the law?" One who 
stood near him replied, " Answerest thou God's high 
priest so?" and the Apostle replied, "I wist not, brethren, 
that he was the high priest; for it is written, Thou 
shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people." It is 
uncertain what the Apostle meant by this language. 
It may be his defective eyesight did not recognize Ananias. 
Or, possibly, he meant to be understood as 
questioning the right of Ananias to the title of high 
priest. Or, in view of the fact that the antitypical 
high priest is the Lord Jesus, and that the typical priesthood 
came to an end at the time of Christ's glorification, 
the Apostle may have had that in mind. However, 
he acknowledged the teaching of the law in respect 
to the officers of the government, to render honor to 
whom honor is due; and there is a lesson here for all 
of us in this day, when we find so many disposed to 
"speak evil of dignitaries," and bring railing accusations 
against them. The attitude of the Lord's people 
should be a very conservative one in such matters— in 
harmony with Michael's words to the Adversary, "The 
Lord rebuke thee!" 

Reasoning that he would have scant courtesy from 
such a tribunal, and knowing that its members were 
about equally divided as between Pharisees and Sadducees, 
and that the high priest was a Sadducee, the Apostle 
appealed to the Pharisees that it was a case in which 
the Sadducees were trying to do him injury because of 
his religious faith, much of which was shared in by the 
Pharisees; and that a Sadducee, in violation of the Law, 
had just caused a Pharisee to be smitten in the mouth. 
He thus to some extent gained the sympathy of the 
Pharisees by declaring that he was a Pharisee, the son 
of a Pharisee, and that the real animus of the opposition 
against him was on the score of the resurrection of 



the dead— for the Pharisees believed in a resurrection 
of the dead, but the Sadducees denied it. Immediately 
there was a contention in the Sanhedrin, the Pharisees 
to some extent espousing the Apostle's cause, as against 
their adversaries, the Sadducees. The meeting broke up 
in disorder, the Roman commander, Lysias, rescuing 
Paul and removing him, and thus causing the excitement 
to abate. 

The honesty and propriety of Paul's claim to be a 
Pharisee has been questioned by some, but we regard 
their contention as without foundation. The Apostle 
was a Jew; so were the Pharisees, and a Jew may 
have either more or less piety without its affecting his 
nationality. The Pharisees claimed to be strict believers 
of the Law of Moses— believers in all that Moses 
and the Prophets did write, the name Pharisee signifying 
holiness or completeness in the observance of the 
Law. Paul had all his life been zealous for the Law of 
God and for its complete observance, and he was no less 
so as a Christian. Indeed, he was more so, for, having 
realized his own inability and the inability of all men 
to keep the Law, he had laid hold upon Christ, the sent 
of God, as the one through whom alone he would be 
able to keep the Law perfectly, wholly: as he expressed 
it, "The righteousness [the full, whole, complete meaning] 
of the Law is fulfilled in us [holiness people, complete 
in Christ] who walk not after the flesh, but after 
the spirit." All true Christians today could make a 

R3190 :page 142 

similar claim to that of the Apostle— that we are Pharisees 

—holiness people— keepers of the divine law— observers 

of it in every particular to the extent of ability, 

and with all shortcomings and deficiencies made up for 

us by our Lord Jesus. We are not under the Law Covenant, 

for it has given place to a better one, the original 

one; but as for the Law itself, it is God's Law, "holy, 

just, good," and can never pass away. It is recognized 

by us as much as it was recognized by the holiness 

people of old, and more so; for we discern, not 

only its letter, but its spirit— love for God and love for 

fellow-men. 

The Jews must have realized that their case against 
the Apostle would appear very poorly in the eyes of the 
Roman commander, seeing that they were doing the 
rioting on both occasions, that the Apostle was the 
more sedate and willing to reason his cause, and that 
some of those supposed to be his accusers had turned 
to his defense. Meantime the sympathy of the Pharisees 
for Paul doubtless cooled off. At all events, during 
that night more than forty of the deluded religious 
enthusiasts bound themselves to God with a curse 
that they would kill Paul. Such an anathema was in 
effect, "May the divine curse be upon us if we do not 
effect the death of this man, whom we believe to be an 



enemy of God and of our religion, and whom we believe 
it to be our duty to destroy." 

They laid a plot, as follows: They would have the 
high priest send word to the Roman commander that 
the Sanhedrin desired a fresh examination of the prisoner 
on some other charges, the intention being that 
while the soldiers would be bringing him these forty 
men would assault and risk their lives to assassinate 
Paul. The matter was evidently not kept as secretly 
as they supposed, for one of Paul's relatives learned 
the particulars. Indeed, we know that it is impossible 
to keep anything from God, and that the most 
secret engagements are, therefore, powerless to do injury 
to the Lord's people. Nevertheless, when the 
information reached the Apostle he did not say to himself, 
God knows all about this matter and will take 
care of me, and, therefore, I have nothing to do in respect 
to it. On the contrary, he arranged matters so 
far as he could to defeat the plot— just as though the 
entire responsibility for his preservation rested upon 
himself. There is a lesson in this which many of 
God's dear people need to learn, viz., that each of the 
Lord's followers is a colaborer with the Lord in every 
good work. It is our duty to do all that we know how 
to do in proper self-defense and in protection of one 
another from the wiles of the Adversary and in the 
defense of the cause we serve; but, having done all in 
our power, having exercised all the wisdom and prudence 
we can command, we are to rest our hearts in the 
knowledge that the Lord will take care of all that is 
beyond our power to control, so that all things shall 
work together for good to them that love God. 

There is another lesson for us in the fact that, although 
the Lord promised Paul that, as he had been 
faithful in testifying of him at Jerusalem, he must also 
preach the Gospel at Rome, nevertheless this latter prediction 
was long deferred of realization. It was over 
two years before he reached Rome, and then as a prisoner. 
We also need certain lessons of faith. We not 
only need to believe that the Lord is with us, and has 
the care of our affairs, but have need of patience and 
perseverance in faith and hope and love; and ofttimes 
with us, as with the Apostle, the Lord defers for a 
long time to complete our deliverance from adverse 
conditions— defers for a long time the opening of 
the desired door of opportunity in his service. We 
are to remember his wisdom as well as his love 
and power, and to rest contentedly therein after doing 

R3191 :page 142 

all within our power. In Paul's case it may be that 
conditions at Rome would be more favorable to his ministry 
later than they were at this time. It may be also 
that the Lord had a work for him to do in the interim 
as a prisoner at Caesarea,— amongst the Romans. And 



so in our affairs: we are to look for the opportunities 

of service as they come, and leave to our Lord the supervision 

of our life as a whole. 

As a result of the communication of the plot to the 
Roman captain, he sent the Apostle under a strong military 
escort to the Roman capital of Judea,— Caesarea. 
There the Apostle, although kept a prisoner, was 
doubtless made comfortable, awaiting the trial before 
the Roman governor, Felix. The essence of this lesson 
as a whole, in its application to us, is expressed in the 
Apostle's words, "If God be for us who can be against 
us?" 



R3191 :page 142 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 

WHICH WERE THE MORE RESPONSIBLE; JUDAS OR ANANIAS 
AND SAPPHIRA? 



Question.— What difference should we recognize 
as between the condition of Judas Iscariot and his 
crime, and Ananias and Sapphira and their crime? 
The one sinned before the holy spirit was dispensed 
at Pentecost; the others subsequently. If Judas' case 
merited the verdict of Second Death, would not the 
others merit the same? If Ananias and Sapphira did 
not sin the sin unto death, how should we regard the 
case of Judas? 

Answer.— There would appear to be considerable 

R3191 :page 143 

difference between these two cases. Both crimes were 
committed against much light; both were reprehensible; 
but that of Judas seems to us to be much the 
more serious of the two. While he lived prior to 
Pentecost, we are to remember that he was one of the 
twelve upon whom Jesus had specially conferred a 
measure of his spirit— such a measure as permitted 
him, with the others, to perform miracles of healing, 
casting out of devils, etc., as recorded. His position 
was one of special closeness to the Lord and his personal 
instruction, both by precept and example. We 
remember our Lord's words to the disciples, "To you 
it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom; but 
to them that are without these things are spoken in 
parables." All this privilege, opportunity, knowledge, 
contact, made Judas specially responsible. Then, too, 
his crime would have been bad, wicked, had it been 
against any ordinary person; but was seriously intensified 
by being a crime against him who spake and acted 



as never man spake or acted before. It is from this 
standpoint that our Lord's declaration, that he was 
the son of perdition, seems to have special weight, or 
import, as implying that he had enjoyed a sufficiency 
of light and knowledge of righteousness to constitute 
a trial, and that his deliberate sin against such light 
and knowledge meant the Second Death. 

In the case of Ananias and Sapphira they were 
beginners; they had not been long in the Church; 
they never met the Master, and had not known the 
apostles a great while. They saw others consecrating 
their goods and noted that they were correspondingly 
appreciated in the Church. They wished to have such 
an appreciation, and wished to do some good with their 
means; but a selfish feeling, combined, perhaps, with 
a feeling of caution, ensnared them into a wrong 
course of conduct which the Apostle Peter denominates 
"lying unto the holy spirit." We do not positively 
say that they will have any future or further 
opportunity for gaining everlasting life; we know of 
no Scripture which guarantees to us that they will 
have any such; yet it seems to us not improbable 
that they will have a further opportunity in which 
they will have greater light, and greater knowledge 
of right and wrong, and of the results attaching. 

SHALL WE USE THE TERM "EVOLUTION," ETC.? 



Question.— I note your opposition to the Evolution 
theory; yet in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., page 31, 
you remark the possibility that something of an evolutionary 
development was used by our Creator in 
bringing the various species of animals each to its own 
perfection. Let me ask, then: Cannot we Christians 
hold to the word "evolution" with propriety? and 
may we not even think of Adam as having reached 
human perfection by a process of development as one of 
the species animal? 

Answer.— No; to both questions. We regard the 
words Evolution and Evolutionist as now definitely attached 
to a particular theory. These words belong 
wholly to those who invented and now have them, 
and we believe that, as Christians, we would do well to 
avoid them thoroughly, as the thought connected with 
the word is a mechanical one, pure and simple, as in 
opposition to a creative one. We would hold that 
God did develop different species, each to its perfection, 
and that he developed these, either by a long or 
a short process, from the earth itself; but we cannot 
admit, as evolutionists would claim, that this was 
merely a development which needed not the Life-giver 
to start it, and to maintain and direct it. We 
would claim that God is the director of all the forces 
of nature, and that they are all of his own creation, and 



results, therefore, of his direct creation in every instance 
—fish, fowl, brute, man. 

It would not strike us as reasonable to suppose a 
gradual development of a perfect man by an evolutionary 
process without his having some measure of 
responsibility added at some stage of his career before 
he reached perfection. Neither would it be reasonable 
to suppose the evolution of a man from a lower 
order of being to absolute perfection of his own kind, 
without a history, literature, etc., etc.; neither would 
it be reasonable to suppose a human being so evolved 
from a lower order of being to human perfection, as being 
in ignorance of good and evil up to the time that he 
reached perfection. If we who are in a fallen condition 
are held to be responsible to divine law, would 
not those of the human family who had not yet reached 
full perfection, but who had considerable intelligence, 
be reasonably amenable to law also?— supposing your 
theory to be true. 

From whatever standpoint we would view the 
matter we can find no ground whatever for supposing 
that Adam ever had a human father, either perfect or 
imperfect in the flesh. Much more would we disbelieve 
that he ever had a father of a lower order of being, 
who could give him life in the divine likeness, in 
heart and head. Furthermore, to suppose such a possible 
evolution of a man to perfection from a condition 
of imperfection, would be to suppose that man, in the 
present-time imperfect condition, is his own savior, 
and could re-commence a process of evolution just as 
well as he could have carried on such a process before 
reaching perfection. If such a proposition should be 
considered true, it would negative all the Scriptural 
teachings we have respecting the necessity for a Redeemer 
and for his interference in order supernaturally 
to bring about times of restitution of all things. 



page 145 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 