A ‘Mighty Growth’ on Jungle Islands
Though the new branch facilities for Jehovah’s Witnesses on the Solomon Islands are impressive, the episodes leading to their construction are even more so.
THIRTY years ago, where the off-white two-story building now stands was dense jungle. In the nearby town jail a young man, imprisoned for illegal activities, was then avidly reading the book “Let God Be True,” loaned to him by a fellow prisoner. With the help of this Bible aid published by Jehovah’s Witnesses, appreciation of spiritual things began to grow in Clem Fa’abasua’s heart. He wanted to know more. But there was not another Witness in all the Solomon Islands.
Clem wrote for more literature and soon began a study of the Bible through the mail with a Witness in Australia. Wherever Clem went he talked about what he was learning. His efforts were the only flicker of spiritual light in these jungle islands in the South Pacific 1,000 miles (1,600 km) northeast of Australia.
In his wildest dreams Clem never imagined that within three decades his lone voice would be joined by over 500 others, and that at the 1981 annual Memorial celebration 2,624 persons would gather in 31 congregations in the Solomons! Nor would Clem have believed that 30 years to the month from his imprisonment he would be sitting in a newly constructed branch office, waiting for the dedication program to start.
The situation in the Solomon Islands has been comparable to that in Asia Minor during the first century when Christianity made rapid progress. The Bible account reads: “Thus in a mighty way the word of Jehovah kept growing and prevailing.” (Acts 19:20) The powerful growth of God’s Word in the islands was apparent from the events surrounding the dedication program​—June 20, 21, 1981.
Who Came to the Dedication?
Many Witnesses had saved their money for some time to make the seven-hour boat trip from the neighboring island of Malaita to this city of Honiara on the island of Guadalcanal. They arrived carrying bags of root vegetables, taro, sweet potatoes, cassava and even some live chickens and pigs. A meal was planned on the Saturday evening of the dedication and each congregation wanted to bring its share.
Clem, though up in years and completely deaf, still devotes many hours each month as a special pioneer to help spread the Word of God. He told the 688 present at the dedication program his story of the problems of the early days. Afterward a taped recording was played of one who also performed a major role in the early 1950’s​—Les Carnie.
Back in 1955, Les Carnie reported, ‘On one exhausting nine-mile (14-km) trip I had to contend with swamps, crocodiles and mosquitoes before reaching the territory.’ He was the first overseas Witness to come to the Solomon Islands. With his help many of the islanders saw through the false teachings and hypocrisy of traditional religions. They had seen their islands drenched in blood by two “religious” nations during World War II, for Guadalcanal became a focal point in the battle for the South Pacific.
One day, while Carnie was on a riverboat, an unfamiliar native boy sat behind him and spoke up. He said in the native Pidgin English: “Too many religions, they no true. They say ‘no kill,’ but all’gether fight. Me no like-im them. Me believe all-same you. You savvy gettim small-fella Bible for me?” How had this young boy heard? “Other boys tell me,” he said. So God’s Word by various means was ‘growing and prevailing.’
Teachers of God’s Word
A slender man with a deeply tanned face, capped by snow-white hair, John Cutforth, spoke to the dedication crowd. He was the first traveling overseer to serve in the Solomons. He told of his trips during the late 1950’s to Malaita island. These involved a full day’s journey on the deck of a small boat, followed by up to 10 hours of walking while climbing the mountains on jungle trails. Often he was soaked to the skin from tropical rainstorms. Many areas of the Solomon Islands average 10 to 12 inchesa of rain each month.
John taught others to spread the Word of God. How delighted he was to see many of those who had gone with him on those epic journeys across the island of Malaita, still faithfully serving Jehovah after more than 20 years. He spoke of times when the interested people kept them up most of the night asking questions. Finally some of the brothers had to take a short nap while another went on answering the Bible questions. But this perseverance paid off.
‘I am conducting Bible discussions with 60 persons! I have over 655 persons now interested in studying the Bible. Please send help!’ Thus wrote one of the special pioneers in a letter to the Society back in 1959. Jim Smith, who also sent a taped message to the dedication program, reflected on that period when on North Malaita island over 1,000 people decided at one time to leave their old religion and study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses (though not all actually continued and became Witnesses). Many of these were taught by means of picture sermons on blackboards in order to overcome the illiteracy problem.
Whole Villages Want to Learn
God’s Word ‘grew mightily’ with whole villages zealously wishing to be taught by the Witnesses. Among those that came to help teach these eager listeners was a couple from the United States, Charles and Carolyn Isbill, who spent some time in the Solomons. During the dedication program they spoke of how the physical hardships of walking long hours on rough roads and putting up with the monotonous diet were more than compensated for by the keen desire of the new ones to absorb Bible truth, and the love of the brothers who would accompany them.
Not even a 20-year ban on the Watchtower and Awake! magazines prevented spiritual growth. When the ban was lifted in 1974 and the distribution of the magazines leaped from 3,000 in 1975 to over 12,000 three years later, it became obvious that larger facilities would be needed for storage and shipping space. But who would build the needed structure? Skilled tradesmen are not plentiful in the Solomon Islands and the few brothers with such ability were occupied fully in caring for their families.
The Construction Workers
The decision was made to use 10 young brothers under the supervision of an Australian Witness who was a builder, Rodney Fraser. But many of these young men had never used building tools before! Yet what they accomplished was amazing. They had to dig out of rock-hard coral a 1,500 square-foot (139 m2) area to the depth of up to twice their height! This they did with pick, shovel and crowbar. The group became a close working team and learned to pour concrete and lay blocks.
Those from the congregations in the islands helped on the weekends. Witnesses in the outer areas contributed food and money. Additional skilled Witnesses from Australia joined the work force and helped to speed up the progress. Finally, after nearly three years of work, all could rejoice to see the completed structure. The building was located on a sloping block at the end of a street, surrounded by fruit trees and flowering shrubs. It presented an appearance fitting its use.
“Branch belong you-me winnim every house long town!” was the delighted claim of the Solomon Island Witnesses who toured the facilities. Or, in other words, “Our branch is the best building in town!”
Truly “in a mighty way the word of Jehovah” has grown in the Solomon Islands. The fine branch facilities will be a constant reminder of the increased influence of the Word of God on the hearts of the people of these jungle islands.
[Footnotes]
1 inch equals 2.5 centimeters.
[Picture on page 9]
John Cutforth, one of the first traveling overseers to visit the Solomon Islands, teaching Bible truths

