Insight on the News
Sinking Morality
Sexual immorality and depravity continue to reach new lows. Now, some “sexologists” are saying that very young children should be allowed to have sexual relations, including relations with adults. One who promotes such views states: “They should have the right to express themselves sexually, which means that they may or may not have contact with people older than themselves.” Another says: “We believe children should begin sex at birth. It causes a lot of problems not to practice incest.”
In reply to this, columnist Nancy Walker states that these “sexologists” should “at least say what the real issue is: that they want to [have sex] with children.” “Time” magazine said: “Such views fall just short of a manifesto for child molesters’ lib.”
One reason why practically every civilized society has had laws against sexual contact with children is the physical and psychological damage that can be done to them. Child psychiatrist Leon Eisenberg says: “Premature sexual behavior among children in this society almost always leads to psychological difficulties because you have a child acting out behavior for which he is not cognitively or emotionally ready.” Psychotherapist Sam Janus states that people who were seduced early in life “go through the motions of living and may seem all right, but they are damaged. I see these people year after year in therapy.” And psychiatrist Edward Ritvo concludes: “Childhood sexuality is like playing with a loaded gun.”
Mankind’s Creator considers all sexual relationships outside of marriage violations of his laws. His Word clearly says: “Do not be misled. Neither fornicators . . . nor adulterers, nor men kept for unnatural purposes, nor men who lie with men . . . will inherit God’s kingdom.” (1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) Of morally depraved persons, the Bible states: “Those practicing such things are deserving of death.”​—Romans 1:32.
Compensation for Victim
In several countries, the concept of having persons who commit crimes compensate their victims instead of going to jail is gaining support. For example, in Ontario, Canada, the Victim Offender Reconciliation Project operated at various centers, combined with other court-ordered restitution, resulted in 5,000 offenders paying a total of $4 million to their victims. In some cases, the compensation agreed to between victim and offender was made up of work that helped to restore the damage done.
Several thousand years ago, in the nation of ancient Israel, God’s law did not provide for jails. Offenders were required to compensate their victims, at times fourfold or fivefold depending upon the kind of property loss involved. (Exodus 22:1-15) Capital crimes, such as murder, were punishable by death. (Exodus 21:12-17) As long as the nation abided by these God-given laws, they prospered. But when they cast them aside, the entire nation suffered as crime and violence surged.
Active Despite Bans
Though there are bans on witch doctors in some African lands, a great number of people take their illnesses to them for treatment rather than to practitioners of modern medicine. In one African land where there is a ban on witch doctors, these are so busy, it is reported, that even soccer players refuse to play until their witch doctor has laid a curse on the opposing team. Two German medical doctors recently visited this country and filmed a brain operation performed without anaesthesia by a witch doctor.
A young boy was in severe pain after receiving a blow on the head, causing pressure on the brain. He was held down by five men while a witch doctor spent five hours drilling a hole in his head with a sharp instrument. Afterward, oil was poured over the wound and his head bandaged. Astonishingly the boy got up and walked home.
But from what source do witch doctors and spirit mediums get their power? The Bible clearly shows it is from the demons, wicked spirits, and, hence, “anyone who consults” such persons is viewed by God as “detestable.”​—Deuteronomy 18:9-12.

