They Made It​—In Honesty
HOW marvelous it would be to leave your doors open without the fear of being robbed! What a boon to life and pleasure it would be to be able to trust everyone and to be trusted!
But all of this starts with the individual, does it not? Our personal effort comes first.
Consider a few examples of persons who have overcome their bad inclinations and struggled free because they wanted to do so.
Would He Cheat for the Boss?
In Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, a man was facing the loss of his job unless he continued to cheat the customers. Why did he find himself in this situation? After having done his employer’s bidding without qualms, he began to learn God’s standards from the Bible. What would he do next? Promptly do what the Bible said? By no means. He took the easy way out; he stopped studying the Bible. For a little while he kept his job. But this was not the end of the story.
His conscience would not let him rest anymore and he handed in his resignation. (Romans 2:14, 15) His prayers to God for a good conscience must have been heard, for he sought out one of Jehovah’s Witnesses who lived near him in order to continue his study of God’s Word. Interestingly, it did not take long before his former boss called for him. Why? He wanted him back. The man who was hired in his place was dishonest, not only with the customers but with the boss himself! Meanwhile, strengthened in his resolve to be honest, the Bible student said he would consider going back, but on his own terms​—being honest under all circumstances. This stipulation was agreed to. Honesty triumphed, and the man is now a baptized Christian.
Armed Robber Changes
Can an armed robber change his way of life? In southern Brazil a 19-year-old youth belonged to a gang that broke into homes. While in prison he came in contact with Bible literature published by the Watch Tower Society. What he learned shocked him. Jehovah’s requirements for a Christian were so different from his own way of life, although nominally he was a Roman Catholic.
Slowly he made progress. His appreciation grew as his doubts were dispelled. Today he studies the Bible himself with other prisoners, and to the prison authorities, lawyers and judges he is known for his amazing transformation. The authorities have been so impressed with his changed behavior that they allow a group Bible study to be held every week, with 40 present.
A Thief and Liar No More
In London, England, a youngster felt so disgusted with the system around him that he became openly rebellious. Without a regular job and not wanting to work, he found that the inducement to steal was great. As a delivery boy he would take packages for himself and would also steal candy from shops. Soon he got into a burglary gang, but was caught, tried and convicted. Being only 16, he was sent to an English reform establishment called Borstal. After two years he was set free, and for a time stayed out of trouble, fearing further confinement.
Had the establishment reformed him? Not really. After a year he was back on the prowl. As a bus conductor he took advantage of the rush hour to pocket the money instead of ringing up tickets. Once again he lost his job. Meanwhile he got married, but from the start serious problems arose as a result of his heavy drinking and extramarital affairs.
At this point, two months after their wedding, the couple came in touch with the Bible. They agreed to a Bible study. Did it perform a sudden change? Realistically, no. The dishonest streak was too ingrained. He no longer sat in on the study. Nevertheless, a seed had been sown.
In retrospect, he admits that deep down he knew that what he had heard in the few weeks of Bible study was the truth and was the only means of straightening him out. His heart wanted it, but he lacked the strength. One day he became involved in a fight with the police. He was arrested for drunken driving in an uninsured vehicle. When he looked in the mirror the next morning and saw his white shirt covered with blood, he took stock of his position.
“Only two ways were open to me,” he says. “Six feet under or clean myself up; make a stand. I prayed to Jehovah to send a certain Witness around. Sure enough, he soon came and I begged him to study the Bible with me. That was in November 1973. In March 1974 I was baptized.”
Has it been easy for this former thief and liar? “No,” he replies. “There have been ups and downs, slight relapses in attitude. Without Jehovah’s help I would never have got out of the mess I was in.”
He knows that happiness depends on applying God’s law of love. “My family is united at the Kingdom Hall. And I am endeavoring to bring up my children in God’s way. I’m sorry my parents didn’t know what I know and so couldn’t help me.”
Life with a Future
In this sophisticated world, some may think that “opportunity makes the thief.” But even some former thieves can see that a life of honesty offers much more.
Why? Because it results in uprightness, a good conscience, mutual trust and, above all, God’s good pleasure. It is a basic requirement for life in God’s new order close at hand, when there will be no more stealing or dishonesty.
Love will be the dominating factor of a most satisfying and full life on a paradise earth under the millennial reign of Christ Jesus. Honesty will reign everywhere. Why not find out more about this worthwhile hope now? Jehovah’s Witnesses in your community will be delighted to help you.

