Announcements
FULL SUPPORT OF THE SERVICE OF JEHOVAH’S HOUSE
Full support of Jehovah’s service, the bringing in of the whole tithe, as counseled in Malachi 3:10, AS, means, in the case of Christians, not merely giving an exact tenth of grain or gain, but the willing offering of service and means for the purpose of advancing the interests of God’s kingdom. In consideration of the specially difficult times in which we find ourselves, it is all the more essential that Jehovah’s people, as his servants and witnesses, meet together, work together, preach together and sacrifice together. In harmonious effort during November, Jehovah’s witnesses and persons of good will will present in house-to-house preaching the timely Bible study aid book You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World and an important Bible booklet, on a contribution of only 50c. All are invited to share in this work in support of the service of Jehovah’s house. Write the Watchtower Society for particulars or inquire at the nearest Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses.
BECOME QUALIFIED FOR THE MINISTRY
The field of the ministry has never been overcrowded. In spite of the fact that the nation of Israel had a well-organized and highly trained priesthood, Jesus said of his day that the harvest was great and the workers were few. Why? Because those priests, by their own choice, were not workers in Jesus’ harvest. Therefore Jesus bypassed them and trained his own ministers, whose qualifications for their assignment were proved by the fruits of their work. A similar situation exists today with the harvest at the end of the world in progress. The organized clergy of Christendom are not trained to proclaim the end of this world and its replacement by God’s kingdom. Yet that is the assignment for true ministers of God in these last days. The New World society of Jehovah’s witnesses is evidence that a qualified ministry has been active, one in which all Christians are not only invited to participate but urged to do so. The book Qualified to Be Ministers has been especially prepared to train you for this vital work. It is yours for only 50c. Obtain it and study it with Jehovah’s witnesses.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
November 18: “Offer to God a Sacrifice of Praise.” Page 625.
November 25: Offer Your Sacrifices of Praise Aright. Page 632.

