A Review of the Book or of the Bible?
1 The principal book studied by Jehovah’s witnesses is the Bible. It contains the words of God, and it instructs us on how to serve Jehovah. It teaches us how to live peacefully with our fellowman now and it prepares us for life in the future. Because of its importance, during our study periods we should make full use of the Bible.
2 The publications we are studying help us to understand what the Bible says and why. But after about an hour’s consideration of a subject, do we know where the principal scriptures involved are found in the Bible, and can we give an explanation as to what they mean? A fine way to find out is by a review of the lesson. At the conclusion of the study, rather than reviewing the publication being studied, would it not often be advantageous to review the Bible texts around which the study material was built?
3 For example, at our congregation book study, where we are studying the ‘Know Jehovah’ book, try having the brothers close their books at the end of the study and open their Bibles to the verses in Ezekiel that were covered that evening. If only a few verses were covered, these can be read. If many were covered, it would be good to read key texts that highlight the theme of the study. The book study servant can present a review to the group on the information as they follow along in their Bibles. Different ones could possibly participate in reading the verses and the book study servant might ask questions on principal points as they proceed. This will make the brief review of the subject material one that is directly from the Bible. In our study of other publications, the verses may be in different parts of the Bible but the same style of Scriptural review can be used. Such reviews may also be used effectively on home Bible studies.
4 The results for those using this style of review have been very gratifying and enlightening. It gives the book study conductor an opportunity to see how much the group is learning and remembering. Some brothers have found it practical to make a few notes in the margin of their Bibles during the course of the study or the review, and these are very helpful in the field service.
5 In the future as we open our Bibles to that particular section, we will find that our comprehension will be much better because we looked up the scriptures and reviewed the Bible and not just the book.

