Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
We had a very happy evening March 29 here in New York city. At 6:30 you could see a full moon coming up over the horizon, and many thousands of people had one thing in mind. That was attending the Lord’s Evening Meal at one of the Kingdom Halls. Two hundred and fourteen congregations (English, Spanish and French) are now established in New York city; that is five more than a year ago. And we had a remarkable attendance​—52,627!
Only 235 partook of the emblems this year; that is 23 fewer than last year. But we had 2,266 more in attendance than a year ago. This was very fine and shows that many of the people with whom we are having Bible studies were there to observe the Lord’s Evening Meal and to express again their firm belief in Jesus Christ. Many of these are going to be helped to come to a fuller appreciation of what it means to be a disciple of Jesus Christ along with hundreds of thousands of others throughout the world within the next year.
The Bethel Family was very happy with its March production too because we made 2,135,730 bound books in March. The demand for printed literature is still very great world wide. So far this year, seven months, it has been necessary to make 16,850,708 bound books at the Brooklyn factory.
Interestingly we had to make seven reprints of the 1972 Yearbook, bringing the grand total printed to 959,820. Many have written appreciative letters expressing their determination to continue on faithfully in God’s service just like those workers spoken of in the Yearbook who were faithful under trial. Jehovah’s witnesses certainly are a living spectacle before men and angels of integrity and devotion to Jehovah God, and this all of us want to continue to be, and we want to help everyone else who has a love of life to come to know Jehovah God and his Son so that they too may gain everlasting life. We are living in momentous times! What a joy it is to have a share in this grand work, to have a keen appreciation of what Jesus Christ did in laying down his life on our behalf that we too may share in making known the name and Word of the Sovereign Ruler, Jehovah God! Happy indeed is our lot, letting people know the prophetic truths!
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

