Make Known the Name of Jehovah
1 Jehovah has given us, as his witnesses, the responsibility to preach the good news of the Kingdom and to make his name known among the people. It is very clear that he wants this done because sixty-two times he tells us in the book of Ezekiel alone that they “will have to know that I am Jehovah.” (Ezek. 6:7) We will have a fine opportunity to do just this in the month of May by placing the ‘Know Jehovah’ book, along with a booklet, for 50 cents.
2 It is beneficial to call back wherever a book is placed and to encourage people to read it by telling them some outstanding points in a chapter or two that will stimulate their interest. Or, we can even demonstrate how to study this book and thus help the people who obtain it to know Jehovah! Effectively using it may require a different approach, but preparation on our part and having the right outlook on our purpose in using it will make us successful.
3 Teaching people to know Jehovah by studying the ‘Know Jehovah’ book may take more effort on our part than with other publications such as the Truth book. Our goal in studying with newly interested ones in the ‘Know Jehovah’ book is not necessarily to start at the beginning of the book and study it in its entirety. However, we may want to use a chapter or possibly two to make the point that they must know Jehovah as the Creator and so they ought to read the entire book. But what then? You may decide to study more of the book or you may feel that the reasonable thing to do would be to refer them to the Truth book for the six-month program of home Bible study in which we teach them the basic truths from the Scriptures and help them to reach a decision as to what is the right religion and the right course to follow. We should recommend that they continue in their personal reading of the ‘Know Jehovah’ book and invite them to go with us to the congregation book study that is near their home. This is very good to do right away, for if they go they will quickly benefit from associating with Jehovah’s organization.
4 But how do we go about demonstrating how they can study the ‘Know Jehovah’ book? What are the best chapters to use? And how many chapters should be studied before we refer them to the Truth book? This will vary with different individuals. Consider the chapters that appealed to you the most. Why not use one of these in studying with the newly interested person? It would be good to use a chapter that we know well. When we speak about such a serious matter as knowing Jehovah and do so with personal conviction, this in itself is going to add to the impact of the content of the chapter.
5 By our using the ‘Know Jehovah’ book in May, the name of Jehovah will become more widely known among the people. As long as there is time to do it, we should continue to have a part in letting the nations know that God’s name is Jehovah.
[Blurb on page 1]
Let people know the prophetic truths.
[Blurb on page 4]
Can you be a vacation pioneer?

