Presenting the Good News​—To Those Closest to Us
1 Is it possible that we can get so busy taking care of certain theocratic activities that we keep overlooking or neglecting to witness to our unbelieving parents or other relatives? Paul, in quoting from the Law, said: “‘Honor your father and your mother’; which is the first command with a promise.” (Eph. 6:2) The best thing we can do for our parents if they are yet unbelieving is to show them the truth. In doing so, of course, it is good to be tactful. You might ask yourself: “What am I doing to encourage those in my family who have not yet accepted the truth?” If away from home, we might aid them by writing letters regularly and including comments on the blessings that we have had from Jehovah and those that we still anticipate. In doing this we might write out a scripture or relate an experience we had. We might send a gift subscription or we can mail a copy of an appropriate issue of The Watchtower or Awake! that we feel may be of particular interest,
2 If one is living at home with his parents, what a fine opportunity he would have to give a witness by letting the family observe how his study of the Bible has taught him Christian conduct. He should be anxious and willing to do things around the home without being asked. Close ties can be made with our parents by taking more of an interest in what they are doing. Your being kind, polite, appreciative and respectful are bound to win the silent praise of unbelieving parents.
3 One young Witness who learned the truth while going to school gave his unbelieving parents a Bible as a gift and wrote this note on the flyleaf of the Bible: “Dear Mom and Dad, For all the years you both worked to bring me up as you did, I thank you from the bottom of my heart. You raised me with the responsibilities of great parents. Whether you know it or not, you have both used Bible principles to do the job. I would like to repay you both by studying this true book with you that will definitely lead us all to an eternal life here on earth. Without a knowledge of the Bible, this is impossible. (John 17:3) I would like nothing better than to have both of you living together with your family forever. Love, . . .” As a result of this gift and the thoughtful words, this young brother’s parents began to study, and now seven of his family have accepted the truth.
4 Are you doing as much as you can to teach the truth to those closest to you?

