Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MAY 14
Theme: Declaring Jehovah’s Name in All the Earth.​—Isa. 43:10. Song 105.
13 min: Introduction, text, comments, Question Box (by school servant).
20 min: “Make Known the Name of Jehovah.” Question-and-answer discussion. Explain how publishers can interest people in reading the “Know Jehovah” book by highlighting points from a chapter such as 1, 2, 9, 19 or 21 on a back-call.
Demonstrate how a presentation such as the following may be used to show others how to study the book: “I appreciated our conversation last week because it revealed some of the changes that the Creator, Jehovah God, will bring to pass for the good of mankind in the near future. What is unusual is that most people do not even know the name of the one who will make these beneficial changes. Yet his name is the original and greatest name in the universe. The ‘Know Jehovah’ book you received last week comments on the seriousness of knowing Jehovah. Let’s read the first paragraph of chapter one to see how we can benefit from the actions of nations in Bible times. [Read paragraph one.] What has been the attitude of nations and peoples toward that name? Do you think it would benefit us to know more about that name?” Allow householder time to answer. Continue the discussion and explain how the questions at the bottom of the page are used to isolate the main points in the paragraph. Proceed on to the next paragraph as time and circumstances permit.
Chairman then explains that after consideration of one or possibly two chapters, publisher will point out that the remainder of the “Know Jehovah” book presents a much more detailed discussion that the person will enjoy reading. At this point, invite him to attend the congregation book study with you. Then explain that knowing Jehovah is more than an acknowledgment of what he is going to do. It is a matter of knowing all the aspects of true worship and conforming to these. To make sure he believes as the Bible teaches, invite him to have a six-month course of Bible study in the “Truth” book.
15 min: “A Review of the Book or of the Bible?” A talk. Also have book study servant demonstrate this suggested style of review, using the material considered in his last book study.
12 min: Concluding remarks; include April field service report. Song 48.
WEEK STARTING MAY 21
Theme: Jehovah’s Service Produces Joy and Satisfaction.​—Acts 20:35. Song 55.
13 min: Introduction, text, comments, points in Branch Letter and Theocratic News.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News.” A talk. If possible, arrange ahead of time so that one or two local experiences of witnessing to relatives may be related.
17 min: “‘Divine Rulership’ District Assemblies.” Question-and-answer discussion. Highlight assembly date that applies to the congregation if your circuit is listed. Discuss filling out volunteer service forms and rooming request forms with clarity and accuracy.
15 min: Concluding remarks. May refer to meeting theme, asking for comments from audience on how field service brings joy and satisfaction. Appropriate announcements; encourage summer vacation pioneer plans. Song 49.
WEEK STARTING MAY 28
Theme: Vindicate God by Integrity to Him. (Ps. 26:1) Song 109.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
30 min: Why Goodness Is Important. (“Aid,” pp. 676, 677; w67, pp. 273-284) Ask everyone to use Bible and participate. In introduction, point out how vital it is that we ‘abhor what is wicked and cling to what is good.’ (Rom. 12:9) Hatred of bad protects us from acting out of harmony with God’s will, and loving what is good reflects itself in positive action toward others. Then aid audience to get key points from scriptures and other references cited in answer to as many of the following questions as time permits: (a) What is goodness? (“Aid,” p. 676, par. 9) (b) Why should we be concerned about having the quality of goodness? (Ps. 119:66, 68; 145:9; Gal. 5:22; Eph. 5:1) (c) What is needed to determine whether something is truly good, and so what should we be doing? (Rom. 15:14; Col. 1:9-11) (d) What should others be able to see in individuals who manifest goodness? (Rom. 12:2; Phil. 4:9) (e) Who should be included in our expressions of goodness, and how will this help us to get along well with others? (Rom. 12:17-21; Gal. 6:10) (f) What effect does goodness have on our eating and drinking habits? (Prov. 23:20, 21; 1 Tim. 3:2, 3, 8, 11) (g) How can goodness be reflected in the way we care for our clothing and home? (Isa. 52:11; w67, pp. 281, 282) (h) How might goodness be manifested in our choice of grooming or attire? (1 Tim. 2:9, 10; “Aid,” p. 1172, par. 7; w67, pp. 283, 284) (i) What attitude toward work would show that we are displaying goodness? (Eccl. 3:13, 22; 1 Thess. 4:11, 12; Titus 2:9, 10) (j) Why would individuals be more willing to expend themselves in behalf of a good man than one who is merely righteous? (Rom. 5:7; “Aid,” p. 1411, pars. 2, 3) Give brief résumé showing why goodness is important in our lives.
15 min: Presenting the “New World Translation” and “Great Teacher” book. (See Nov. 1971 “Kingdom Ministry” for suggestions on offering Bible.) First time offering “Great Teacher” book; people have not seen it in door-to-door work. Most householders have young children or grandchildren, interested in their needs. Presentation may be based on points found on page 5 of book; it can help to prevent ‘generation gap’ so common now, can aid to keep communication open. Publishers can be alert to note local news on juvenile questions; try to select chapter that fits situation and speak about subject. Could use Chapter 17 or 23. Show how “Great Teacher” book and Bible go together. Can point out that parents have given a Bible and book to child as reward for having done something well; added incentive to continue to do right. Could use as reward for having done well at school. Some have Bible now. “Great Teacher” book itself makes wonderful gift for children; can offer four for a dollar so each child in home can have own copy. (Demonstrate a presentation of offer featuring points from “Great Teacher” book.)
Get expressions from congregation on actual experiences in placing Bible or “Great Teacher” book, what appeals to local people. May wish to try offering “Great Teacher” book in street work; many family people live in hotels or buildings we cannot enter. Best way is to approach them with book in hand. “Great Teacher” book also excellent for people of limited education. Urge all to get good supply of “Great Teacher” book.
10 min: Concluding comments; refer to month’s theme. Song 88.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 4
Theme: Recommending Ourselves as God’s Ministers. (2 Cor. 6:3, 4) Song 116.
 6 min: Introduction, text, comments and accounts report.
30 min: Congregation servant covers “Questions from Readers” in April 1, 1972 “Watchtower,” by questions, answers and discussion.
14 min: Qualified to Be Ministers. Enthusiastic talk based on “Aid” book, page 1162, subheading “Christian Ministers.” Help congregation appreciate that our ministry stems from work of Jesus Christ. He trained his followers to preach. It was their primary activity. Have someone read Luke 22:25-27 and discuss with congregation the importance of humility as God’s ministers. This also shown by our not having titles as do Christendom’s clergy. (Matt. 23:8-12) Emphasize that God’s ministers are qualified by Jehovah. Explain who are their letters of recommendation. (2 Cor. 3:1-6) Help congregation appreciate who are Jesus’ “gifts in men” after his ascension and today. Stress the importance of other sheep being ministers of God even though not of anointed class. (Rev. 7:9-15) Are you personally sharing in the ministry?
10 min: Concluding remarks. Encourage making back-calls on all interested persons with June offer. Song 112.

