Our Priority
 1. How did Jesus demonstrate that the ministry was important to him?
1 The ministry was Jesus’ priority. He expended himself, walking hundreds of miles throughout Palestine to preach to as many as possible. He kept his life simple so he could devote more time and attention to the ministry. (Matt. 8:20) When crowds tried to detain him so that he would cure their sick, he said: “Also to other cities I must declare the good news of the kingdom of God, because for this I was sent forth.”—Luke 4:43.
 2. Why was the ministry so important to Jesus?
2 Why was the ministry so important to Jesus? His prime concern was the sanctification of Jehovah’s name. (Matt. 6:9) He loved his heavenly Father and so desired to accomplish His will and obey His every commandment. (John 14:31) In addition, he genuinely cared for people and wanted to help them.—Matt. 9:36, 37.
 3. How may we demonstrate that the ministry is our focus?
3 Imitate Jesus: Maintaining the same focus Jesus had can be challenging because the world makes heavy demands on our time and offers many distractions. (Matt. 24:37-39; Luke 21:34) Therefore, we must make sure of the more important things, scheduling time to prepare for and engage in the preaching work regularly. (Phil. 1:10) We endeavor to maintain a simple lifestyle and avoid using the world to the full.—1 Cor. 7:31.
 4. Why is it vital to maintain the right priority now?
4 When time is limited, a wise person prioritizes. If he learned that a dangerous storm was approaching, for example, he would focus his time and energy on making arrangements for the safety of his family and warning his neighbors. Less important activities would wait. The time left before the storm of Armageddon arrives is reduced. (Zeph. 1:14-16; 1 Cor. 7:29) In order to save ourselves and those who listen to us, we must pay constant attention to ourselves and our teaching, be it inside or outside the congregation. (1 Tim. 4:16) Yes, our survival depends upon keeping the ministry our priority!

