
Imitate Their Faith




 1. What will we consider at the Congregation Bible Study starting the week of October 19?
1 During the week of October 19, 2015, we will begin consideration of the Imitate Their Faith book at the Congregation Bible Study. This publication examines the Biblical accounts of 14 men and women of faith. It does so in such a way that these faithful ones come to life in our mind, helping us to see them as real people who faced challenges as they served Jehovah. The book also draws lessons from those accounts to help us make personal application today.—Heb. 6:12.
 2. Explain some features of the Imitate Their Faith book.
2 Features: The book includes a time line and maps to help us determine when and where each character lived. Additionally, each chapter has a feature entitled “To Think About . . . ,” which will help us to meditate on the accounts and apply the practical lessons we have learned. The book is also richly illustrated with colorful, detailed, and carefully researched artwork, which helps bring the accounts to life.
 3. What can we do to benefit from our study of this publication?
3 How You Can Benefit: The opening letter from the Governing Body encourages us with these words: “Use your imagination; get your senses involved. Try to feel what those Bible characters felt, to see what they saw. Compare how they reacted in a given situation with the way you would likely have responded.” Of course, to use our imagination does not mean to speculate wildly but, rather, to picture what the inspired account says and to empathize with the people involved. Doing so requires time and meditation. (Neh. 8:8) If the lesson begins in the middle of a chapter, the conductor will start with a 30- to 60-second review of the previous lesson. One or two questions may be asked as a concluding review if the lesson does not include the feature “To Think About . . .”
 4. Why do we need to study the Imitate Their Faith book?
4 We live in a world that seeks, every day, to erode or weaken our faith in one way or another. This book—as well as the ongoing series in The Watchtower on which it is based—is a gift from Jehovah to help us strengthen our faith. (Jas. 1:17) Let us take full advantage of it by attending the Congregation Bible Study regularly and having as full a share in commenting as possible while we study this publication together!




