
Teaching With the Good News Brochure




 1. How is the Good News brochure designed?
1 As discussed in the July issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, one important tool in our teaching toolbox is the brochure Good News From God! Cited scriptures are not quoted so that householders can enjoy learning directly from the Bible itself. While many of our study publications are written in such a way that the reader can learn on his own, this publication was designed to be discussed with an instructor. Therefore, when we offer it, we should try to demonstrate the study so that the householder can see how thrilling it is to learn good news from the Bible.—Matt. 13:44.
 2. How can we use the Good News brochure on the initial call?
2 On the Initial Call: You might say: “I’m here because people are concerned about where this world is heading. Do you think conditions will ever improve? [Allow for response.] The Bible contains good news that can give us hope. Here are some of the questions that the Bible answers.” Hand the householder the brochure, and invite him to choose a question from the back cover. Then demonstrate the study using the first paragraph of that lesson. Another option is to ask the householder an interest-arousing question based on a lesson you chose and then demonstrate how the brochure can help him find the Bible’s answer. If that lesson has a corresponding video on jw.org, some publishers play it during their presentation.
 3. Explain how to conduct a study using the Good News brochure.
3 How to Conduct the Study: (1) Read the numbered question in bold print to help the householder focus on the main point. (2) Read the paragraph that follows. (3) Read the italicized scriptures, and use tactful questions to help the householder to see how the scriptures answer the numbered question. (4) If there is another paragraph under the question, repeat steps 2 and 3. If a video matches the question and you have not yet played it for the householder, do so at some point in the discussion. (5) Finally, ask for the householder’s answer to the numbered question to make sure he understands.
 4. What will help us to use this valuable tool with skill?
4 Get familiar with this valuable tool. Use it on every appropriate occasion. Before each study, think about the student and the best way to reason with him, using the scriptures in the lesson. (Prov. 15:28; Acts 17:2, 3) As you gain experience and skill, you may very well view this brochure as one of your favorite tools to use in teaching people the truth!




