Part 3​—Conducting Progressive Bible Studies
Effective Use of the Scriptures
 1. Why should we emphasize the Scriptures when conducting Bible studies?
1 Our purpose in conducting Bible studies is to “make disciples” by helping people to understand and accept the teachings of God’s Word and apply them in their lives. (Matt. 28:19, 20; 1 Thess. 2:13) Therefore, the study should center on the Scriptures. At first, it may be helpful to show students how to find specific texts in their own copy of the Bible. How, though, can we use the Scriptures to help such ones to progress spiritually?
 2. How do we decide which Bible texts to read and discuss?
2 Select Texts to Read: In your preparation, determine how each cited scripture in the lesson applies to the point under consideration, and decide which ones you will look up and discuss during the study. Generally, it is good to read those that show the Scriptural basis for our beliefs. Texts that provide background information may not need to be read. Take into consideration the needs and circumstances of each student.
 3. What is the benefit of using questions, and how can we do this?
3 Use Questions: Instead of explaining Bible texts to the student, have him explain them to you. You can prompt him to do this by the skillful use of questions. If the application of a scripture is obvious, you might simply ask how the text supports what is stated in the paragraph. In other cases, a more specific question or series of questions may be needed to direct the student to the proper conclusion. If further explanations are needed, these can be made after the student has responded.
 4. How much explanation is needed for the scriptures we read?
4 Keep It Simple: A skilled archer often needs just one arrow to hit a target. Similarly, a skilled teacher does not require many words to make a point. He can convey information simply, clearly, and accurately. At times, you may need to do research in Christian publications to understand a scripture and explain it correctly. (2 Tim. 2:15) But avoid trying to explain every aspect of each scripture in the study. Include only what is needed to make the point under consideration.
5, 6. How can we help students to apply God’s Word in their life, but what should we avoid?
5 Make Practical Application: When appropriate, help the student to see how Bible texts apply to him personally. For example, when considering Hebrews 10:24, 25 with a student who is not yet attending Christian meetings, you might discuss one of the meetings and invite him to attend it. But avoid pressuring him. Allow God’s Word to motivate him to take the action needed to please Jehovah.​—Heb. 4:12.
6 As we carry out the commission to make disciples, may we “promote obedience by faith” through our effective use of the Scriptures.​—Rom. 16:26.

