Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting November 8
Song 180
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. The special campaign to distribute Keep on the Watch! will conclude on November 14. For the remainder of November, we will offer Learn From the Great Teacher. Briefly review the suggested presentations from the May 2004 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 3.
15 min: Benefit Fully From the Service Meeting. Audience discussion based on the Our Ministry book, pages 71-2. In what five areas does the Service Meeting help us improve as Christian ministers? Cite examples from current month’s program. What are the benefits of preparing beforehand? Why attend regularly? What Scriptural precedent is there for this meeting?
20 min: “Keep a Sense of Urgency!”a Include comments on the January 15, 2000, Watchtower, pages 12-13.
Song 19 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 15
Song 170
10 min: Local announcements. If the suggestions on page 4 are practical for your congregation territory, use them to demonstrate how to present the November 15 Watchtower and the November 22 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used.
15 min: Do You Know the Happiness That Comes From Giving? Talk based on the November 1, 2004, Watchtower, pages 19-23.
20 min: Cultivate Interest Using the New Brochure. Talk and audience discussion to be handled by the service overseer. We should return to cultivate the interest of each person who accepted a copy of Keep on the Watch! Using the table of contents on page 2, give a brief overview of the brochure, drawing attention to the concise highlighted sections (listed in regular type under the bold headings). This material can be used for short, meaningful follow-up discussions. For example, if pages 3-4 were featured on the initial call, the highlighted section “Does God Really Care?” on page 5 could be used to make a return visit. Discuss how that could be done. Review other highlighted sections, such as those on pages 6-8 and 17-18 or others appropriate for the local territory. Demonstrate a return visit, using one of the highlighted sections. One or more of the cited scriptures should be read and discussed. Publisher concludes by drawing attention to another highlighted section that could be discussed on the next visit.
Song 66 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 22
Song 199
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Starting Bible Studies With Those Who Accepted the New Brochure. Talk and audience discussion to be handled by the service overseer. Briefly review the return visit demonstrated on the previous Service Meeting, noting especially the highlighted section that was mentioned at the conclusion of that visit. Have the same publishers (if possible) use that material to demonstrate the next return visit. Publisher then uses back cover of the brochure to offer a Bible study, and arrangements are made to consider lesson 1 of the Require brochure on the next visit. Encourage all to focus on starting Bible studies with those who accepted a copy of Keep on the Watch!
Song 58 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 29
Song 23
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for November. Demonstrate how to present the December 1 Watchtower and the December 8 Awake!
10 min: Question Box. Talk by an elder.
25 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies​—Part 3.”b Use the questions that are provided. After discussing paragraph 3, include a brief demonstration of a Bible study in the Require brochure, lesson 5, paragraph 1. The paragraph has already been read and the question answered. The conductor and student read and discuss Isaiah 45:18 and Ecclesiastes 1:4. The conductor uses simple questions to prompt the student to explain how each text bears on the point under consideration.
Song 178 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 6
Song 96
10 min: Local announcements. Mention literature offer for December. Demonstrate one or two presentations that could be used when offering the Greatest Man book.
20 min: “Can You Extend a Helping Hand?”c Interview one or two publishers who appreciated assistance or encouragement that was extended by others.
15 min: Local experiences. Invite audience to relate experiences enjoyed in following up placements of Keep on the Watch! Arrange in advance to reenact outstanding experiences. Commend all for their support of the special campaign.
Song 101 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

