From Our Readers
Science Trusted?  Your series of articles “How Far Can Science Be Trusted?” (March 8, 1998) was a timely warning. It helped me to be more realistic about inventions and scientific discoveries, many of which can cause harmful side effects to man and his environment. At the same time, the series directed readers to the Bible—something that is completely trustworthy.
A. I. B., Brazil
The Apache  We are keenly interested in the history of the Indians and have read many books on them. So we want to thank you for the article “Whatever Happened to the Apache?” (March 8, 1998) It spoke about this subject in a way that was clear and convincing.
G. C. and R. S., Italy
Caste System  I am 12 years old, and just yesterday I was assigned schoolwork on the caste system. I am part Indian. Today I received your article “Christians and Caste.” (March 8, 1998) My schoolbooks did not explain this subject as thoroughly as you did.
S. S. N., United States
Managing Stress  I have read articles in popular magazines about coping with fatigue, burnout, and nervous exhaustion. But they often leave me wondering if I am fit to carry on! I was pleased to see that of your 15 suggestions on managing stress, none suggested giving up and retiring. (“You Can Manage Stress!,” March 22, 1998) Rather, they showed how to reduce stress while getting on with one’s life.
J. B., Bolivia
The articles came out at the right time, since I have been suffering from anxiety. I am a full-time evangelizer, and I thought that I shouldn’t have such problems. As I read these articles, tears came to my eyes. I realized that Jehovah has tender care for his servants and understands what we are going through.
D. M., Italy
It was just what I needed to read, since I suffer from psoriasis, a stressful condition. Sometimes I feel that I am unimportant to Jehovah, but your article showed me that this is not the case. He really cares for me—so much so that he has provided me with all the information I need about stress.
S. S., Brazil
I wish to thank you with all my heart for the box “PTSD—A Normal Reaction to an Abnormal Experience.” I had a traumatic childhood, and although past memories are still a part of my life, the article gave me real comfort.
R. N., United States
I found the articles to be very enlightening. Since pressures from Satan are mounting, we need this kind of information to stay in the faith. It made me realize that you take a keen interest in our problems and that you give us what we need to cope with them.
V. T., Fiji

