Life Free from Injustice​—Is It Just a Dream?
WOULD it not be a far pleasanter earth to live in if all persons, and especially those with authority, were truly impartial and just? What hope is there in our day of seeing a world free from injustice? How could it come about?
From what we see around us, the prospects may not look bright. Consider a few examples of the things causing many to feel both outraged and helpless.
On the one hand, people see wealthy persons and high public officials commit crimes and often come away almost untouched. Perhaps they pay a small fine, a mere ‘slap on the wrist.’
For example, when a New York brokerage firm unlawfully funneled some $20,000,000 in stocks through secret Swiss bank accounts, the firm was fined $50,000. But it had received some $225,000 in illegal commissions. A senior partner of the firm perjured himself in grand jury investigations. He was fined $30,000 and given a one-year suspended sentence. He spent no time in jail.
One week later, an unemployed shipping clerk, married and the father of two children, was convicted for stealing a television set. He received a year’s sentence in jail​—from the same judge. Because such things happen so often, the feeling of many among the public may be: “The bigger you are, the lighter you fall and the easier your treatment.”
In many lands, so-called “white-collar crimes” account for far greater losses than what is called “street crime.” The U.S. Chamber of Commerce estimates that such “white-collar crimes” as bribery, kickbacks, consumer fraud and illegal competition, securities theft and fraud, all together cost some $42 billion a year. Yet those guilty of these crimes seldom receive severe punishment. And most of this hits the ordinary citizen heavily in the form of higher taxes, higher prices and higher insurance rates.
Tax laws may provide “loopholes” favoring the rich. In 1972 some 400 Americans with incomes of over $100,000 paid absolutely no federal taxes. Four of these had incomes of over $1,000,000.
So, prejudice and partiality because of station in life, wealth, race, color, nationality and language bring oppression and inequality to millions in many lands. To them, life free from injustice seems just a dream.
There is another side of the coin, however. At times those gaining authority will favor certain minorities only because they are minorities. The theory may prevail that “the ‘underdog’ is always right”​—even when he is wrong. This is not justice either.
And what often happens when those who have been discriminated against in a land because of their race, color or nationality gain authority in that land? Do not they themselves often show prejudice and partiality toward those not of their kind? Thus injustice persists, flourishes.
This situation is not new. Nearly three thousand years ago the inspired Bible writer set down these words: “If you see oppression of the poor and denial of justice and righteousness in the province, do not be shocked [“surprised,” New English Bible] at the sight, for one official watches over another official, and there are higher officials over them.”​—Eccl. 5:8, New American Standard Bible.
Yes, corruption among local officials often just reflects that among the higher officials over them. It is not surprising, then, that the average citizen on the bottom gets severely squeezed.
What, then, is needed? How can a life free from injustice ever become a reality for people everywhere, of all kinds?
HOW THE “DREAM” WILL BECOME A REALITY
Obviously, something has to change. Actually a change is needed in the entire system of things now operating on earth. How great a change? Is it enough just to reform the system in certain aspects, making personnel and administration changes, or changes in certain laws?
No, what is really needed is a replacement of the entire present system with a new system established on a new foundation. We have seen all kinds of reforms, personnel and administration changes, new legislation, in country after country. But, in spite of these, corruption keeps cropping up in high levels of government. And where sincere individuals try to promote justice, often they find their efforts blocked by selfish interests.
As the director of an institute of Georgetown University’s law center states, a “system of justice will work only if the public has confidence in its fairness. . . . the public must feel that the government and the social order deserve credence, respect and loyalty.” How can such a system come about?
Because Jehovah God loves justice, he has promised a totally new system for this earth under the direction of a heaven-based government. Of the one appointed as head of that government, Christ Jesus, it was prophesied that “upon him the spirit of Jehovah must settle down,” bringing wisdom, understanding, counsel, mightiness and knowledge, and “there will be enjoyment by him in the fear of Jehovah.” What benefits will this bring to his subjects? The prophecy adds: “And he will not judge by any mere appearance to his eyes, nor reprove simply according to the thing heard by his ears. And with righteousness he must judge the lowly ones, and with uprightness he must give reproof in behalf of the meek ones.”​—Isa. 11:2-4.
When on earth Christ Jesus showed these very qualities that will characterize his Kingdom rule over earth. Looking at the crowds that gathered to hear him speak, “he felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd,” a large share of the blame for this resting with the hypocritical religious leaders of that day. (Matt. 9:36; compare Matthew 23:23, 24; Mark 12:38-40.) He taught his disciples to show love for all people, ‘giving freely even as they had received freely.’ (Matt. 5:43-48; 10:8) He proved his unselfish love by giving his life on behalf of all humankind.
The “spirit of Jehovah” that the Kingdom government will foster throughout the earth guarantees fairness and justice to all. Of God, the inspired apostle wrote: “For a certainty . . . God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”​—Acts 10:34, 35.
Take heart, then, and take time to learn from God’s Word how you can gain life under the righteous rule of his Son when life free from injustice will be a reality.
[Picture on page 163]
“You must not be partial in judgment. You should hear the little one the same as the great one.”​—Deut. 1:17.
“With justice you should judge your associate.”​—Lev. 19:15.

