Announcements
◆ Literature offer, February through April: Watchtower subscription, with three booklets, for $1.50, or subscription for both magazines, with six booklets, for $3.00. If subscription offer is not accepted, we can offer two magazines and the three new booklets for 25c.
◆ On Saturday, April 17, the Bethel home and factory and Watchtower Farms will be closed for spring cleaning; so there will be no arrangement for tours on that day.
◆ In the June Kingdom Ministry, announcement was made concerning new identification cards to be issued to all baptized publishers and it was requested that old cards be destroyed. Some congregations have not followed through on this yet, so this reminder is given to the elders. Publishers should not be carrying the old identification cards. The new identification cards are available at two for one cent. If your congregation has not yet ordered them, please do so now.
◆ Recently a number of reports have been received from congregations in this country about persons who have come to the congregation and asked for money, but later proved to be impostors. It seems good to mention this now and to warn the brothers to be on the watch for such persons. If someone comes and says he is in need, it is wise to ascertain the location of the congregation from which he came and inquire of an elder there to see if the person is telling the truth; also get a recommendation from the former congregation before giving money to such a stranger.
◆ New Publications Available:
One World, One Government—Under God’s Sovereignty—Portuguese
Reading Aid—Italian
◆ Available Again in U.S.A.:
Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook—Portuguese
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life—Arabic, Polish
◆ If a congregation must change its permanent shipping address for literature, please indicate this IN A LETTER ACCOMPANYING THE NEXT LITERATURE ORDER BLANK, not by merely writing a new address on the next order blank. Neither the name of the addressee nor the street address should be changed because of rotation of elders. (See Cost List, page 4, paragraph 15; page 6, paragraph 26.) If the permanent address for congregation mail MUST CHANGE in a letter state why and give new address.

