Keep Speaking the Word
1 “As for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.” With these courageous words the apostles Peter and John stated their position when before a court that demanded they quit talking about Jesus. Satan would like the telling of the good news to cease, but Christians have the obligation to keep speaking the word of God. This is why the apostles refused to stop. Earnestly they prayed: “Jehovah, give attention to their threats, and grant your slaves to keep speaking your word with all boldness.” Jehovah backed them up in this speaking.—Acts 4:20, 29, 31.
2 As the first-century Christians carried on their evangelizing work, they became skilled in speaking to others. Following the example of Jesus Christ, they conversed with people in public places as well as in their homes in order to spread the good news. (Acts chapters 3, 10, 17) Do you remember how Philip the evangelizer started a conversations with the Ethiopian eunuch by asking: “Do you actually know what you are reading?” (Acts 8:30) That led to the Ethiopian’s accepting Jesus as Messiah. What a marvelous work was accomplished through effective conversations! Though they did not have books and magazines as we do now, with the help of Jehovah’s spirit the good news was spread to all parts of the Roman Empire. The early Christians knew the Holy Scriptures well. They referred to God’s Word and often quoted directly from it in talking with people about the truth. What a fine example they set!
CONVERSATIONS IDENTIFY US
3 How about us today? Both when in the field service and at other appropriate times, do we carry on effective conversation with people about the truth? Do some people tend to view us merely as literature distributors? We should be recognized as teachers, evangelizers, if we follow the lead of Jesus and the early disciples, should we not? We should be known as people with a message of hope and comfort, people who are ready to share information through interesting and effective conversation. Jehovah’s people in some lands have no publications they can place; but they do use the Bible and talk to others, often in public places. And the work grows.
4 While many publishers are adept at starting conversations on Bible topics, others would appreciate suggestions as to how they can improve their ability. Practice and experience are needed in order to be really effective, but a few suggestions here might prove helpful.
5 First, we should be genuinely interested in people and their welfare. That is why we spread the good news, is it not? We want to help others to learn the truth so they can worship Jehovah and enjoy the blessed promises found in his Word. (Rom. 10:13-15) Do your attitude, your tone of voice, your facial expressions and words reflect genuine friendliness and interest in the householder? This is a key to effective conversation.
6 Also, it helps to take into account the customs of the people, or things that are of special interest to the local populace. Then, like Paul, you can tactfully include these in your conversation. (Acts 17:22, 23, 28) Take note of local happenings that are reported in the newspaper or on the radio. Current news items are effective in starting conversations, because these are on the minds of people and they may have a reaction that they will freely express. It also helps if we learn how to ask viewpoint questions in a tactful way to determine the person’s thoughts or interests, but being careful not to ask embarrassing questions. Once the conversation gets started, of course, it is not hard to work in the good news. Always keep in mind your objective so that the discussion will lead into a witness about the Kingdom.
QUESTIONS CAN START CONVERSATIONS
7 What kind of questions might we use to open up a conversation? Consideration must be given to the type of person and the area in which we work. Questions that have been used successfully in the field by some are:
Do you believe that a book written by man could, nevertheless, be God’s message to mankind?
What do you think about the origin of our life? Is it from a source higher than man, and from one to whom we are responsible?
What do you think is the greatest problem facing mankind?
Do you think that it is possible for us to enjoy the best from life today and to have a secure hope for the future without an accurate knowledge of our Maker (or life source)?
Do you believe that religion serves as a real force for righteousness in the lives of people today?
Do you see any connection between the tremendous loss of morality in society today and the teaching of evolution in the schools and colleges?
8 These questions may prove to be effective for you. On the other hand, you may find that other questions or remarks appeal to people in your area. Use whatever brings results in getting a conversation started. In addition to selecting a question, however, be sure to have in mind a few interesting facts on the subject as well as two or three related scriptures. This is necessary in order to keep your discussion going. You can get texts on many themes from “Make Sure.”
9 Remember, conversation is a ‘two-way street.’ We really must be good listeners also. If we ask for a householder’s viewpoint, then we really are obligated to listen to his viewpoint, are we not? If we listen, then we know more about what he thinks and can use this as a basis for appealing to the householder. We are thus in a good position to share thoughts from God’s Word in a way that will interest the householder.
10 What should we do if the householder recognizes us as one of Jehovah’s witnesses and immediately says that he does not want any literature? Perhaps the householder thinks that our only goal is to leave magazines or books with people. Tactfully try to start an interesting conversation and thus plant some seeds of truth. Try to give the householder some Scriptural truth to think about. Perhaps you can leave him in a much better frame of mind for the next call. Literature can be used later on.
11 Try it. Start right away to strike up conversations with people that you meet in the house-to-house work and in other places. Giving people some encouraging words to think about will bring you encouragement also. At the end of each day when you think over what you have done, if you have told the good news to someone during that day, you will have a feeling of satisfaction and pleasure.—Col. 1:5, 6.

