Question Box
● Is it proper for one of Jehovah’s witnesses to receive treatment and care at a hospital operated by a religious organization?
Various religious organizations operate hospitals, which provide medical treatment and care. Generally such hospitals are not established for the outright promotion of false religion. They may have been incorporated originally to serve a religious organization as a source of income. Today, however, some hospitals are religious in their name only, whereas others are still partially staffed by members of the clergy.
If one of Jehovah’s witnesses requires hospital care, he must make his own decision as to whether he will go to a hospital that may possibly be connected with a religious organization. The conscience of one might permit him to do so, but the conscience of another may prevent him from doing so. There are certain circumstances that may have a bearing on one’s decision and it is good to consider these.
For example, a hospital with a religious name may be the only one in the immediate area. Or, if there is another hospital nearby, the one with possible religious connections may have a reputation for superior service. Also, such a hospital with a religious name may be the only one equipped to provide the particular treatment needed, or it may be the only hospital where your doctor or surgeon is able to handle cases. Also, sometimes hospitals with religious connections may respect your viewpoint as a Christian on the use of blood, whereas some other private or municipal hospitals may not. So these are some factors that you may have to consider when deciding what hospital to use.
If you do decide to use a hospital with religious connections, you might view it merely as paying for services rendered. You might view it as if the religious organization were operating a certain business, and in purchasing a service from such business you would not be making a direct, voluntary contribution to the support of a false religion. You would merely be paying for a product or a service.
Of course, as a Christian, in such circumstances you must definitely see to it that you do not engage in any acts of false worship. Also, you could not ascribe the usual religious titles, like “Father” or “Sister,” to individuals who may work at or visit the hospital. You would have to see to it that the matter is strictly a business arrangement in which you are receiving treatment and service, and nothing more.
So, each one will have to consider all the circumstances involved and then make his own decision as to which hospital he will use.—Gal. 6:5.

