Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 1
16 min: Song 4. Introduction. Comment on February theme, “Stay in the Way of Life with a Christian Conscience.” (1 Pet. 3:16; see April 1, 1975, Watchtower.) Include reference to how proper understanding of God’s Word together with a good conscience will cause us to make wise decisions in life. Keeping our dedication close in mind will help us do God’s will. Good personal study habits will help us train conscience properly. Participating regularly in field service helps us keep good conscience and stay in way of life.—1 Tim. 1:5, 19.
15 min: “Wish You Had More Time?” Questions and answers. Include any appropriate local suggestions on how to make the most practical use of time in the field service or how to schedule and organize better. Offer to be of help to anyone who wishes to go over his schedule. Encourage using an hour or two more a month in field service.
19 min: Analyzing Your Own Presentation. Talk showing it is good to sit down and analyze our presentation from time to time, on occasions doing so with others who have success in what they are doing. Do we get householder involved? One way is to put magazine or book in householder’s hands. When speaking about a feature of the publication, point it out. Makes impression.
Are you observant? Are there children in the home? Is there an ill person or invalid? Is there anything indicating the person’s religious belief? Learn to be flexible and tactful in presentation, taking advantage of what you see and trying to make your presentation meaningful. Select article or subject and scriptures that might have most appeal to person’s thinking. Preparation comes in here; know what is in the magazine. The more you know, the more you can say to convince.
Sometimes several people are listening. Do not ignore any. Try to cover interest of everyone. Let each one examine the magazine.
Demonstration: Two publishers in service together talk about how they will make presentation with first article in Watchtower. Come to house and speak to mother, two children present in background playing. Publisher sees children and so makes presentation with reference to first article in February 8 Awake!, which involves children. After leaving house explains to other publisher that she had read the magazine and knew what to use if situation came up; therefore changed from planned presentation.
Chairman encourages all to prepare well and thus enjoy service more. Suggest that some publishers or family groups may find it helpful to go over their presentations together before going out.
10 min: Concluding Comments. Suggest that during February we try to get subscriptions from workmates or schoolmates. Mention progress, number of new subscriptions since January 1 and new Bible studies started. Suggest bringing Truth book next week. Song 55.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 8
15 min: Song 92. Introduction and day’s text. Comment on congregation field report for January and Branch Letter.
15 min: Have You Called Back? Discuss use of House-to-House Record. Especially practical this winter. Want to make a return visit soon wherever booklets are placed. Every publisher should use Record or personal notebook, or calls will probably not be made. Value of making notes that will help you when you go back. Can use more than one line on House-to-House Record for each person. When making notations after first call ask yourself which subject would interest person most; write that down so you will not forget. Some publishers have noted that person was ill or had a problem, and then on follow-up call they opened up with query as to health, etc. This personal interest makes good impression and builds up friendly relationship. Good to be friendly and conversational when visiting again. Ask audience how many have gone back where booklets were placed, also what points they found effective in their territory. How did they prepare before going? Better to have something definite to say, not just, “Did you read the booklet?” or, “How did you like it?”
Have brief refresher demonstration on starting a study with one of the booklets. Chairman follows with invitation to those who have not started study or have problem with this to speak with him or Bible study overseer following meeting for suggestions on making arrangements to go with someone to gain experience. Encourage all to carry House-to-House Record and use it regularly.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News—Another Way.” Discuss article and follow with demonstration showing publishers selecting key texts from chapter of Truth book and noting them on slip of paper to put in Bible. Two publishers should talk to each other, selecting key texts, so audience can follow along in book and see why they chose those texts for making presentation. Then follow up with demonstration of two going to a home and using it to consider theme. Chairman encourages all to try selecting texts on a chapter theme during coming week and then to try to speak to someone on subject.
12 min: Concluding Comments. Mention advisability of carrying additional publications when doing magazine work. If working with car, good to have extra copy of Bible and a few books in car in case interested person requests them. Mention which issue of Watchtower to be used next week in meeting. Song 25.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 15
Communicate Through Effective Conversation
15 min: Song 11. Introduction. Show need to communicate with others through effective conversation. Use first two paragraphs of “Keep Speaking the Word.” In Bible times conversation, talking to people, was chief means of spreading good news. Marketplaces were often used as places to exchange information and news through conversation. (Acts 17:16, 17) Jesus and early Christians also conversed with people in their homes in order to spread good news.—Luke 19:5, 6; Acts 20:20, 27; Matt. 10:11, 12.
20 min: “Keep Speaking the Word.” Start with paragraph 3. Questions and answers. Ask brothers who have had success locally what questions or points they use to arouse interest and to get conversation going, reasoning with the people.
Demonstration: Publisher presents magazines, but with no theme or attempt at conversation. Householder refuses. How could he improve? Chairman highlights need to get conversation going, get householder involved. Follow up with another demonstration showing publisher starting conversation with person who refused literature; sees what is on mind of householder, then leaves person with good things to think about.
Chairman concludes, encouraging all to make effort to open conversation about Bible truth with someone sometime during every day and build up ability to express self on truth. Also, if persons have literature already, it may be practical to offer to consider what they have or even to start a study by making conversation.
15 min: Review latest Watchtower magazine. Often been encouraged to know what is in the magazines, read them first. Then have good points to use in conversing at doors. Read an article and talk about it with someone at home or a brother or even a stranger. Do you have main points still in mind after reading? Can you tell someone what you read? If necessary, you could even put magazine down and talk to self about article in practice session. Chairman should have some publishers well prepared to comment on articles they have read (without magazine or notes in hand), but let all audience share in program at this point. In articles highlight main points needed to carry on coherent conversation on subject. Encourage all publishers to try to do this with an article in next magazine they receive in mail, and after practicing use information in field service.
10 min: Concluding Comments. Include accounts report. Remind brothers to prepare for next week’s consideration of February 15 Watchtower, bringing copy next week. Song 27.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 22
10 min: Song 23. Introduction. Comments on Theocratic News, appropriate Announcements and Question Box.
30 min: “God Wants People to Live.” Article from February 15 Watchtower. Make up questions for each paragraph. Appropriate texts can be looked up in Bibles and some paragraphs in magazine read in summary. After finishing article ask for expressions from audience on what this material means to them personally or how it helped them.
10 min: Our Field Service. Experiences on subscription campaign to date, as well as starting studies in the booklets. Comments may be made on contents of latest magazines for use in field.
10 min: Concluding Comments. Hearing from any who might have expression on success in using suggestions to start conversations with people during last week. Song 64.

