Love for Jehovah Stimulates True Worship
“This is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments.”​—1 JOHN 5:3.
 1, 2. With what motive should we serve Jehovah?
A GROUP of 80 visitors from Japan were touring an Assembly Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses in California, U.S.A. Delightful surroundings, including a garden complete with blue jays, doves, and hummingbirds, made them feel even closer to their Grand Creator, Jehovah God. Their tour guide soon realized that almost everyone in the group was serving full-time as a pioneer. So, later, the group was asked a question that has often been posed: “Why are there so many pioneers in Japan?” For a moment there was silence. Then one young woman volunteered a response: “Because we love Jehovah.”
2 Love for Jehovah​—how this impels us to be zealous in his service! True, not everyone can pioneer. Indeed, the majority of our more than four million Kingdom publishers have not been able to make room for this privilege. But many whose circumstances permit reach out for it. The rest of us can also “trust in Jehovah and do good,” showing our love by having some part in the disciple-making work. (Psalm 37:3, 4) And all dedicated worshipers of Jehovah can share in fostering the pioneer spirit, giving loving support to those who are pioneering.​—Matthew 24:14; 28:19.
 3. What contrast is to be noted between most professing Christians and Jehovah’s Witnesses?
3 In contrast with most professing Christians, who conveniently regard religion as a mere appendage to their lives, Jehovah’s Witnesses demonstrate an intense love for God that motivates them to keep on “seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness.” This has called for sacrifice, but how worthwhile that sacrifice has been! (Matthew 6:33; 16:24) It has been in line with the first great commandment, stated initially by Moses and repeated by Jesus Christ: “Jehovah our God is one Jehovah, and you must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.”​—Mark 12:29, 30; Deuteronomy 6:4, 5.
 4, 5. Who are to be regarded as faithful, and how may faithfulness be shown?
4 One of the headquarters staff of Jehovah’s Witnesses remarked recently to F. W. Franz, the 98-year-old president of the Watch Tower Society who has spent more than 70 years in full-time service: “You have been a fine example of faithfulness, Brother Franz.” And Brother Franz replied: “Yes! You have to be faithful.” That sums up the matter. In whatever aspect of Kingdom activity we serve, we can be faithful.​—1 Corinthians 4:2; Galatians 3:9.
5 True, many would like to do much more in Jehovah’s service, but Scriptural responsibilities or health problems may limit them somewhat. Those who are unable to pioneer, however, are not to be regarded as less faithful. Some have stayed loyal under the most trying conditions and often for a great many years. Yes, they have been faithful! They have shown love for Jehovah and served diligently in wholehearted support of his theocratic arrangements. They have taken a keen interest in the pioneers’ activity and have given encouragement to potential pioneers, often their own children, to work toward pioneering as a career in life that excels all others.​—Compare Deuteronomy 30:19, 20.
 6, 7. How does the precedent set out at 1 Samuel 30:16-25 apply today?
6 The loving unity of action of all of God’s people today may be illustrated by the account at 1 Samuel 30:16-25. In battle against the Amalekites, “David went striking them down from the morning darkness until the evening” and took much spoil. Upon returning to camp, some of David’s fighting men asked that none of the spoil be given to those who had not advanced with them into the heat of battle. But David answered: “Who will listen to you as to this saying? For as the share of the one that went down into the battle even so will the share of the one that sat by the baggage be. All will have a share together.”
7 The same principle applies today. Pioneers are out in the forefront of our spiritual warfare. But all others in the congregation give wholehearted, loyal support. And the grand result of their combined activity during 1991 is portrayed in the chart that now follows.
An Outstanding Report
 8. (a) What does the worldwide report reveal as to total publishers and the hours they spent in Jehovah’s service? (b) What points of interest do you note for countries newly appearing in the report?
8 Yes, the preceding four pages of this magazine show how the united efforts of all of Jehovah’s zealous worshipers have contributed to a thrilling worldwide expansion during 1991. A splendid new peak of 4,278,820 Kingdom publishers is recorded​—a 6.5-percent increase. These devoted 951,870,021 hours (almost one billion!) to the service. And note the sterling effort put forth by our brothers in countries newly appearing in the worldwide report​—Bulgaria, Cameroon, Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Rwanda, and U.S.S.R.
 9, 10. (a) How have the pioneers responded to the challenge of hard times? (b) What encouragement is provided for entering the pioneer service?
9 In recent years the pioneer spirit has spread throughout the world. Even in lands where freedom of worship has been granted only recently, the pioneer ranks are swelling. Harsh economic conditions are not deterring these stalwart Witnesses from devoting their all to the worship of Jehovah. (Compare 2 Corinthians 11:23, 27.) On a monthly average, 14 percent of all Kingdom publishers have been pioneering. The peak number of pioneers is 780,202, which is an excellent 18 percent of all publishers.
10 On observing the joys experienced by the pioneers, others too are encouraged to take up this service. If you are not yet pioneering, could your love for Jehovah spur you on to say, as we read at Isaiah 6:8, “Here I am! Send me”? Or through your diligent Bible study, might God’s Word ignite a burning desire in your heart, so that you just have to take the further step of entering pioneer service? Even in a time of trial, the word of Jehovah stimulated Jeremiah, so that he could not hold back.​—Jeremiah 20:9.
Loving Service to Mankind
11. How has the home Bible study activity prospered?
11 One of the outstanding features of the year’s report is the growth in the number of free home Bible studies, 3,947,261, being conducted regularly each month worldwide. This is a loving arrangement whereby Jehovah’s Witnesses follow up the interest that they locate in their house-to-house work. We are happy to conduct Bible studies with people of all nationalities and racial backgrounds, working with the same earnestness that the apostle Paul showed. His ‘thoroughly bearing witness both to Jews and to Greeks’ no doubt called for many hours of teaching the truth. (Acts 20:20, 21) It is the same today. Jehovah’s Witnesses are helping “all sorts of men [to] be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”​—1 Timothy 2:4.
12-14. What joyful reports are coming out of Europe?
12 How exciting the reports of increased Bible study activity in Eastern Europe! For decades our brothers there had to meet in small groups, with perhaps just one well-worn, mimeographed copy of an old Watchtower for all in the group. But now an abundance of Bibles and Bible literature is flooding into those lands. It reminds one of Song of Solomon 2:4, King James Version: “He [Christ Jesus] brought me to the [spiritual] banqueting house, and his banner over me was love.” Having their personal copies of the magazines, many are becoming well equipped to handle “the word of the truth aright.”​—2 Timothy 2:15.
13 A congregation of 103 publishers in St. Petersburg, Russia, recently reported over 300 home Bible studies. As fruitage of this Bible study effort, 53 new Witnesses were baptized in just eight months. More than half the congregation have been in the truth eight months or less! And they have no elders​—just one ministerial servant to care for their spiritual advancement.
14 A Kingdom publisher in Estonia was asked by a Bible student whether she might invite some of her friends to the study. When the Witness arrived at the home the following week, she found over 50 persons assembled! Of course, special arrangements were needed for continued care of all that interest.
15. What is to be said about Memorial attendance and baptisms?
15 Many who are studying get their first taste of Christian fellowship by attending the Memorial of Jesus’ death. This past year, attendance exceeded 10,000,000 for the first time, 10,650,158 assembling worldwide in 66,207 congregations for this joyful occasion. In numerous Latin-American, African, and Eastern European countries, there were attendances three or four times the number of Kingdom publishers. Now we must start preparing for the Memorial to be held this year on Friday, April 17. It is hoped that a large number of new Bible students who attend the Memorial will continue to make progress toward baptism. As for baptisms, in 1991 we again saw more than 300,000 symbolizing their dedication to Jehovah God by water immersion.
Lovers of Godly Freedom
16. What thrilling reports are coming from the “Lovers of Freedom” District Conventions?
16 A noteworthy feature of the 1991 service year has been the series of “Lovers of Freedom” District Conventions, now completed in the Northern Hemisphere but continuing into 1992 in the Southern Hemisphere. For the first time, the complete convention program was presented in a number of Eastern European countries, where our brothers are rejoicing to use their newfound freedoms to Jehovah’s praise. In October 1991 the total attendance reported at the first 705 conventions in 54 countries was 4,774,937.
17, 18. (a) What freedoms do Jehovah’s worshipers enjoy and anticipate? (b) How does godly freedom differ from worldly freedoms?
17 Jesus told his disciples: “The truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) Today, Bible truth has set millions free from the dogmas of Christendom. These millions have learned that Jehovah’s provision of Jesus’ ransom sacrifice will make it possible for mankind to “be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God.” (Romans 8:19-22) What grand freedom that will be​—living forever in a paradise earth within the proper bounds that Jehovah lovingly determines!​—Isaiah 25:6-8; compare Acts 17:24-26.
18 The freedoms that Jehovah’s Witnesses now enjoy, and expect to enjoy more abundantly in God’s new system of things, are from our God, Jehovah. (2 Corinthians 3:17) They are not dependent on any political or revolutionary movement. (James 1:17) To guard against any misunderstanding on this point, 1991 convention badges worn by Jehovah’s Witnesses in some Eastern European lands bore the wording “Lovers of Godly Freedom” rather than simply “Lovers of Freedom.”
Intense Love for Jehovah
19. How can prayerful intimacy with Jehovah sustain us?
19 Our love for Jehovah and our trust in him will cause us to stay close to him in prayer. It is this intimacy with Jehovah that has helped our brothers to endure many hardships and persecutions. (Psalm 25:14, 15) In his hour of greatest trial, Jesus maintained intimacy with his Father through prayer. (Luke 22:39-46) Such prayerful intimacy with Jehovah sustained Stephen through the agony of his martyrdom. Gazing into heaven as he was about to be stoned to death, he said: “Look! I behold the heavens opened up and the Son of man [Jesus] standing at God’s right hand.”​—Acts 7:56.
20-22. How does an experience illustrate that God hears prayers?
20 As Jehovah’s worshipers have so often experienced, Jehovah answers prayers that are in harmony with his will. For example, in an African country where the work of the Witnesses is banned, a special pioneer traveling to the north by bus had a large  sack of Kingdom literature and envelopes to deliver. The attendant who was loading the bus asked the brother: “What does the sack contain?” The brother said the first thing that came to mind: “Mail.”
21 En route, the bus sped through a routine road checkpoint, and the traffic police gave chase and stopped it, suspecting that it carried contraband. They ordered that all passengers get off the bus and that all luggage be inspected. This was a crisis! The brother walked a short distance away from the murmuring crowd and, sinking to his knees, prayed to Jehovah. When he rejoined the crowd, each traveler’s luggage was being opened and examined with meticulous care. When the brother’s sack was to be opened, he silently called upon Jehovah for help.
22 “Whose sack is this, and what does it contain?” the policeman yelled. Before the brother could open his mouth, the bus attendant answered and said: “It is mail from ​——​——​ post office to ​——​——​ post office.” “Very well,” the officer said. He picked up the sack and handed it to the attendant. “Make sure you keep it in a very safe place for the journey,” he charged him. The special pioneer again fell on his knees to thank the Hearer of prayer.​—Psalm 65:2; Proverbs 15:29.
23. What has Jehovah demonstrated, and yet why does he at times let persecution run its course?
23 This does not mean, however, that Jehovah’s worshipers are entirely free from calamitous happenings. In certain situations, both in Bible times and today, Jehovah has demonstrated that he can deliver his people. But in line with settling the issue of integrity, he at times appears to let persecution run its full course. (Compare Matthew 26:39.) Further, Jehovah does not automatically protect his people from accidents, civil strife, or crime, though the exercise of Bible-based practical wisdom can be of value. (Proverbs 22:3; Ecclesiastes 9:11) We can be confident, though, that whether we are delivered from trying situations or not, our faithfulness will be rewarded, even by a resurrection if necessary.​—Matthew 10:21, 22; 24:13.
24. What loving gifts has Jehovah provided, and how may we respond to his love?
24 How marvelous are Jehovah’s loving gifts! His gift to mankind of this earth and everything on it is an outstanding expression of his love. (Psalm 104:1, 13-16; 115:16) And God’s compassionate gift of his Son, Jesus Christ, to ransom mankind from sin and death is the most loving gift ever made. “By this the love of God was made manifest in our case, because God sent forth his only-begotten Son into the world that we might gain life through him. The love is in this respect, not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent forth his Son as a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins.” (1 John 4:9, 10) In response to that love, may we be convinced “that neither death nor life nor angels nor governments nor things now here nor things to come nor powers nor height nor depth nor any other creation will be able to separate us from God’s love that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”​—Romans 8:38, 39.
Reviewing This Article
□ What does it mean to be faithful?
□ In what spheres of activity may we display love for Jehovah?
□ What features of the service-year report interested you most?
□ How may we show appreciation for Jehovah’s loving gifts?
[Box on page 15]
WHY SO MANY PIONEERS?
  Reportedly, for 2,600 years the Japanese were fervent worshipers of their emperors. In the wars of this 20th century alone, more than three million Japanese fighting men sacrificed their lives, for they thought there was no greater honor than to die for their emperor-god. But Buddhist-Shinto militarism failed in World War II, and thereafter the emperor renounced his godship. What could fill this religious vacuum? Happily, home Bible studies conducted by missionaries of Jehovah’s Witnesses and later by native Witnesses helped many to find the true God, Jehovah, and to dedicate their lives to him. This dedication means much to those Japanese Witnesses. If in former times they would have sacrificed their lives for an emperor-god, with how much greater zeal they now devote their energies as pioneers in worshiping the living God and Creator of the universe​—the Sovereign Lord Jehovah!
[Chart on page 10-13]
1991 SERVICE YEAR REPORT OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES WORLDWIDE
(See bound volume)
[Picture on page 16]
Lovers of godly freedom​—Jehovah’s worshipers in convention in Prague, August 9-11, 1991

