Do You Respect Your Place of Worship?
“From the very infancy of the gospel, the Christians always had their settled and determinate place of divine worship.” ​—“Primitive Christianity,” by William Cave.
GOD’S people have always taken pleasure in gathering together for worship. This was as true in the first century as it is now. Early authors and theologians, such as Lucian, Clement, Justin Martyr, and Tertullian, all agree that Christians had specific places where they gathered to worship together on a regular basis.
The Bible establishes the same point, making numerous references to regular meetings held by groups of Christians. These groups were known as congregations. This was appropriate because the word “congregation” in the original languages of the Bible denotes a group of people gathered together for a particular purpose or activity.
Early Places of Christian Worship
What did the first-century Christians do when they gathered together? The Bible describes a number of such meetings and shows that teaching was an important feature. (Acts 2:42; 11:26; 1 Corinthians 14:19, 26) Educational programs were arranged, with discourses, the relating of encouraging experiences, and the careful consideration of letters received from the governing body in Jerusalem or from an apostle.
At Acts 15:22-35, we read that after one such letter to a group of Christians in Antioch was read, Judas and Silas “encouraged the brothers with many a discourse and strengthened them.” Another account states that when Paul and Barnabas arrived at Antioch “and had gathered the congregation together, they proceeded to relate the many things God had done by means of them.” Praying to Jehovah was also an important feature of Christian meetings.​—Acts 14:27.
The places where first-century congregations gathered for worship were not elaborate structures like many of Christendom’s churches today. For the most part, early Christians met in private homes. (Romans 16:5; 1 Corinthians 16:19; Colossians 4:15; Philemon 2) Often the roof chamber or the upper room of a private home was used. It was in an upper room that the Lord’s Evening Meal was held. It was also in an upper room that the 120 disciples were anointed with holy spirit at Pentecost.​—Luke 22:11, 12, 19, 20; Acts 1:13, 14; 2:1-4; 20:7, 9.
Today Jehovah’s Witnesses follow the pattern established by the apostles. They use meeting places known as Kingdom Halls. There they are trained as preachers of the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 24:14) At the Kingdom Hall, they also study the Scriptures, pray, and encourage one another. This is in harmony with the Bible admonition at Hebrews 10:24, 25: “Let us consider one another to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.”
Using Our Place of Worship Properly
Do you recall the words of the apostle Paul: “God is a God, not of disorder, but of peace” and, “Let all things take place decently and by arrangement”? If you examine the context of these words, you will discover that Paul was discussing the manner in which Christian meetings ought to be conducted. As in the apostolic era, Christians today make sure that their meetings are orderly and well organized.​—1 Corinthians 14:26-40.
The October 15, 1969, issue of The Watchtower stated: “The spiritual atmosphere at the Kingdom Hall is genuine, springing from a real interest in true worship and Biblical instruction. And the light, natural surroundings in the hall encourage those present to be outgoing and friendly, not inhibited by a mysterious imposed solemnity.” Of course, care is also exercised so that use of the Kingdom Hall always reflects respect and dignity.
Christendom has manifested gross lack of respect in this area. Some religious organizations use their places of worship as community centers for entertainment. They have live concerts of religious rock music, rooms for weight lifting, billiard tables, nurseries, and in-house cinemas. One church had a wrestling match as part of their program. This would hardly harmonize with the pattern set by the apostles.
If any first-century congregation acted improperly, correction was in order. For example, some in the Christian congregation in Corinth were using the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal as an occasion for eating and drinking. They would bring their supper with them to eat before or during the meeting, some even overeating and overdrinking. This was truly out of place. The apostle Paul wrote to them: “Certainly you do have houses for eating and drinking, do you not?”​—1 Corinthians 11:20-29.
In harmony with Paul’s counsel, Jehovah’s Witnesses strive to care for personal matters at home or elsewhere rather than at the Kingdom Hall. Granted, our regular meetings provide a convenient opportunity to see a number of friends at one time. However, the Kingdom Hall is dedicated to Jehovah, so it is to be used exclusively for his worship. We do not take advantage of our attendance there to pursue secular business or to take care of personal financial transactions.
Furthermore, Kingdom Halls are not used by the congregation for recreational programs, fund-raising activities, or social services, such as child care. There are other places where one can care for such personal and business matters.
The elders in one Kingdom Hall noted that congregation members were making a practice of borrowing or returning borrowed items at meetings. Also, they were habitually exchanging videocassette movies at the Kingdom Hall. Although this activity was not commercial in nature, the elders helped them to see the wisdom of caring for these matters at home whenever possible.
To avoid situations that could give a wrong impression and to make sure that the Kingdom Hall is properly used, each one should ask himself: ‘Are there any personal matters that I have been caring for at the Kingdom Hall that can be cared for at home?’ For example, when organizing outings or other social gatherings, would it not be better to discuss such arrangements at home? Could we use the telephone or visit the homes of those we wish to contact? Borrowing Paul’s words, we could say: ‘Certainly we do have houses for the handling of such matters, do we not?’
An Appointed Time and Place to Worship Jehovah
The Bible states at Ecclesiastes 3:1: “For everything there is an appointed time, even a time for every affair under the heavens.” When attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall, we can fully immerse ourselves in activities that are related to the Christian ministry. It is an appointed time to worship Jehovah.
Jesus’ half brother James gave counsel against showing favoritism within the Christian congregation. (James 2:1-9) How can we apply this counsel in our Kingdom Halls? The appearance of favoritism could be given when the conspicuous passing of written invitations for social events is done there. In one congregation the custom was to place such invitations in the book bags or Bibles of those present. Granted, this is more convenient than sending the invitations by mail or delivering them at each home. However, how do those who do not receive an invitation feel after observing that invitations are being passed out to other individuals? Could this give the appearance of favoritism?
Of course, there need not be a strict rule that says no one can hand another a personal message or package while at the Kingdom Hall; nor is it wrong to talk in the Kingdom Hall about daily activities or events, to invite someone to your home, or to ask someone to join you in some recreation. But these should be incidental and done in a discreet and unobtrusive manner. Personal arrangements should never distract from the real purpose of our being together at the Kingdom Hall, namely, to be edified spiritually.​—Matthew 6:33; Philippians 1:10.
Men Who Set the Example
Elders and ministerial servants zealously set the example in showing respect for the Kingdom Hall. Generally there are one or two elders and ministerial servants assigned to coordinate matters pertaining to the upkeep of the Kingdom Hall. Where more than one congregation uses the same hall, a committee of elders oversees these matters.
While certain ones are specifically assigned to look after such duties, all ministerial servants and elders should display a genuine interest in the hall. They recognize that the Kingdom Hall has been dedicated to Jehovah and is used for his worship.
Elders should not procrastinate when there is a need for repairs. (2 Chronicles 24:5, 13; 29:3; 34:8; Nehemiah 10:39; 13:11) In some congregations regular inspections of the Kingdom Hall are made in order to care promptly for any necessary repairs. Inventories are kept to make sure that necessary supplies are on hand and accessible. If there is a designated area for storing supplies, tools, and cleaning equipment, all elders and ministerial servants should display an interest in its condition, making sure that it is kept neat. Those who work at the literature and magazine counters can show their interest by promptly seeing that empty cartons do not litter the hall.
By setting an example, elders and ministerial servants can help the rest of the congregation to manifest zeal for the Kingdom Hall. (Hebrews 13:7) All can show proper respect by having a part in the cleaning of the hall and by showing genuine interest in its overall appearance.
Jesus said at Matthew 18:20: “Where there are two or three gathered together in my name, there I am in their midst.” Yes, Jesus is interested in what we do when we gather together to worship Jehovah. This includes any meetings held at private homes and large meetings such as conventions or assemblies.
For millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses, there is no place closer to their heart than their regular place of worship, the Kingdom Hall. They show proper respect for that place. They manifest an industrious spirit in caring for it, and they strive always to use it properly. May you too follow the admonition that Jehovah himself gives: “Guard your feet whenever you go to the house of the true God.”​—Ecclesiastes 5:1.

