Questions From Readers
Since Christians do not wager money, may they accept tickets or participate in drawings in which they may win prizes?
This is a question that has arisen from time to time, so it has already been addressed in our publications. In some languages, we have made available indexes of our literature, such as the Watch Tower Publications Index 1930-1985 (and a similar one covering 1986-1990). If a Christian has such indexes in his language, these can prove very useful in locating satisfying answers quickly.
The question asked above is an example. Looking in the Index for 1930-1985 under the heading “Questions From Readers,” one finds the subheading “‘drawings,’ may Christian accept ticket for?” The reader is referred to the section “Questions From Readers” in The Watchtower of February 15, 1973, page 127.a Many Witnesses have the bound volume (or individual issues) of The Watchtower for 1973, or it may be consulted in the library of many Kingdom Halls.
The discussion published in 1973 pointed out that Christians rightly avoid any sweepstakes or drawings that involve buying chances (such as raffle tickets) or putting up money for a chance to win some prize. Simply put, we avoid gambling, which certainly is an expression of greediness.​—1 Corinthians 5:11; 6:10; Ephesians 4:19; 5:3, 5.
A store or a business, though, may use drawings as a means of advertising. All a person has to do is submit his name or send in a form or a ticket, without buying anything. The drawing is part of the advertising scheme; it is designed to be an impartial method of deciding who will be given the prize or prizes. Certain Christians might feel that they could accept the prize in a drawing that did not involve gambling, just as they could accept free samples or other presents that a business or a store might use in its advertising program.
However, some Christians would shun anything of this sort, not wanting to stumble or confuse others and also seeking to keep far from any enticement to trust so-called Lady Luck. As Isaiah 65:11 shows, God’s servants do not link themselves with “the god of Good Luck” or “the god of Destiny.” They may also feel that they would not want to be part of any publicity that winners might be required to share in. Those who feel this way should certainly not be critical of a Christian or Christians whose conscience allows them to be involved in such drawings.​—Compare Romans 14:1-4.
[Footnotes]
The same material is indexed under the headings “Advertising,” “Business,” and “Gambling,” so the versatility of the Index helps one to locate the information.

