Scenes From the Promised Land
Gerasa​—Where Jew and Greek Met
THE apostle Paul wrote that among Abraham’s true seed, “there is neither Jew nor Greek.” (Galatians 3:26-29) Yes, national background or culture did not matter as far as God’s acceptance was concerned.
Those words might seem fitting for Christians spread around a Roman province, such as in the province of Galatia, where there was a mix of Jews, Greeks, Romans, and local peoples. But what about parts of Israel itself, such as Gilead?
That region is east of the Jordan, between the Salt (Dead) Sea and the Sea of Galilee. About midpoint in this fertile plateau, the Jabbok River descends to the Jordan. The photograph above shows some of the impressive ruins of Gerasa, now called Jerash, which lay near the upper Jabbok.
An ancient north-south trade route called “the king’s road” crossed Gilead. Upon leaving Haran, Jacob and his family evidently traveled down this road to the Jabbok. He wrestled with an angel and encountered Esau near where Gerasa would be built. (Genesis 31:17-25, 45-47; 32:22-30; 33:1-17) At a later time, Israelites moved from the south up the king’s road when heading toward the Promised Land. Two and a half tribes settled north and south of the Jabbok along the trade road.​—Numbers 20:17; Deuteronomy 2:26, 27.
Did Greeks become involved in this area, and if so, how? Yes, they did when Alexander the Great conquered the region. According to tradition, he founded Gerasa for veterans of his army. Gradually, Greek influence became well established. Ten of the colony-cities east of the Jordan and the Sea of Galilee formed a confederation known as the Decapolis. You may have noted that name in the Bible, which reports that “great crowds followed [Jesus] from Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judea and from the other side of the Jordan.” Gerasa was one of the Decapolitan cities.​—Matthew 4:25.
‘It was part of the plan of Alexander to introduce the Greek people into all parts of the empire. Lower Syria [including the Decapolis], especially, as one of the strategic centres, received a large Hellenic population. To this day no part of the eastern world can show so many and such striking Greek ruins as the country east of the Jordan. The Greek cities displayed, superficially, a complete establishment of Greek institutions and customs​—magnificent temples to the Greek gods and goddesses, gymnasia, public baths, annual celebrations of games, and in many cases philosophical schools and academies.’​—Hellenism, by Norman Bentwich.
If you visit the ruins of Gerasa, you will find ample proof of that. Near the southern entrance, there is a circular forum, or public market, visible in the photograph. You likely will be amazed at the baths, temples, theaters, and public buildings, many of them connected by paved streets lined with columns. Outside the city, you can see milestones or markers along the ancient road that linked Gerasa to other Decapolitan cities and to Mediterranean ports.
Even after Rome took over Gerasa in 63 B.C.E., the Hellenistic flavor persisted. You can imagine how this flavor could influence Jews living in Gerasa and the region. The book Hellenism observes: “Gradually but surely the Jews began to assimilate the religious ideas of the people about them, and to look on the Scriptures under the influence of those ideas.”
While Jesus may not have preached in the city, he entered the district of Gerasa, which may have reached to the Sea of Galilee. He expelled demons from a man in that district, allowing them to enter swine. (Mark 5:1-17) Likely, his early disciples preached to Jews in the Decapolitan cities, and after 36 C.E., the good news could be shared with Greeks in Gerasa. Whether a person accepting Christianity had been a strict practicer of Judaism, a Hellenized Jew, or a Greek, he could be accepted by the true God as part of the spiritual seed of Abraham.
[Map on page 24]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Dion
Gerasa (Jarash)
Philadelphia (Rabbah)
King’s Road
Salt Sea
Jerusalem
Jordan
Jabbok
Pella
Scythopolis (Beth-shean)
Gadara
Sea of Galilee
[Credit Line]
Based on a map copyrighted by Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est. and Survey of Israel.
[Picture on page 24]
The photograph above is in large format in the 1992 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Credit Line]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.
[Picture Credit Line on page 25]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.

