Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Good News From Eastern Europe
MANY exciting things are happening in the theocratic field in Eastern Europe. Outstanding was the international convention in Zagreb, August 16-18, 1991, when 7,300 Witnesses gave a hearty welcome to their brothers from 15 nations. In all, 14,684 attended. It was a marvelous display of love and unity in a country shaken by unrest!
The Witnesses in Eastern Europe are busy telling others the good news of Jehovah’s Kingdom, which they realize is the only hope for real peace. In some parts it is a challenge for them to maintain their neutral stand. Nevertheless, people often listen, and the Witnesses report many fine experiences.
In one town a 16-year-old girl heard the good news from the only Witness of Jehovah in that town. A regular Bible study was started, and her appreciation for the truth grew. Having a great desire to tell others the wonderful things she had learned, she tried to speak with her schoolmates but met up with opposition and ridicule. One schoolmate especially opposed her but was surprised and impressed by her patience, for the young Bible student did not become angry in spite of all the insults. Later, a more thorough witness was given to this girl, and she realized that her attitude had been wrong. A Bible study was started with her, and then the original Bible student and her new companion tried to share their happiness with others, despite opposition from their parents, their teacher, and their schoolmates.
As a result of their witnessing, another schoolmate accepted the truth. Now there were three of them in the classroom, and all three were good examples of willingness to help others and of showing love among themselves. Then another girl joined them.
Now there were four on the bench in the school yard where they discussed the Bible together. And to the surprise of many, their number grew. Another girl from the class, enthused about their fine conduct, decided to join in the Bible study. The five of them continued to invite others, students and teachers, to do the same. Nevertheless, the girls continued to experience great pressure from their parents. The parents tried hard to force the girls to stop their Bible study by destroying their literature and by mistreating them.
What was the result of this witnessing that started with just one young interested person? One of the girls was baptized at the district convention in 1990, and the other four at a circuit assembly in the spring of 1991. This was a cause for great joy! Today, all five girls are serving as regular pioneers! In the town where this happened, there are now 11 publishers, 8 of them in the pioneer service.
Jehovah is sustaining and blessing his Witnesses in Eastern Europe. There is clearly great potential for increase among the honesthearted ones in this part of the world.

