R889 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER, 1886. 

NO. 2. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 
BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 40 Federal Street, Allegheny, Pa. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS: --Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat~yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it-- "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 



satisfieth not? Hearken diligently~and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness."-- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



R896 : page 1 

THE LAST NUMBER-FOR SOME. 

DEAR READERS :~You all know that we do not follow the 
common custom of "begging," "coaxing," "dunning," etc. Your 
experience in receiving extra papers, tracts, etc., free, teaches 
you too that the TOWER is not published for worldly gain. And 
yet you all know that money is needful to carry on the work. We 
make these statements as a preface to the announcement that we 
are about to STRIKE FROM OUR LISTS the names of a large 
number, from whom we have not heard for more than a year. 
This course is a necessity because some remove without 
notifying us, some die, some lose interest, etc. Some stricken off 
may have deep interest, hence we now say to all who have not 
subscribed during 1886, nor asked to be put upon the "poor list" 
for 1886, to write at once. Do not trust to me, and think that the 
editor knows you want it, etc.; for I have not the time to devote 
to revising the lists myself, and must entrust it to office help who 
go only by the marks on the subscription books. 

Understand clearly, dear friends, this does not relate to those 
who send their subscriptions at the first of the year; such are not 
in arrears and should not send now, but at the usual time. Nor is 
it intended to cut off from our list a single one of the Lord's 
children who worthily receive the TOWER FREE, because too 
poor to pay for it. It will appear strange to some that any cannot 
by care and self-denial spare fifty cents a year, one cent a week; 
and yet we have very many on the free list as "The Lord's Poor," 
who we believe cannot pay. Some of them are invalids, some 
aged and dependent upon children or friends opposed to the 
"good tidings of great joy." We want all such to remember that 
they are as welcome to the TOWER as to the air they breathe. 
But they must write at least a card, once a year, stating their 
interest and desires and their inability to pay. See the "Terms" 
above. 



R889 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

As a striking indication of progress in religious thought, notice 
the fact that the influential class of religious people known as 
Congregationalists is about to split upon the question, Is there, or 
is there not, probation after death? The question has been under 
discussion at two general meetings recently, and is thus stated by 
the Pittsburgh Dispatch: 



IS THERE MERCY FOR MAN AFTER DEATH? 

Des Moines, la., Oct. 3. --Members of the American Board of 
Foreign Missions are arriving here for their annual convention, 
which begins to-morrow. There is going to be a great 
controversy, the preparations for which have agitated 
Congregationalism during the past three months. The question at 
issue is whether or not sinners are irrevocably condemned at 
death to eternal punishment, or are subject to a period of 
probation and possible salvation beyond the grave. This issue is 
known to theologians as the Andover question. It is raised in the 
present instance by the Missionary Board's rejection of those 
candidates for mission work who cannot declare an utter unbelief 
in the possibility of repentance after death. So heated has the 
feeling become that several churches, to resent the repulse of 
men put forward by them for foreign missionary service, have 
declined to take up the usual mission collections until after the 
Des Moines meeting. Further importance attaches to this 
convention because the National Council of Congregational 
Churches will meet in Chicago on the week following, and the 
result at Des Moines will be looked for anxiously as in a great 
measure a test of the strength of the two parties to the dispute. In 
a general way the issue may be stated as drawn between old- 
school believers in endless damnation and those who have been 
affected by the tendency of the times toward a liberal 
interpretation of the Scriptures. The National Council will 
probably have to amend the creed or reaffirm the one now in use, 
for the trouble in the American Board of Foreign Missions seems 
to hang upon a doubt as to the true and only genuine doctrine of 
Congregationalism. The matter has been the subject of clerical 
discussion for years, and the way the Board of Missions became 
involved may be told briefly. 

In 1880 the National Council met at St. Louis. The debates on 
the doctrine of punishment and probation had become so hot, 
that many of the more conservative members feared that the 
foundations of the Church were being undermined. As a 
preventive to such a calamity they prevailed upon the Council to 
consent to a revision of the creed. They wanted the questions at 
issue so definitely settled and expressed in words used according 
to their modern meaning, that there could no longer be a doubt as 
to what was the true belief of Congregationalists. So, by a 
complicated process, a committee of twenty-five was chosen to 
take charge, with final power, not even the National Council 
having the right to revise, inspect or amend the report. After 
three years this committee completed its task and reported the 
creed directly to the churches through the press. Two members 
of the committee withheld their names from the document 
because they felt that certain articles bearing upon probation, 
which they had submitted, should have been incorporated in the 
creed. As a rule the creed met with glad acceptance, not the less 
joyful, perhaps, because it was silent on the points that had 



raised all the hue that had led to the revision. The theory upon 
which these points were omitted from the new creed was that the 
Scriptures were not so explicit upon them as to warrant 
dogmatizing one way or another. The revision of the creed failed 
to act as its advocates had hoped, for it not only did not check 
the discussion of doctrines of probation and punishment, but 
soon a new cause of discord was thrown into the camp through 
the Mission Board. 

The present difficulty grows out of the fact that Dr. Alden, of the 
Mission Board, who is a firm believer that there is no probation 
after death, refused to send to the mission field candidates for the 
mission work who believed the contrary. In this matter it is 
claimed that Dr. Alden has used his official position to impose 
on candidates articles of a creed that have been rejected, and that 
by doing this he has greatly hampered church work. This has 
called forth opinions pro and con in letters in church 
publications, and in some cases contributions have been 
withdrawn until the Board settles the matter. 

The same question is brewing in all denominations, and must 
sooner or later develop a split between those who can reason and 
those who will not think or cannot reason. The question strikes 
Congregationalism sooner than some other denominations, 
because it represents religious democracy, is less under clerical 
jurisdiction, and is largely composed of independent, intelligent, 
thinking people. 

The question at issue has for some time been stealing quietly, 
almost unperceived, upon thinking Christian people. The time 
was, when the doctrine of the eternal torture of all but the few 
saints was generally preached and generally accepted, one 
church edifice in this city gaining the distinguished title of 
"Brimstone Corner." But this is so no longer: "eternal torture" is 
seldom preached before a cultured audience now, for very 
shame. And though the people still subscribe to the doctrine in 
accepting the creed and joining any of the various Christian 
denominations, yet, thank God, they are coming to see better and 
accept those creeds with mental reservations. It is a pity and 
strange that they do not see this to be wrong-that they are acting 
a lie, when they outwardly profess a faith which they do not 
inwardly hold. 

No longer do our Presbyterian and Baptist friends preach about 
"infants in hell," nor confine all hope of salvation to "the elect 
children of believers" in their preaching, though the written 
creeds stand just as they were. The growing intelligence of the 
people cannot long be fettered by the creeds made a century or 
two ago by fallible men, who, however well meaning, were 
wrong in attempting to put "iron shoes" upon all the intellects of 
those coming after them. Unintentionally they were in this the 
tools of the Prince of darkness, opposing the unfolding of God's 



Word which as the shining light was to shine more and more 
until the perfect day. 

The nominal church, cold and selfish was spurred into charity in 
mission work by pity for the heathen millions, whose everlasting 
destiny they were led to believe depended upon their liberality 
and effort. Doubtless this false idea has prompted a larger work 
of "witnessing" to the cross in all the world, than would have 
been accomplished otherwise: and yet fewer missionaries 
inspired by the truth, and the love of it would doubtless have 
done more good and have thrown much more light upon the real 
value of the cross. 

Even heathen minds can see that there is something wrong with 
the doctrines of so called Orthodoxy; for missionaries declare 
that if they preach in full the creeds of the denominations they 
represent, they would make no converts. The heathen do not 
consider it "good news" nor will they accept, the teaching that a 
just God, worthy of their worship has sent all of their forefathers 
to eternal torment because they had not believed on Jesus, of 
whom they had never heard. 

The rupture between creeds and thinking people is coming surely 
and steadily, and at it all might well rejoice, were it not for one 
very sad feature connected with it. The unfavorable feature is 
this: Many have come to regard their creeds and especially the 
everlasting torment dogma and the limit of probation to the 
present life and age, as the teaching of the Bible; and hence in 
breaking from and discrediting their old creeds (not very old 
either,) they are at the same time leaving the Bible, the appointed 
"lamp," to follow their own imperfect reason; which though 
better than their old creed is useless on religious subjects if 
unguided by the Divine Revelation. 

Thus it is with our Congregational friends in the question above 
noticed, which instead of being called "Probation after death," 
should be called Probation in death; for the views above referred 
to are, that when a man is dead, in some place, they know not 
where, he has a further chance to come to a knowledge and 
obedience of the truth and to secure everlasting life. In this we 
see the bad result of such a tearing apart of reason and creeds 
and neglect of the sword of the spirit, the word of God, which 
could have cut the two apart perfectly. In tearing them apart 
some of the errors of the creed still adhere to their reasonings, 
and some truth adheres to the creed which they are casting away. 

In this case the creed claims that eternal torment is the penalty of 
sin. If so, reason says then Jesus Christ did not give a ransom (a 
corresponding price); for he did not suffer eternal torment. Thus 
the foundation of true faith is cast away, or rather in most cases 
they slip 

R889 : page 2 



their building off it, onto the sands of conjecture and human 
assumption. Next they reason, If eternal torment is the penalty, 
surely there must be a future hope despite our creed. So they 
reject the part of their creed which limits probation, but hold to 
that part of it which declares eternal torment to be the wages 

R890 : page 2 

of sin. In it all, the Scriptures are neglected, and not called upon 
as the final arbiter between old creeds and reason; hence though 
accepting of future probation they do not get it as the Bible 
teaches it, but oppositely. They expect or hope for a probation in 
death, while the Bible teaches that "in death there is no 
remembrance" of God (Psa. 6:5; 115:17; Eccl. 9:5) and points us 
to a resurrection of the dead as the great means to the end, for 
bringing all to a full knowledge of the truth, which God has 
declared to be his will. (1 Tim. 2:4.) In this we see the evil result 
of an endeavor to limit truth and knowledge by fixed creeds. It is 
subversive of truth, and misleading to all in any degree bound 
thus. 

Dear Brethren and Sisters, hold up the Royal banner upon which 
is inscribed "Restitution"~"Good Tidings of great joy which 
shall be unto all people" and hold up with it as a torch, in the 
light of which alone the inscription may be clearly read—the 
RANSOM. Tell it to all, "The man Christ Jesus, gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in DUE TIME."-1 Tim. 2:6. 



R890 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Philadelphia, Pa., Sep. 12, 1886. 

BELOVED BROTHER: I should feel ashamed to be always 
ready with an excuse from more active service to any of the 
household who may yet be without the truth with which we are 
so richly blessed. 

I seem to have become partially forgetful and drowsy 
(spiritually) lately, and for that reason my interest and 
appreciation became slightly dulled, and the enemy took 
advantage of it. 

I pray our dear Master to bring the whole truth home to my own 
heart, and inspire me with greater love for him and his words. 

One thing that withholds me from such outside work as visiting 
from house to house, open air preaching, etc., is the saying of our 
Head: "Give not holy things unto the dogs; neither cast ye your 
pearls before the swine, lest they trample upon them and turn 
again and rend you." In this connection I have just found in the 
gospel by Mark, 6:30,31, something which might apply to us at 
present. Is it a forced application? Have we all truth, or do we 



not need a little "leisure to eat" when He has girded himself and 
is serving us with meats in due season? 

A brother in Christ, R. W. H . 



We are glad to know that the brother's natural timidity has not 
full control of him. Mark 6:31 should be read in connection with 
verses 34 and 37. We think it had reference merely to needed 
physical rest from arduous and incessant TOIL AS 
PREACHERS, and that it was by no means an intimation that 
preaching was not proper, and not their special work. Jesus said, 
"I send you forth" and "as ye go preach"; and of the Christ head 
and body it was prophetically declared, "The spirit of the Lord 
God is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the good 
tidings to the meek." All the anointed body, following the 
example and footsteps of the Leader and Head, are preachers; 
they cannot help it; the good tidings are too precious to keep. 
Their anointing impels them to preach, so that to us, as to the 
earlier members of the anointed body it is, "Woe is me, if I 
preach not the good tidings." 

It would be a serious loss if the Lord would refuse to use us as 
his ambassadors and heralds~a loss of our chief joy and 
privilege in the present life. 

Yes surely, our Lord wishes us to "eat" while he serves us with 
the food; but, we should observe how the Lord serves. Is it not 
by using willing members of the body, that he serves the various 
members? It is to the very few indeed, that the Lord hands truths 
direct, and not through others. In fact we may say that it is only 
to those who are serving the others, that the Master directly 
hands the precious viands. 

"Cast not your pearls before swine," should not be used as the 
brother has applied it. Jesus did not class all Israelites as swine in 
his day; for he spent three years preaching to them the kingdom, 
etc., and sent forth twelve and then seventy other disciples also, 
to preach the same, saying, "The harvest is plenteous, but the 
laborers are few," "Go ye also into the vineyard," etc., etc. Jesus 
and the eighty-two ministers he sent forth, did not go forth 
casting pearls before swine. And so in this harvest: those who go 
forth to seek the wheat, to gather the elect from every part under 
heaven, should not thus apply it in their work. 

The meaning of the expression is in brief this: —There are "deep" 
as well as surface truths. The rich pearls and nuggets of truth are 
for those who will dig and search as men search (self -deny ingly 
and faithfully) for silver. Those who have received the truth 
know that they received the simpler features first, and thus they 
should try to give it out to others. Before showing the "deep 
things of God," our precious pearls of divine wisdom and grace, 
to those about us, we should make sure that they are such as 
would appreciate them. We should first present the simpler 
features of truth, and those requiring less faith and spiritual 



discernment. If they are not interested in these, then do not cast 
the (to you) yet more precious truths before them; for surely they 
would not appreciate them, but would think you foolish and 
injure your influence and the truths you advocate. 

God blesses the messengers of his glorious truth as they dispense 
it to others. He that watereth others is more abundantly watered 
himself than if he attempted to merely sponge, or absorb the 
truth. 

Was it not the most active apostle that had visions and 
revelations and knowledge more than all the others? Work in and 
for the truth, thus differs from working in and for sectarianism.— 
EDITOR. 



R890 : page 2 

BE NOT WISE ABOVE WHAT IS WRITTEN. 

Marshall County, Ala., July 30, 1886. 

ELDER C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR BRO.: Enclosed find money 
for which please send me by mail the "Millennial Dawn." 

From reading the "Food" about a year ago, I was led to see the 
truth on the "Plan of the Ages," and now I do not stop at your 
liberal salvation, but can see the salvation of "all" clearly taught 
in God's Word. And I'm trying to preach it with all the strength 
the Lord gives me. Yours in his love, 

J. B. SHERRELL. 

In reply:- 

Beware dear brother lest you fall into a common error of 
swinging from one extreme to another—from believing in the 
everlasting torture of nearly all, to believing in the everlasting 
salvation of all. 

You put quotation marks about the "all" to indicate that you refer 
to Scripture texts which mention the salvation of all, as the basis 
of your hopes. Let me remind you that in these columns, also in 
the pamphlet "Food" and in the "Millennial Dawn," which we 
have mailed to you, all the Scripture texts which refer to the 
salvation of all, are recognized and given weight and place 
harmonious with the remainder of the Bible—a thing which you 
cannot do, with your present views expressed above. 

We teach, as you know, a full and complete salvation for all 
mankind, from the guilt, condemnation and penalty of the first 
trial in Eden, and from all the contingent wrong doings and 
weaknesses, physical, moral and mental, which flow to us as the 
children of Adam and heirs of his weaknesses. This is the 
"common salvation" secured for every man by him who gave his 



life a ransom for all; and all must have the full benefit of that 
salvation "in due time"~in the next age, if not in this. 

Is this not a salvation of all from sin and death? Does not the 
Bible in all its passages which refer to salvation of "all" indicate 
that it is the salvation from Adamic death and condemnation? 
Does a single passage refer directly or indirectly to the 
everlasting salvation of any, who, when saved from the Adamic 
death and given the privilege of life again by the Redeemer and 
Restorer, shall then reject it and sin wilfully? In other words, Is 
there an everlasting salvation mentioned for that part of the "all" 
saved from the first condemnation in Eden, who after being tried 
in the second trial are found unworthy of life and worthy of the 
second death? (Matt. 25:41,46; Rev. 20:9,15; 21:27; 
22:14,15,19.) 

There is no intimation that God will ever compel any one to 
accept of the gift of life everlasting. It is quite sufficient that he 
provides through Christ an opportunity for every man to come to 
a knowledge of the truth, and to an ability to live in harmony 
with the Law of life. The matter is put as an invitation in the 
present age, "Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden 
and I will give you rest." So of the next age it is written, "The 
spirit and the bride say Come!... And whosoever WILL, let him 
take the water of life freely." 

The parable which speaks of compelling some to come in, refers 
to the present age, and not to the next. The Scribes and Pharisees 
were by their profession, education, etc., the ones originally 
invited to the Gospel feast, but they heeded not the 
announcement, "The 

R891 : page 2 

Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." The messenger then went into 
the streets and lanes and by-ways of that people [city] and 
selected a goodly number, but not sufficient to fill the number 
which God had designed should constitute the Temple class, in 
which the world at large should be blessed and have access to 
him. So then the call to this feast was sent out into the 
"highways" —outside the city [or Jewish people] to all nations 
and will gather enough to complete the designed number. It here 
reads "compel them to come in," but the translation would be 
better constrain as the Revised Version renders it. 

Let us beware how we permit reasoning to go beyond the facts 
set before us in the Scriptures. We might indeed reason, that 
when all come to a full knowledge of the truth, with full ability 
to obey and enjoy the favor of life everlasting, that they would 
be very foolish to do anything else. And yet we should take 
God's foreknowledge and its revelation as much superior to our 
reasoning as in other things we have proved it to be. He not only 
tells us of the grand provision of the future age, when whoever 
will may have life freely, but he tells us also that some will not 



accept life on the conditions he offers. God as clearly pictures to 
us the book of life wherein are written the names of those found 
worthy of life, as he on the contrary symbolizes the second death 
as a lake of fire, destroying those found unworthy in that trial. 

The fact that a being could have full knowledge and ability, and 
yet wilfully choose evil, presuming on the love of God to avert 
its consequences, is clearly proved by one case concerning which 
we have positive information. For over six thousand years Satan 
has had good and evil and their results before him, and yet he is 
an open and wilful adversary of righteousness. God who can 
read the future as we do the past, informs us that the further 
unfoldings of his plan in the Millennial age will make no 
different impression upon him, but that when loosed or permitted 
to manifest his will in the end of that age, Satan will rejoice in 
iniquity as before; and God calls all his children thus to witness 
to his righteousness in the destruction of Satan and all his 
messengers [co-workers in evil] in the second death. —Matt. 
25:41. 

Ask yourself, what object there could have been in the 
permission of evil in the world, or what object there could be in 
appointing a day [age] of resurrection from the great sentence, 
and penalty, or of the future trial,~if there will be no trial as to 
the willingness of the creature, but merely a trial of the ability of 
the Creator to force obedience. Surely the ability of the Creator 
is not in question that it need be tried, hence if trial there is to be, 
as the Scriptures assert, it must be man's willingness that is to be 
tested. 

Had God intended to force obedience and life upon man against 
his will, he might as well have done so at first, and avoided the 
first as well as the second trial, and the first as well as the second 
death. Nay, would it not have been better to have forced the 
obedience at first, than to have allowed all the anguish, pain and 
evil which have been, if God must in the end force every 
creature. But no, God seeketh such to worship him as worship 
him in spirit and in truth. He does not desire forced obedience 
and forced love. Those who need force after they have had full 
opportunity to know and do God's will, will only receive the 
force of destruction, being unworthy to enjoy the favor of their 
Creator. Liberty to choose, or free moral agency, is above all 
other characteristics the liberty and likeness of God in his 
creature. To destroy it would reduce man to a mere machine. 
God seeketh not such worship, and hence it is written: "The Lord 
preserveth all them that love him, but all the wicked will he 
destroy." (Psa. 145:20; 37:18-20.) 

The redemption and second trial are granted as a favor, to prove 
who are wilfully wicked. 

Re-examine, dear brother, and do not allow your fallible reason 
to lead you outside the Divine plan of the ages. Be guided by 



God's expressed plan. Reason finds full satisfaction in God's plan 
only. Those who claim a universal, everlasting salvation, are by 
the same line of false reasoning invariably led to deny the 
ransom. 



R896 : page 2 

THE DIVINE FASHIONER. 

The sculptor, with an ideal form in his thought, produces a 
statue from the block of marble. Every measurement of the 
block, every turn of the drill, every blow of the mallet upon the 
chisel, and every effort of the sculptor's mind, goes to make up 
the finished form, which is the production of his ideal, as nearly 
as the materials would admit. So, our Lord, as our Maker, has the 
idea toward which he seeks to form us. And all his operations are 
but steps in the work of our formation. Every measurement of 
our life by the divine truth, tests our capacity to attain the ideal; 
every turn of the drills of penetrating precepts of life, prepares us 
for the ideal character; every blow of the hammer of 
circumstances is, in the hands of the divine providence, 
constantly shaping us toward the heavenly pattern. And, in the 
perfect economy of our Lord, never do we have to bear one 
measurement, or one penetrating cut, or one blow of 
circumstances, that is not absolutely needed to produce the most 
perfect work which we will allow to be done within us.~Sel. 



R895 : page 3 

HOW WE LEARN. 



Great truths are dearly bought. The common truth, 
Such as men give and take from day to day, 
Comes in the common walk of easy life, 
Blown by the careless wind across our way. 

Great truths are greatly won; not found by chance, 
Nor wafted on the breath of summer dream; 
But grasped in the great struggle of the soul, 
Hard buffeting with adverse wind and stream. 

Sometimes, 'mid conflict, fear and grief, 
When the strong hand of God puts forth in might, 
Ploughs up the subsoil of the stagnant heart, 
It brings some buried truth-seeds to the light. 

Not in the general mart, 'mid corn and wine; 
Not in the merchandise of gold and gems; 



Not in the world's gay hall of midnight mirth, 
Nor 'mid the blaze of regal diadems. 

Not in the general clash of human creeds, 
Nor in the merchandise 'twixt church and world; 
Truth springs like harvest from the well plowed fields, 
Rewarding patient toil, and zeal, and faith. 



-Sel. 



R896 : page 3 

THE NEXT number of the TOWER will be a special one. Do 
not expect it before December. 

Of the present number we print an extra supply. Order as many 
as you please for those you think it would benefit, or send us 
their addresses plainly written. No charge. 



R891 : page 3 



THE SECOND DEATH. 



The term death signifies destruction, extinction. We see it about 
us on every hand and have the inspired record of its cause in the 
Apostle's words, "Sin entered into the world, and death by [as a 
result of] sin." Rom. 5:12. True the word death is sometimes 
used in a figurative sense, but behind all these is the actual death 
from which all figures are drawn; the death which "passed upon 
all men in that all are sinners." 

The term "second death" is specific and cannot refer to a 
figurative use of the word death. When anything is called a 
"second" it recognizes one, and only one preceding it, of the 
same kind. If the expression second death refers to a second 
figurative death, it would imply that there was but one figurative 
death before it. This we know would be nonsense; for any word 
can be used in a thousand figurative forms. It must therefore 
refer to actual death, not figurative. It recognizes but the one 
death preceding it, the first death. The penalty of failure under 
the second trial is thus brought strikingly in contrast with the 
penalty of failure under the first trial. 

The "second death" is specially mentioned in connection with the 
closing scenes of the Millennial Age; and if from that standpoint 
we look backward to see what death it relates to, or repeats as a 
second, none could reasonably stop with any of the figurative 
uses of the word death. All, we think, must see that it refers back 
to the calamity (death) which entered into the world and passed 
upon all men because of Adam's failure when on trial as our 
representative. 



Adamic death~the loss of existence and all right thereto~was the 
first penalty, the result of failure under the first trial of mankind 
for life. The second death is pointed out to us in Revelation as 
the second penalty, the result of failure during the second trial of 
the world, of a class not worthy of a place in the "book of life." 

None are prepared to understand the book of Revelations except 
those who understand clearly the general plan of God, the plan of 
the ages. Only these can see that God judged the world once 
representatively, and because of its failure condemned it; how 
then he redeemed or purchased mankind out of that 
condemnation and death, and made provision for a second trial 
for all, under the one who was his agent in their redemption. As 
it is written, "He hath appointed a day [period] in the which he 
will judge [give trial to] the world, in righteousness, by that man 
whom he hath afore ordained, Jesus Christ." If God has 
appointed such a day or time of trial, it must be another, a second 
trial, for Scripture assures us of the first (Acts 17:31; Rom. 
5:12,17-19), and the penalty of that failure we see all about us. 

Those who will have another trial must in some way get free 
from the condemnation or sentence of the first trial (death), else 
a second trial would be useless. God cannot admit that there was 
any injustice in that first trial, and cannot set aside his own 
sentence. If it was just and right, to set it aside would be unjust 
and wrong; and a new trial, while the sentence of the first trial is 
firm, uncancelled, would be only a mockery, for it could not 
reverse the first sentence of the righteous Judge. 

But God has made provision for the canceling of the sentence of 
death, (extinction,) which came upon all through Adam by 
providing a ransom for all, whereby all may have a second trial, 
in which the one who redeemed them will be the judge, ready 
and willing to grant every needed aid to those desirous of 
availing themselves of this second offer of life. While very few 
indeed come to this knowledge and second trial in the present 
time, all others shall be brought to it in the Millennial age, 
because such is God's plan, and full provision for it has been 
made both in the ransom for all, and in the appointment of a time 
or age for judging all. 

Every trial must reach a conclusion and have a sentence. The 
first trial in Eden, ended with a sentence, as we read, "Sentence 
came on all men to condemnation." (Rom. 5:18. Diaglott.) The 
second trial is to have a sentence also. The few who in the 
Gospel age come to a full knowledge of the truth are on their 
second trial. If they obey the truth they are counted worthy of 
life, and their names will be written in the book of life, and will 
be confessed before the Father and the holy messengers, while 
those who sin wilfully after they have come to a full knowledge 
of the truth, who despise the favor of the ransom after having 
been justified and sanctified (Heb. 6:4-6 and 10:26,30), are 
sentenced as unworthy of life; and this being their second trial, 



the sentence is to the "second death" as distinguishing it from the 
first sentence which came upon all men as the result of the first 
or representative trial. 

While during the Millennium when the world is getting its 
second trial, some of the conditions will be different from the 
present, yet the main conditions or tests of the trial will be the 
same as now. 

R892 : page 3 

That is to say, the world will then be on trial to prove who are 
worthy of life (the second life—restitution) and who worthy of 
death (the second death-final extinction). 

Life was the original gift of God to his creatures. 
Representatively he then tried them. In Adam's disobedience the 
first trial, the first or original gift of life was forfeited, lost, for 
all, and death (the first) came upon all. Through another 
representative all were redeemed from the first condemnation, 
the first death sentence, justified to life again-a second or 
restored life. A second trial is granted to every man to prove (this 
time individually and not representatively) which are worthy to 
retain God's gift (life) everlastingly, and who are unworthy of it. 
This is the second offer of this gift of life (second life). This time 
it is offered through Jesus Christ our Lord, who as the Father's 
faithful agent gave himself for our ransom: and those found 
unworthy of this second life, under this second trial are 
sentenced to death-the second death. 

The failure in the first trial was the result not of imperfection; for 
God created man "upright," "very good," "in the image of God," 
but it was the result of lack of experience, lack of knowledge. 
This lack of knowledge, God was ready and willing to supply the 
place of, for he proposed to give man the benefit of divine 
knowledge through laws and instruction. But as God had 
foreseen and saw good to permit, man chose to make an 
experience of his own by disobeying divine counsel. God has 
redeemed all from that first transgression and its condemnation 
and granted another, a second trial, knowing that some after their 
bitter experience in disobedience, will in the second trial choose 
life, by choosing to be obedient to all his just and loving 
arrangements and laws. 

The second trial is final. There is no hint of another redemption 
for any who in the second trial are found worthy of the second 
death, unworthy of the second or restored life. On the contrary 
we are assured that any who spurn this second offer of life need 
hope for no more favor; for "Christ dieth no more," death shall 
never again have dominion over him;-he is death-proof, 
immortal, now. A third trial is never suggested in Scripture; 
consequently there could not be a third death, and none is 
mentioned. Furthermore, none who have reasonable minds and 
comprehend the subject fully, could expect a third or more trials; 



because the second is arranged on so comprehensive a scale as to 
leave no use for more. The Millennial age will furnish full 
KNOWLEDGE and full ABILITY to all. "The earth shall be 
filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters 
cover the sea." (Hab. 2:14.) The weaknesses of heredity will no 
longer weigh men down; it will no longer be a true proverb, "the 
fathers ate a sour grape [of sin] and the children's teeth are set on 
edge. But then it shall be, that he that eateth the sour grape 
(sinneth), his (own) teeth (only) shall be set on edge. The soul 
[being] that sinneth [wilfully and deliberately against full light 
and ability] IT SHALL DIE."-- See Ezk. 18:20 and Jer. 31:29,30. 

It should not need much argument to convince any reasonable 
being that the second trial for the second or redeemed life is here 
referred to, and not the first trial in Eden,* on account of which 
we are born in sin, shapen in iniquity, and come forth to a few 
short years of dying and groaning. It clearly refers to the trial of 
the world in the Millennial age, the second trial; and it shows, as 
we have already seen, that in that trial some will be found 
worthy of the second life, and that the wilful sinner will share in 
the second death, the penalty upon all failing under the second 
trial; the conditions of which could not be more favorable than 
they have been arranged for. 



*In this as in other connections it should be borne in mind that 
the Jewish people, their covenant of life by obedience, etc., was 
only typical of the world, including themselves, in the second 
trial under the New Covenant which theirs typified. 



R892 : page 3 

CHOOSE LIFE THAT YE MAY LIVE. 

"I have set before thee this day life and good, death and evil." "I 
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; 
therefore choose life that both thou and thy seed may live."-- 
Deut. 30:15,19. 

We come now to the consideration of other Scripture 
statements in harmony with the conclusions set forth in the 
preceding article. 

The words here quoted are from Moses to Israel. To appreciate 
these words we must remember that they as a people and all their 
covenants, etc., had a typical significance. The above words 
"choose life" seem to imply that Israel was placed upon trial for 
life or death. But not so, they like all others of the race were 
already under condemnation of death through Adam's 
disobedience in the first trial, and could not be placed on full 



trial again, until redeemed from the first condemnation or curse 
of death. 

God knew that they could not obtain life by keeping the Law, no 
matter how much they would choose to do so, because they like 
all others were weak, depraved through the effect of the sour 
grape of sin which Adam had eaten and which his children had 
continued to eat. Thus as Paul declares, the Law given to Israel 
could not give them life because of the weakness or depravity of 
their fallen nature. Rom. 8:3, Heb. 7:19 and 10:1-10. 

Nevertheless God saw a benefit to them from even an 
unsuccessful attempt to live perfectly; that it would develop 
them as well as show them the need of the better sacrifice, the 
ransom, and a greater deliverer than Moses. And with all this it 
furnished a pattern or shadow of the great second trial insured to 
the whole world (which Israel typified) secured by the better 
sacrifices for sin; which was there prefigured, to be 
accomplished by the great prophet of whom Moses was but a 
type. 

Seeing thus that the trial for life or death presented to Israel was 
but typical of the great second trial and its issues of life and 
death-second (or restored) life and second death—may help 
some to see that the great thousand-year-day of trial, of which 
our Lord Jesus has been appointed the Judge, contains the two 
issues, life and death. All will then be called upon to decide, and 
a choice must be made, and the verdict in the end will be in 
harmony with the choice expressed by the conduct of each 
during that age of trial, under most favorable opportunity. 

This second trial and its sentence and result is shown also in the 
words of Moses quoted by Peter (Acts 3:22,23), "A Prophet shall 
the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto 
me. Him shall ye hear [obey] in all things whatsoever he shall 
say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every soul [being] 
which will not hear [obey] that Prophet [and thus choose life] 
shall be destroyed from among his people." In few words this 
draws our attention to the World's second trial yet future. It 
shows the great Prophet or Teacher raised up by God to give a 
new judgment or trial to the condemned race which he has 
redeemed from the first condemnation. It shows too the 
conditions of the second trial to be righteous obedience, and that 
with the close of that trial some will be adjudged worthy of the 
second or restored life, and some worthy of destruction- second 
death. 

Jesus having redeemed all by his perfect and precious sacrifice is 
the head of 

R892 : page 4 

this great prophet, and during the Gospel age God has been 
selecting the members of his body, the little flock, who with 



Jesus shall be God's agents in judging the world. "Do ye not 
know that the saints shall judge the world?"-- 1 Cor. 6:2. 

The Lord presents the same matter to our attention in Matt. 
25:31-46. There in few words he shows the trial of the world 
(not the church, which as members of his body are with him in 
glory during that Millennial reign-- judging, ruling and blessing 
the world), and concluding the illustration of the second trial our 
Lord also shows the same two classes noted above and their 
opposite rewards~the one class who obey and come into 
harmony with his arrangement enter fully into the blessing of the 
second life, and are therefore called "blessed." The other class 
with every opportunity obey not, and experience the second 
condemnation of death, the "second death," and are thus "cursed" 
or condemned again. 

The first trial was of mankind only, and hence its penalty or 
curse, the first death, was only upon man. But the second trial is 
to be much more comprehensive. It will not only be the trial of 
fallen and imperfect mankind, but it will include every other 
thing and principle and being out of harmony with Jehovah. 
"God will bring every work into judgment with every secret 
thing." 

The "Judgment to come" will include the judgment to 
condemnation of all false systems—civil, social, and religious. 
These will be judged, condemned and banished early in that 
Millennial Day, the light of truth causing them to come into 
disrepute and finally to flee away. This judgment comes first in 
order, that the trial of man may proceed unhindered by error, 
prejudice, etc. It will include also the trial of "the angels which 
sinned" --those angels which kept not their first estate of purity 
and obedience to God. Thus it is written by the apostle of the 
members of the body of the great Prophet and 

R893 : page 4 

High Priest who is to be Judge of all-- "Know ye not that the 
saints shall judge angels?"~l Cor. 6:3. 

This being the case, the condemnation of the second trial 
(destruction, second death) will cover a wider range of offenders 
than the penalty or curse for failure under the first trial. In a word 
the second destruction at the close of the second trial is an utter 
destruction of every being and every thing which will not glorify 
God and be of use and blessing to his general creation. Thus the 
second death is to the perfect future age, what Gehenna the 
Valley of Hinnom-was to the typical city and kingdom of Israel. 
It will destroy and consume totally whatever is cast into it. (See 
article Undying Worms and Quenchless Fires.) 

Thus seen the second death does not mean simply to die or be 
destroyed a second time; for some things will be destroyed in the 
"second death" which never were destroyed before; for instance, 



Satan never yet died, so it could not mean death a second time to 
him. So too some of the systems of error which will be destroyed 
in the Gehenna, which is the second death, never were destroyed 
before: hence this second death in which they will be destroyed 
cannot be considered as their destruction a second time. The 
second death, or destruction, is the name of the destruction 
which will come upon every evil thing as the result or verdict of 
the second judgment, the "judgment to come." 



R893 : page 4 

THE LAKE OF FIRE AND BRIMSTONE 
WHICH IS THE SECOND DEATH. 

Rev. 21:8. 

Several prophetic pen pictures of the Millennial Age and its 
work in chapters 20 and 21 of Revelation, clearly show the 
object and result of that age of trial, in harmony with the balance 
of the Scriptures as just noted in the preceding articles. 

Chapter 20 verses 2,4,11 with verses 1,2,10,11, of chapter 21 
shows the beginning of the age of judgment, the restraining of 
blinding errors, and misleading systems. The beast and the false 
prophet are the chief symbols and represent organizations or 
systems of error which we will not here pause to explain. (We 
have done so heretofore, and will do so again D.V. in a 
succeeding volume of Millennial Dawn.) This judgment against 
the "thrones" of the present time, and against "the beast and false 
prophet" systems, follows speedily upon the introduction of this 
Millennial judgment reign. The thrones of present dominion of 
earth will be "cast down" and the dominion transferred to the 
great Prophet and Judge. (Compare Dan. 7:9,14,22.) And the 
systems of error will be speedily judged worthy of destruction, 
the lake of fire, the second death.~See Rev. 19:20. 

Thus the second destruction (or death) begins quite early in the 
new Judgment --with the systems of error. But it does not reach 
men as individuals until they have first had full trial with fullest 
opportunity to choose life and live forever. Chapters 20:12,13 
and 21:3-7 indicate the blessed favorable trial in which all both 
dead and living [except the church who are with Christ Jesus, 
kings, priests, joint-heirs, and judges] will be brought to a full 
knowledge of the truth, relieved from sorrow and pain, and freed 
from every blinding error and prejudice, and tried "according to 
their works." 

The grand outcome of that trial will be, a clean Universe. As the 
Revelator expresses it, "Every creature which is in heaven and 
on the earth.. .heard I saying, Blessing and honor and glory and 
power be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the 
lamb forever." But this result will be accomplished in harmony 



with all God's dealings past and present, which have always 
recognized man's freedom of will to choose good or evil, life or 
death. 

We cannot doubt that when in the close of the Millennial age 
God will again for a "little season" permit Evil to triumph, in 
order thereby to test his creatures then thoroughly acquainted 
with both good and evil and the consequences of each, and to 
demonstrate to all of them his justice, that those who finally 
prefer and choose evil will be cut off, destroyed. Thus God will 
for all eternity remove all who do not love righteousness and 
hate iniquity. 

We read regarding that testing, that Satan will endeavor to lead 
astray all mankind whose numbers will then be as the sand of the 
sea for multitude: but that many of them will choose evil and 
disobedience, with past experience before them, and unhampered 
by present weaknesses and blinding influences, we cannot 
suppose. However, when God does not tell us either the number 
or proportion of those found worthy of life, and those judged 
worthy of death (the second death), we may not dogmatize. Of 
one thing we may be confident, God willeth not the death of the 
wicked, but would that all should turn to him and live; and no 
one shall be destroyed in that "lake of fire and brimstone" 
(figurative of utter destruction, as Gehenna) who is worthy of 
life, whose living longer would be a blessing to himself or to 
others in harmony with righteousness. 

That utter and hopeless destruction is intended only for willful 
evil doers, who like Satan, in pride of heart and rebellion against 
God, will love and do evil notwithstanding the manifestations of 
God's disapproval, and notwithstanding their experience with its 
penalties. Seemingly the goodness and love of God in the 
provision of a ransom, restitution, and second chance for man, 
instead of leading these to an abhorrence of sin, will lead them to 
suppose that God is too loving to cut them off in the second 
death, or that if he did so, he would give them other and yet other 
chances. Building thus upon a supposed weakness in the divine 
character, these may be led to try to take advantage of the grace 
(favor) of God, and to use it as a license for willful sin. But they 
shall go no further, for their folly shall be manifest. Their utter 
destruction will prove to the righteous the harmony and perfect 
balance of Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power in the divine Ruler. 
Such are called the angels (messengers, followers, servants,) of 
Satan. And for such as well as for Satan, the utter destruction of 
the second death is prepared by the wise, loving and just Creator. 
And so, in the parable of the sheep and goats the latter are called 
messengers or servants of Satan. To them he will say, "Depart 
from me ye cursed [cursed a second time having been relieved 
and released from the first curse of death and now condemned or 
accursed a second time for their own willful sin] into everlasting 
fire, prepared for the devil and his messengers. The fire is a 



symbol of destruction as much as the sheep and goats are 
symbols, hence the thought would be as in Revelation ~ 
everlasting destruction~the second death. 

And so we read, These shall go away into everlasting 
punishment [Greek kolasin "cutting off" from life—the same 
word is used in Greek for the cutting off of branches from a 
tree]: they shall go into the punishment prescribed for willful 
sinners under the second trial, namely the second death. 

Everlasting torment, mark you, is not the punishment, but death: 
"The wages of sin is death "--cutting off from life, extinction. 

An inference may be drawn from this parable, from the figures 
used by our Lord, that the willful sinners who will go into the 
second death will be few compared with the obedient who will 
enter into life; for sheep are much more numerous than goats. 

The true character of the goat class is portrayed in Rev. 21:8. 
The fearful and unbelieving [who will not trust God], the 
abominable, murderers [brother haters], whoremongers, 
sorcerers and idolaters [such as misappropriate and misuse 
divine favors, who give to self or any thing or creature that 
service and honor which belongs to God] and all liars- 
"whosoever loveth and maketh a lie" [in a word, all who do not 
love the truth and seek for it, and at cost defend and hold it], 
shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and 
brimstone [the Gehenna, symbol of utter destruction], which is 
the Second Death. Such company would be repulsive to any 
honest, upright being. It is hard to tolerate such now, when we 
can sympathize with them, knowing that such dispositions are 
now in great measure the result of inherited weakness of the 
flesh. We are moved to a measure of sympathy by the 
remembrance that in our own cases, often when we would do 
good, evil is present with us. But in the close of the Second 
Judgment, when the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall have given 
every advantage and opportunity of knowledge and ability, this 
class will be an abhorrence and detestation to all in harmony 
with the King of Glory. And we shall rejoice when, the trial 
being ended, the gift of life, which these shall have proved 
themselves unworthy of, shall be taken from them, and the 
corrupters of the earth and all their work and influence shall be 
destroyed. 

Rev. 23: 10, tells us, that after the final test in the end of the 
Millennium, Satan will be cast into the lake of fire (symbol, like 
Gehenna, of utter destruction), and reminds us of the beast and 
false prophet, the systems which in the Gospel age deceived 
some, saying that they (these systems) shall be tormented, day 
and night, forever; or, as expressed 

R894 : page 4 



in Chap. 19:3, speaking of one of these systems, "Her smoke 
rises up forever and ever." That is to say, the remembrance of, or 
lessons attendant upon the destruction of the systems of 
deception and error, will be lastingly remembered --as smoke 
continues to ascend after a destructive fire has done its work. 

Verse 9 tells of the destruction of those who join with Satan in 
the last rebellion, and verse 15 tells us of that same destruction in 
other words, using the symbol "lake of fire" to represent it. 

Verse 14 says: "And death and hell [hades~the tomb] were cast 
into the lake of fire [destruction], this is the second death"~the 
lake of fire.-Sinaitic MS. 

"Death and hell" [hades] is used several times in this book as 
expressive of the first death. Hades is the state or condition of 
death, and is sometimes translated the grave. It is called a great 
prison house, because those who enter it, though actually extinct, 
are reckoned as not extinct, but merely confined for a time, and 
to be brought forth to life, liberty and a new trial by him who 
ransomed them from the penalty of the first trial. It is in view of 
God's purpose and promise of a restitution of all and a second 
trial, that the tomb is spoken of as a great "prison house," in 
which the captives of death (the Adamic, or first death) await 
deliverance. Though dissolved in death, the identity of each 
being is preserved in the mind and power of God, and will be 
reproduced in due time by resurrection power. Hades, the prison, 
the tomb, is referred to by the prophet, the Master himself, and 
the apostles. (Hos. 13:14; Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18; John 5:28; 1 Cor. 
15:55.) The grave is really a symbol of hope; for we would not 
speak of it as a prison house were it not for our hopes of 
resurrection. If we believed that death ended existence forever, 
all hope of release of the dead would vanish, and we would not 
think of them as in prison, nor hope for their deliverance. 

Apply this thought to the verse under consideration, and it 
implies this:~The first death and the hopes of resurrection, 
which, by God's favor, were attached to it, will pass away or be 
utterly destroyed in the second death. From that time forth there 
will be no such thing as death under the first sentence, because 
of Adam's sin, and a hope of resurrection from it. That will all 
have been accomplished; every prisoner will have been set free 
from all that guilt, condemnation 

R894 : page 5 

and penalty of the first trial, and the sentence of the second trial, 
whether to second life or second death, will have fully 
swallowed up and destroyed the penalty of the first sentence, as 
well as the hopes which attached to it. Hades is never associated 
with the second death, because those who go into the second 
death are in no sense "prisoners of hope"; they are utterly 
destroyed, extinct, without hope of any deliverance by 
resurrection. Hence the propriety of hades being destroyed. 



The destruction of the first death and hades commences with the 
beginning of the Millennial reign and continues to its close. It is 
a gradual process of casting into destruction. This is in harmony 
with Paul's explanation of Isaiah's prophecy, 1 Cor. 15:54,55, 
"Then [when the little flock, "we," have been changed to the full 
divine nature and likeness and begun to reign and bless the 
world-then] shall be brought to pass the saying that is written- 
Isa. 25:6-8, "He will destroy [cast into destruction, or in symbol 
"the lake of fire"] in this mountain [symbol of the "Kingdom of 
God" or the "New Jerusalem"] the face of the covering cast over 
all people [death] and the vail [ignorance] that is spread over all 
nations. He will swallow up [the first] death victoriously." 

So then the casting of death and the grave into destruction during 
the Millennial age, is a part of the second destruction which will 
include every improper, injurious and useless thing. — Isa. 11:9; 
Psa. 101:5-8. But the second death, the sentence of that second 
trial, is final; it will never be destroyed; and let all the lovers of 
righteousness say Amen; for to destroy the second death, to 
remove the sentence of the second trial, would be to let loose 
again all the evil systems (beast etc.) and Satan, and all who love 
and practice wrong and deception, and dishonor the Lord, to 
oppose, offend and endeavor to overthrow those who love and 
desire to serve him and enjoy his favor. We rejoice that there is 
no danger of this, but that divine justice unites with divine 
wisdom, love and power to bring in everlasting righteousness on 
a permanent basis. 



R894 : page 5 



TURNED INTO HELL 



"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that 
forget God."-Psa. 9:17. 

This statement of the Lord recorded by the Psalmist, we find 
without any qualification whatever, and we must accept it as a 
positive fact. If the claims of "Orthodoxy" were true this would 
be indeed a fearful thought. Hell, to them, means a place of 
unmitigated woe, where untold millions of human beings writhe 
in anguish, tortured by literal fire or the gnawing of conscience, 
which, say some, is even worse. Under this fearful sentence they 
see the vast majority of mankind hastening, as they believe, to 
their dreadful doom; yet feeble indeed are the efforts put forth to 
rescue them. Babylon still has plenty of time for social 
enjoyment and festivity, which, according to their belief, should 
be spent in an almost frenzied endeavor to save the perishing. 
And she still has plenty of money to spend in gratifying the pride 
of life and the lust of the eye which might be applied to the same 
purpose; but instead, witness her costly temples of fashion, her 



grand organs, her costly apparel, her contempt of the poor, her 
greed of gain and strife for worldly honors. 

But let us look at the true meaning of the word hell, into which 
God says he will turn the wicked and forgetful nations. We find 
that it is the translation of the Hebrew word sheol, which simply 
means, the state or condition of death. There is not in it the 
remotest idea of either life or torment; and no scholar can by any 
manner of twisting or turning make it to signify anything else. 
And suffering of any kind would be impossible where there is no 
consciousness, no life. The Psalmist says, "In death there is no 
remembrance of thee: in the grave (sheol) who shall give thee 
thanks?" (6:5.) And again it is written: "Whatever thy hand 
findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor 
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave (sheol) whither 
thou goest." (Eccl. 9:10.) The corresponding Greek word is 
hades, which also means the state or condition of death, and no 
other meaning can properly be attached to either. Every well 
educated minister knows that this is true: and ignorance on this 
subject is in no wise excusable in these days when books are so 
plentiful and so cheap. But still they go on preaching this false 
idea of hell, which is nothing short of a slander against the 
character of God, as though they were still enveloped in the 
ignorance of the dark ages. This very text which we are now 
considering, is quoted and preached from over and over again by 
men who ought to know, and many of whom do know the true 
meaning of the Hebrew word sheol, and who nevertheless in 
their attempt to uphold the frightful doctrine of eternal torture, 
knowingly pervert this Scripture. 

Well, you inquire, How then did this idea first originate, and 
obtain such universal acceptance? We answer that it originated 
with Papacy, and was a part of her scheme for raising money 
from her ignorant and deluded subjects. Papacy taught that this 
place of torment was prepared for all who did not seek the 
protection of THE (Papal) Church. All heretics (all not of the 
Roman Catholic church) they claim are sure to go there; while 
those of THE Papal Church not counted worthy of heaven, are 
permitted to tarry in Purgatory, to suffer reformatory 
punishment, which might be shortened and relieved by the 
liberality of their friends in securing the prayers of the priests, 
etc. 

No other doctrine of the Romish Church ever did so much 
towards holding her captives in the bondage of fear, and 
increasing her revenues. The Protestant Churches in emerging 
from Romanism rejected the doctrine of Purgatory, but retained 
the worse doctrine of eternal torture. Though the increase and 
spread of knowledge has proved it to be false, yet like Papacy, 
finding it to be such a powerful agent in binding her subjects, 
and exacting her revenues, she is loathe to part with it; and since 
reasoning and enlightened minds are beginning to question this 



dogma, her policy now is, to put the brakes on reason, and to 
hurl her anathemas against investigation. If this bondage of fear 
were once broken, and God's children relied entirely on His 
Word, these great systems of error would soon dissolve. 

If we substitute the true meaning of the word sheol, our text will 
read: "The wicked shall be turned into the condition of death, 
and all the nations that forget God." This we believe; but next, 
Who are the wicked? In one sense all men are wicked, in that all 
are violators of God's law, but in its fullest sense the wicked are 
those who, with full knowledge of the exceeding sinfulness of 
sin and the remedy provided for their recovery, wilfully persist 
in sin and refuse the remedy. 

As yet few, only consecrated believers, have come to a 
knowledge of God; the world knows him not, and the nations 
cannot forget God, until they are first brought to a knowledge of 
him. The consecrated have been enlightened, led of the Spirit 
through faith to understand the deep and hidden things of God, 
which reveal the glory of God's character, but which, though 
expressed in his Word, appear only as an idle tale and 
foolishness to the world. 

As we have hitherto seen, this will not be so in the age to come, 
for then "The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as 
the waters cover the sea." (Isa. 11:9.) Much that we now receive 
by faith will then be demonstrated to the world by sight. When 
he who has ransomed man from the power of the grave (Hos. 
13:14) begins to gather his purchased possession back from the 
prison-house of death (Isa. 61:1);-- when the sleepers are 
awakened under the genial rays of the Sun of Righteousness, 
they will not be slow to realize the truth of the hitherto 
seemingly idle tale, that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, 
tasted death for every man." 

We have also seen by previous investigation, that the gradual 
ascent of the King's Highway of Holiness in that age will be easy 
and possible to all, when all the stones-stumbling blocks, errors, 
etc. —shall have been gathered out, and straight paths made for 
their feet. It is in that age that this text applies. Those who shall 
ignore the favoring circumstances of that age, and will not be 
obedient to the righteous Judge or Ruler-Christ- will truly be 
the wicked. And every loyal subject of the kingdom of God will 
approve the righteous judgment which turns such a one again 
into sheol —the condition of death. Such a one would be 
unworthy of life, and were he permitted to live his life would be 
a curse to himself and to the rest of mankind, and a blemish on 
the work of God. 

This will be the SECOND DEATH, from which there will be no 
resurrection. Having been ransomed from the first or Adamic 
death (sheol) by the sacrifice of Christ, if they die again on 
account of their own sin, "there remaineth no more sacrifice for 



sins." (Heb. 10:26.) "Christ dieth no more; death hath no more 
dominion over him." (Rom. 6:9.) This second death should be 
dreaded and shunned by all, since it is to be the final end of 
existence to all those deemed unworthy of life. But in it there can 
be no suffering. Like the first death, it is the extinction of life. 

It is because mankind had, through sin, become subject to death 
(sheol, hades) that Christ Jesus came to deliver us and save us 
from death. For this purpose Christ was manifested, that he 
might destroy death. (1 John 3:8; Heb. 2:14.) Death is a cessation 
of existence, the absence of LIFE. There is no difference 
between the condition in the first and second deaths, but there is 
hope of a release from the first, while from the second there will 
be no release, no return to life. The first death sentence passed 
upon all on account of Adam's sin, while the second death can be 
incurred only by wilful, individual sin. 

That the application of our text belongs to the coming age is 
evident, for both saints and sinners all go into sheol now, and 
this scripture indicates, that in the time when it applies, only the 
wicked shall go there. And the nations that forget God must be 
nations that have known him, else they could not forget him; and 
never yet have the nations been brought to that knowledge, nor 
will they until the coming time, when the knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth, and none shall need to say unto his 
neighbor, Know thou the Lord, for all shall know him, from the 
least to the greatest of them. (Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34.) In further 
proof of this, we find that the Hebrew word shub, which in our 
text is translated turned, signifies turned back, as to a place or 
condition where they once were. They once were in sheol, and 
were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, and will be 
brought out of sheol; but if then they are wicked, they, and all 
who forget God, shall be turned back to sheol. 



R894 : page 5 

CHRISTIAN SCIENCE AND MIND CURE. 

In our July issue we classed among others who deny the 
ransom, and thus reject the work of Christ and teach another 
gospel (Gal. 1:6,7), the so-called Mind-curers and Christian 
Scientists. Some of our readers not having noticed this in their 
teachings, requested our re-examination of the subject, 
suggesting that there is a difference between so-called Mind- 
curers and Christian Scientists, and that while the former ignore 
God and our Lord Jesus, the latter acknowledge them and claim 
to perform cures in the merit of Christ and by the power of God. 

We have re-examined the subject, and reach the conclusion that 
the two classes of healers work on exactly the same principles, 
except that the Christian Scientists find it prudent, in that it 



becomes popular with a much larger class, to call it Christian, 
and to refer occasionally to God and to our Lord Jesus, and to 
quote here and there texts from the Bible, which for most part 
are out of connection or wholly misapplied to their "science." 
Doubtless some children of God are for a time at least deceived, 
and fail to get the real idea, and place a religious and favorable 
construction of their own upon the sayings and doings of these 
scientists. 

The "scientists" are mostly women, one of whom—the author, 
inventor or discoverer of the science—writes her name "Rev. 
Mrs. M. B. G. Eddy" in the Christian Science Journal which she 
edits. She teaches her disciples the "science" for the sum of three 
hundred dollars, and gives them six lessons in theology for two 
hundred dollars additional. If the price be a good criterion by 
which to gauge the value of this "other gospel" and its teacher, it 
is certainly far in advance of that of Jesus and the apostles and 
their message. 

The basis of their theory, as set forth in this official Journal, is 
that the real man is an immaterial being, whose body is his 
house, and has no more real feeling than the wooden or brick 
house in which it in turn dwells. They claim that pain and 
sickness are really nothing but mental ailments, imaginations; 
and that if people can be made to believe they are well and 
sound, their bodies would rapidly become so;-they would not be 
subject to sickness and pain, but would gradually go on to 
perfection, and thus death would cease to reign and Christian 
Science be the great Deliverer or Saviour. 

It calls Christ the "Master Christian Scientist," yet really it puts 
the Rev. 

R894 : page 6 

Mrs. Eddy as the Great Christian Scientist, the teacher over and 
above all others whose efforts are already more successful than 
those put forth by Jesus in advancing the science, and in whose 
hand now the whole world is to be revolutionized and brought to 
endless life and freedom from all pain, sickness and death. If, 
therefore, Jesus were a Christian Scientist who was trying but 
failed to do what Mrs. Eddy claims she will succeed in doing, it 
follows that she, and not our Lord, is the great teacher, saviour 
and deliverer of the dying human race. 

To show that their claims, are not overstated, we give below 
some quotations from the July, '86, issue of the Journal edited by 
Mrs. Eddy, as follows :- 

"It [Christian science] is still centuries ahead of the world in its 
teachings. When its author planted her feet on the rock of Truth, 
twenty years ago, saying, 'All is mind, there is no matter; all is 
life, there is no death; all is good, there is no evil; all is love, 
there is no hate,' who listened, who saw, who read, who cared? 



Oh, faithful one! we can come into a true conception of thee, 
sharing thy love and power, only when we pattern our ways after 
thine, heeding thy precious words. Oh, patient Mother! we see 
thee dearer as we grow older in truth. We learn that THIS BOOK 
which thou hast bequeathed to us [Science and Health, price 
$3.00] is the outgrowth and epitome of a life spent in closest 
walks with God. We are willing now to follow as thou 
leadest,...as thou revealest to us the mother-side of God! We take 
this blessed key which thou dost place in the hands of the faithful 
to unlock the seals of error. This discovery of the Truth, that 
heals as well as saves, has made her as truly the Deliverer of this 
people as was Moses to the children of Israel." 

This quotation, we doubt not, is quite sufficient for our readers, 
to show the tendency of this Christian science to be anti- 
Christian~in opposition to Christ, replacing him and his words 
by the false teachings of this woman and her science 

R895 : page 6 

falsely so called, which makes void the words of God concerning 
sin, death, the ransom, the mode of deliverance and the 
Deliverer. By a further quotation it will be seen that God, though 
often referred to by them as good and kind and loving, etc., is not 
considered as a personal being, but as a PRINCIPLE OF GOOD, 
after the idea of the Brahmins of India. 

From the same journal (page 100) we quote:-- 

"When I first understood that 'God is principle, and not person,' it 
was like a great light suddenly shining." 

Another writer in the same states it thus: --"What is Christian 
Science? The understanding of an everywhere-present and 
everywhere-powerful PRINCIPLE OF GOOD. What are the 
purpose and result of Science and Health? To explain the whole 
of this PRINCIPLE, to reduce divine love to human perception, 
to interpret God on a purely practical and scientific basis,. ..that 
each may at once begin to understand GOOD." 

Their teaching that disease and pain are produced by 
imagination, and are curable in the same way, is shown in the 
following quotations (p. 93):-- 

"Man is an inventor of disease as well as of other things, and the 
doctors are busy at all times encouraging their patients to 
develop their inventions and take out patents therefor, death 
being the final patent or perfected invention. ...The medical 
fraternity are ever inspecting and probing the body of man in 
search of some new symptom, ailment, or disease, and what they 
look for they generally find or help the patient to find." Again we 
read (page 85), "Let the diseases of mortal thought come to an 
end; then the diseases of the body will perish, for these are 
nothing but abnormal thoughts." 



As a sample of how these would-be teachers destroy or make 
void the Scriptures, darken the understanding, and cover the 
truth, in their endeavor to have some texts fit their theory, we 
quote from the editorial columns as follows (p. 90, 91):-- 

"The soul that sinneth, it shall die,' means, that mortal man (alias 
material sense) that sinneth shall die; and it is the commonly 
accepted view that soul is deathless. Such is the divine mind, for 
soul cannot be formed or brought forth by human thought, and 
must proceed from God; hence it must be sinless, and destitute of 
self-created or derived capacity to sin." [In other words, this 
Scientist, in a roundabout way, contradicts the Scripture she 
attempts to explain, and teaches that the soul can neither sin nor 
die.] She continues: "Now, if soul sinned, it would die, for 'the 
wages of sin is death.'" 

Page 86 explains that "the power over disease was NOT A 
SPECIAL GIFT, but an understanding." [Compare this with 
Paul's statements, 1 Cor. 12:7-11,28-31.] On page 97 we read: 
"We are growing into that state where human possibilities and 
powers expand to their ultimate limits, and are pushing on 
toward the divine development as sons and daughters of Good." 
On page 91 the editor speaks of Jesus Christ as the Master 
Metaphysician; and on page 102 she declares herself the 
discoverer of the science of mind-healing. Then, with the same 
inconsistency which marks every topic of this journal, we read a 
contradiction to this "discovery" and "development" theory in 
the editor's remarks on page 94. She there hints that Jesus was 
even greater than herself and perhaps a co-discoverer of the 
"science" (?), though she ignores the apostles. She says: "Some 
day Christian Science will enable us to enjoy a treat without 
raising the fruit, compounding the cake, freezing the cream, or 
buying the sugar; just as Jesus fed the multitude without 
procuring the loaves and fishes through the usual channels of 
supply... "[not through a gift of miraculous power, mark you, but] 
"through the power of the mind." She argued that "if belief 
PRODUCES DISEASE, and its removal leaves health to have its 
perfect work, then false belief may also prevent the perfect 
fulfilment of spirit in all our material surroundings, flowers and 
fruit not excepted." 

This "scientist" (?) evidently sees that to claim that diseases are 
merely mental affections, would demand a similar explanation, 
of the same principle when applied to the lower animals and 
"flowers and fruits" and this she offers in the above statement. 
"False belief" may prevent perfect "flowers and fruits." This is 
consistent, but at what a cost! At the cost of common sense and 
reason. At the cost of reasonable people doubting her sanity, this 
editor thus claims that not only human ailments are all mental 
emotions, imaginations, and not realities, not actual, but also that 
the blight and imperfections of plants and fruits and flowers are 
the result of their mental imaginations. 



And yet it is more reasonable to believe this concerning plants 
and flowers than for a man or woman who has experienced pain 
to convince himself that he only imagined the pain from the 
ulcer, the wound, the bruise, or amputation. How about the 
various diseases of children? How could they imagine 
themselves into the measles, croup, etc., etc., before they are old 
enough to think at all? And why do they all always imagine the 
same ailments if it is imagination? This is as contrary to reason 
as the thought of a flower or tree blighting and dying from a 
"false belief" that it is decaying and dying. 

This so-called "Christian Science" is of itself unworthy of so 
much attention as we have given it, but the fact that some of our 
readers have been deluded by it, is our justification. The system 
is a mixture of a very little truth with a great deal of theorizing, 
and as a whole, it is directly antagonistic to the truth. 

It rightly claims that sickness and pain and death are abnormal 
conditions, that these are not the conditions under which God 
designed man should live. They err greatly when they think these 
things wholly imaginary (though undoubtedly some are in part at 
least imagined). They ignore often, and sometimes deny the fall 
of man, as recorded in Genesis, and taught by Jesus and the 
apostles. Denying this they see no reason why sickness, pain and 
death are in the world, except imagination. They see not that by 
sin came death and all its train of misery. Hence they see not the 
ransom feature of Christ's work, and place him on a plane with 
their teacher, Mrs. Eddy, the subsequent discoverer of the same 
science of healing which they say Jesus practiced. To them Jesus 
is a Saviour of the same kind, only to a less degree than Mrs. 
Eddy, since he merely attempted to introduce the "science," but 
failed, while she, the later discoverer of the science, it is claimed 
is succeeding and will fully succeed: and hence she will be the 
real Saviour and Jesus the unsuccessful deliverer. 

Blinded by their theory, they see not the great divine plan of the 
ages, nor the relationship in that plan, of sin, pain and death to 
the ransom given eighteen hundred years ago, and the resulting 
restitution of the age now dawning. Consequently the wonderful 
growth of knowledge upon various subjects witnessed in the past 
twenty years, and the incipient steps toward restitution such as 
faith cures, mind cures, etc., they regard as the natural 
development or growth; while we, instructed by the Word of 
God, see them to be marks of the dawning of the new age, 
because it is "due time" for him who redeemed all to begin the 
great work of restoring those whom he ransomed. 

That these who call themselves "Christian Scientists" are 
somewhat different from what are called "Mind Curers" or 
"Mind Healers" we admit; yet their methods and theories seem to 
be exactly the same, except that the so called Christian Science is 
more deceptive in that it clothes itself as a messenger of light, 
calls itself Christian, and quotes and misapplies Scripture where 



it can. It even prints a cross upon the title page of its organ, "The 
Christian Science Journal," from the July '86 number of which, 
the above quotations are made. 

How many cures they do we know not, nor does it matter. 
Neither class of mind curers however, claim to do them through 
the merit of the ransom; on the contrary they ignore all necessity 
for a ransom when they ignore the reality of sin and its 
consequences, claiming that it is all imagination. 

Beware of and reject every theory which rejects the ransom, 
even though it adheres to the name Christian and quotes from the 
Bible. 



R895 : page 6 



ENDURANCE. 



Yet nerve thy spirit to the proof, 
And blanch not at thy chosen lot; 
The timid good may stand aloof, 
The sage may frown~yet faint thou not. 

Nor heed the shaft so surely cast, 
The foul and hissing bolt of scorn; 
For with thy side shall dwell at last 
The victory of endurance born. 



--William Cullen Bryant. 



R896 : page 6 

UNDYING WORMS AND QUENCHLESS FIRES. 

And they shall go forth and look upon the carcases of the men 
that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, 
neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an 
abhorring unto all flesh.~Isa. 66:24. 

It is good for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye 
rather than having two eyes to be cast into hell [Gehenna]; where 
their worm dieth not and their fire is not quenched. —Mark 9:48. 
Verses 44 and 46 are omitted by old MSS. See Rev. Version. 

The figure here used by the Prophet and by our Lord, represents 
the utter destruction of the second death. We say figure, because 
it must be evident to the surface reader even, that there are no 
immortal worms and that a fire which would burn ceaselessly is 
not conceivable. 



The basis of fact upon which the figure rests is alluded to in our 
Lord's reference to Gehenna (translated hell in the common 
English versions). Gehenna was the Greek name for a valley 
outside Jerusalem called in Hebrew, "The valley of Hinnom." It 
was the place for depositing the offal, garbage, carcases and filth 
in general of the City, and in it fires of sulphur were kept burning 
to destroy the carcases and thus prevent infection and pestilence. 

Sometimes a carcase would lodge upon a ledge of rock and not 
fall into the fires and then the maggots would surely destroy it. 
None were permitted to quench or extinguish those fires and 
hence they burned until the substance was consumed. 

It became customary to cast the "carcases" [dead bodies] of 
criminals of certain classes into that Valley of Hinnom or 
Gehenna, instead of giving them decent burial. [Nothing was 
ever cast alive into Gehenna; the Jews were not permitted to 
torture any creature.] Thus Gehenna came to be noted and 
detested and dreaded as an extreme of punishment. It thus 
became a synonym for utter and hopeless destruction, the 
opinion prevailing that those decently buried would be 
resurrected, but that those destroyed in Gehenna were blotted out 
of existence forever. 

With this idea already in the minds of his hearers, how 
appropriate that our Lord should use Gehenna as a symbol or 
figure for the second death, the utter and final destruction of all 
the incorrigible; a destruction sure and detestable among the filth 
and offscourings of the new order of things. 

Jerusalem itself was a figure or symbol of the kingdom of God, 
the New Jerusalem; and even its Gehenna or valley of 
destruction was an appropriate figure of the second death, the 
utter extermination of all things abominable and filthy in the 
close of the Millennial age. --Rev. 22:14,15. 

The prophet's remarks, point us down into the future to a time 
when the new heavens and new earth are fully established (verse 
22) under the Prince of Glory, when full knowledge and ability 
having come, all transgressors will be consigned to the second 
death, the antitype of Gehenna, and when only the righteous 
shall live to serve and obey and enjoy God's blessings. Then all 
such shall see the justice as well as the wisdom of the utter 
destruction of the incorrigible, willful enemies of right. As it is 
written: "They shall be an abhorrence unto all flesh." 



R896 : page 7 

KIND WORDS OF COMMENDATION 

R897 : page 7 

-FROM SOME WHO HAVE READ THE BOOK- 



page 7 

MINISTERS, EVANGELISTS, LAYMEN, AND THE 
RELIGIOUS AND SECULAR PRESS. 

Below we quote some Comments already received. More 
coming in daily, will be given again. 



R896 : page 7 

Millennial Dawn. One's first thought on taking up this volume 
is that it is the work of some good-meaning but over-zealous 
Christian who, in order to add strength to and fortify the faith 
that is within himself, has been led to "rush in where angels fear 
to tread" and to fix the day and hour of the Savior's second 
coming, as so many have already done. However, the reader is 
agreeably surprised, before he has read half a dozen pages, to 
find that such is not the aim and object of the book; that, on the 
contrary, there is nothing of the prophetic about it, and that it is 
the product of a wise and thoroughly Christian pen. The work is 
a serious and philosophical review of "the plan of salvation" as 
laid down in the Book of Books. No other authority is quoted 
except the Bible, the writer stating that it is his endeavor to 
divorce his subject as completely as possible from all opinions of 
men, and to give his readers the truth undefiled from the fountain 
head. The work is admirable in many ways, being produced in a 
style sufficiently pleasant and attractive to at once fix the 
attention of the reader, while the subject matter, relating, as it 
does, to the "old, old story," can never grow prosy or dull. The 
book is calculated to do good to all, whether a young recruit, an 
old soldier of the cross, or one blindly groping in the dark. As a 
reference book for the Bible student it is invaluable, and no 
Christian household should be without it.~Galveston News, 
Sept. 5, '86. 



page 7 



I am astonished at the depth of knowledge the book contains. In 
my judgment there never has been before the public a work to 
equal Millennial Dawn. It ought to be in the hands of every 
minister. 

G. A. SLOTE. 



R896 : page 7 

Millennial Dawn, the Plan of the Ages. A remarkable book! A 
book for the times! It is emphatically A Helping Hand for Bible 
Students. In these latter days, when Christians are so eagerly 
seeking the light of God's word, to interpret passing events and 
to forecast the dawning future, so pregnant with tremendous 



import to all mankind, this book comes as a soothing, satisfying 
draught from the fountain of all truth, knowledge and wisdom. 
Every earnest seeker after truth, every sincere student of the 
Bible, will do well to secure a copy of this remarkable book at 
once and enjoy the feast of fat things which it contains. ~J. E. 
Jewett in Christian Herald, Oct. 7, '86. 



page 7 



I have never been so interested in any work on the Bible. I am 
carried away and lifted up. I think it is the very pith of the word 
of God. It seems I would give all I had if I could only get all 
Christians to read it. It does seem that the writer has gotten right 
down to facts as they are in Scripture. I cannot but think how 
blind I and all the world have been on many things now so plain 
and Scriptural to me. May God bless the author and more and 
more reward his search for the "deep things" of His word. A. H. 
BLUNT. 



R897 : page 7 

It is thoroughly refreshing, in this age of skepticism and 
vaunted indifference to the truths of religion, to find a writer 
coming nobly forward to maintain the principle of a revealed 
religion. This the author has done with strength and good 
reasoning in his Millennial Dawn. A concise idea of his position 
in regard to the Bible may be gleaned from the following extract: 
"When Columbus discovered the Orinoco river some one said he 
had found an island. He replied: 'No such river as that flows 
from an island. That mighty torrent must drain the waters of a 
continent.' So the depth, and power, and wisdom, and scope of 
the Bible's testimony convinces us that not men, but the 
Almighty God, is the author of its plans and revelations." ~ 
Evening Post, San Francisco, Cal. 



page 7 



"I never read any work on the Bible that presented such a vast 
amount of truth in so small a compass in my life." 

W. HAYMAN. 



R897 : page 7 

Millennial Dawn is the title of a series of books issued by the 
Tower Publishing Company. The first 

R897 : page 8 

volume of the series, now on our table, is entitled The Plan of the 
Ages. It is nothing less than an exposition of the purposes and 



method of the Supreme Being in the creation of mankind and in 
the economy of human and angelical affairs. It may be described 
as a philosophy of history, but a philosophy so far-reaching 

R898 : page 8 

in its grasp and so comprehensive in its range as to make the 
expositions of Bossuet, and even of Augustine, seem narrow and 
prosaical. What, with manifest hyperbole, Dr. Johnson said of 
Shakespeare, seems literal truth when applied to this Pittsburgh 
writer: ~ 

Existence sees him spurn her bounded reign, 
And panting time toils after him in vain. 

Readers will cease to suspect any ironical meaning or intent in 
these statements, when they reflect that the writer of this Plan of 
the Ages professes to be merely an interpreter of Scriptural 
prophecies and an expositor of divinely attested facts, soaring 
upon the wings of inspiration, and not of his own natural powers. 

That the author of the book is in earnest, fully believing in the 
sufficiency of his own insight and in the soundness of his 
interpretations, no attentive reader can doubt. So much is 
manifest from the direct, straightforward style, as well as from 
the modest confidence with which he ignores antagonism or the 
possibility of contradiction. 

Some of his interpretations and applications of Biblical texts are 
striking at least, and some of the views expressed are certainly 
novel and ingeniously presented. The references to the industrial, 
social and other troubles of the present time give a practical 
character to many pages of the book, showing that the author is 
by no means a mere dreamer. To persons, therefore, who take 
pleasure in Scriptural interpretation, or in the application of 
Scripture to contemporary history and questions of the day, this 
Plan of the Ages may be safely commended as likely to be 
interesting. —Pittsburgh Times, Sept. 28, '86. 



"It is a strong writing, showing much research and excellent 
arrangement and method in its treatment of its subjects. None 
will doubt the honesty or earnestness, or the intended devotion to 
truth of the author. Christian readers may find teachings in the 
book to combat, but they will find much more to commend. 
From a scholarly stand-point the book will be marked as one of 
merited literary excellence. "--Inter-Ocean, Chicago, 111. 



Millennial Dawn, the Plan of the Ages, is a first or introductory 
volume to a series of works intended to arrest skepticism by 
reason and Scriptural truth. To Bible students its pages will be 
found of most absorbing interest. Its arrangement is clear, and 
every page bears evidence of profound thought as well as patient 



and intelligent study of the Holy Scriptures. The Scriptural story 
has been fitted to the history of the world in a manner that is 
singularly compatible and highly suggestive to the minds of 
those who are willing to read further than the dedicatory page, 
which reads thus: "To the King of Kings and Lord of Lords: In 
the interest of his Consecrated 'Saints,' waiting for the adoption, 
and of 'All that in every place call upon the Lord'~'The 
Household of Faith,' and of the Groaning Creation Travailing 
and Waiting for the Manifestation of the Sons of God, this work 
is dedicated." 

It may not be a palatable truth, nor a fact creditable to the mental 
or moral status of the American people, yet it is undeniable that 
when an author has studied the Scriptures until he gets "a new 
light" on the subject, and begins to teach the second coming of 
Christ, the advent of the Millennium, etc., and publishes this to 
the world, they are apt to scoff at him as "a crank," or to use the 
more scriptural language: --"Saul, Saul, much learning hath made 
thee mad." 

If the author be mad there is an excellent system in his madness, 
and if "a crank," his mind never takes the reverse motion. He 
presses steadily forward from premises apparently well settled to 
his conclusions, with an orderly and calm arrangement of strictly 
logical truths seldom paralleled, and the whole argument is 
presented in such a dispassionate style as to preclude the 
slightest notion of rant, cant or insincerity. The independence of 
thought and originality of "The Plan of the Ages," are refreshing, 
but it is a work which demands careful study to comprehend. It 
is one that will require the average reader to keep a Bible 
constantly at hand for verification of the references and 
amplification of assertions, and in this respect may become a 
helping hand to Bible students. 

The author draws many startling analogies, showing the aptitude 
of likening human governments to beasts, drawing the parallel 
from their selfish and destructive character, based on "man's idea 
of self-government, independent of God." Still, he must not be 
understood as urging therefore that the Church should assume 
control of the affairs of State, and therein reads a wholesome 
lecture in a few words to many ecclesiastical politicians. He 
says:~"The Church of God should give its entire attention and 
effort to preaching the Kingdom of God, and to the advancement 
of the interests of that Kingdom according to the plan laid down 
in the Scriptures. If this is done faithfully, there will be no time 
or disposition to dabble in the politics of present governments. 
Jesus had no time for it; the Apostles had no time for it; nor have 
any of the Saints who are following their example." 

Although the Apostle speaks of the Church as the Kingdom over 
which Christ reigns, and the Church is frequently called the 
Kingdom in the parables of our Lord, yet the author maintains 
that this has reference merely to the Church before the Second 



Coming and is but the "incipient, embryotic condition" of the 
Kingdom. 

In short, he does not believe that the Kingdom of God is 
figurative, but that it is an actual empire to be established on 
earth and among men, that Christ in person will assume the reins 
of government on earth "for a limited time and for a particular 
purpose; and that it will terminate with the accomplishment of 
that purpose." This will be the Millennial age, and will end when 
Christ delivers up the dominion of earth to the Father. (1 Cor. 
15:25; Matt. 25:34.) 

The author's work evinces a keen observation of and lively 
interest in the present situation of mankind; his array of facts 
tending to show from the present aspect of affairs in the world as 
they are "shaping themselves for the rapidly approaching 
conflict" are not alarming, but they force themselves on the 
attention of the intelligent, even though we may not be able to 
see as clearly as himself that the "trouble of the day of the Lord 
is immediately at hand." And, it may be added, that in a 
commercial community, enjoying the comforts of wealth and the 
comparative security of governments founded on the will of the 
people, they will be saints indeed who can be expected "to 
abandon the strife of greed and vain glory and its discontent; 
striving for the higher riches and the peace they do afford. "- 
Commercial Gazette, Pittsburgh, Oct. 9, '86. 



page 8 



Millennial Dawn is even more than I could have possibly hoped 
for: so loyal to God's Word, while so true to moral logic, and 
competent to convince the mind and heart of the truths of our 
holy religion and its "future glory." 

J. COBB. 



R898 : page 8 

Millennial Dawn. We have here what seems intended to be the 
first of a series of volumes under this general title, and which is 
designated as The Plan of the Ages. Prefixed to the volume is a 
chart which is designated as the Chart of the Ages, and which 
embraces two dispensations and an unfulfilled part of another. 
The first dispensation extends from the creation of the world to 
the flood, covering a supposed period of 1,656 years. The second 
dispensation~that of this present evil world—embraces the 
Patriarchal Age, the Jewish Age from Jacob's death to the end of 
the seventy weeks, and the Gospel Age, extending from Jesus' 
baptism to the completion of the church, which is his body. The 
third age, not yet begun, is the Millennial Age, or that of the 
personal reign of Christ. Of course the volume is what is known 



as pre-millennial --with additional views, which probably many 
pre-millennialists will not endorse. The writer enforces the idea 
of three "ways" in the Scriptures: The Broad Way—to 
destruction; the Narrow Way-to life; and the Highway of 
Holiness-for the ransomed of the Lord. He also holds that the 
first great judgment was in Eden, but that God will give the 
world a second trial under Christ, in person and as judge. With 
all this, and with other positions to which exceptions may be 
taken, the work is thoroughly reverent, and may be read with 
profit.— The Interior, Chicago, Sept. 16, '86. 



page 8 



The author of the well-known publications, Why Evil Was 
Permitted and The Tabernacle and Its Teachings, has sent forth 
another volume entitled Millennial Dawn, the Plan of the Ages." 
It is the first of a series designed to make plain the teachings of 
the Bible and arrest skepticism and infidelity. It is intended 
especially as a help for Christians, and this purpose is well 
carried out in the work. It will be of inestimable value to Bible 
students.— Buffalo News. 



R898 : page 8 

"I prize it very highly, and nothing in the world would please 
me better than to see it in the hands of every professing 
Christian. I think it would make real Christians of many of 
them." 

G. EICHORN. 



page 8 



Millennial Dawn; The Plan of the Ages. This is the first of a 
series of works for Bible students,— "a helping hand." The author 
endeavors to show that a severe conflict is approaching between 
Labor and Capital, between Good and Evil— Justice and Injustice, 
and that when the earth shall have been purified from wrong and 
oppression the Millennium will have come. The work is 
scholarly and of much interest.— Springfield (Mass.) Homestead. 



"It will be found a valuable aid in studying the plan of 
salvation. "-National Tribune. 



Millennial Dawn will be undoubtedly very interesting to a large 
class of Bible students.— American Rural Home, Rochester, N.Y. 



I do not intend to "notice" the book, but believe competent 
critics will agree that none of the many books on Evidences of 
Christianity, gives in such compact form and lucid phrase what 
Christians need to know and remember in this direction as the 
opening chapters on Divine Revelation in Millennial Dawn. 

In the important chapters on "The Kingdom of God" and 
"Kingdoms of This World" there is the same masterly 
arrangement of the facts, and calm deductions, so far above the 
common idle speculation on these glorious themes. 

I mention one more topic, Jehovah's Day. Surely no other student 
of "last things" has seen as clearly and written as boldly yet 
truthfully and reverently on this theme as the author of 
Millennial Dawn. Yet in the last chapter of his book the author 
has given clearer pictures of the scenes and events of the Day of 
Wrath, and applied the Scriptures more pertinently as God's 
illustrations, than in any other writings from his pen. 

Every man of means who prizes the truth ought to buy a dozen 
or a hundred copies and sell or loan them. If you cannot preach 
publicly, you could not find a better substitute than copies of 
Millennial Dawn loaned to good minds. Here is a book no one 
need be ashamed to hand to the most polished or refined. If 
composition, breadth of thought and importance of subject are all 
considered, it is second to nothing on earth except alone the 
Book of books. 

J. B. ADAMSON. 



Millennial Dawn, the Plan of the Ages. This is the first of a 
series of volumes, each complete in itself, designed to make 
plain the teachings of the Bible in a manner calculated to arrest 
skepticism by reason and Scripture. Their special aim is to lend a 
helping hand to Christians in putting on the whole armor of God 
that in the present confusion and skepticism and tendency toward 
infidelity, they may be able to stand. The work is by the author 
of the well known publications, "Why Evil was Permitted," and 
"The Tabernacle and Its Teachings," which have had such an 
immense circulation, both in America and Great Britain. —Ohio 
Farmer. 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO.: Deep thanks for the "helping 
hand," Millennial Dawn. It is indeed "still waters," and "green 
pastures," so filling sometimes as to cause fear of a thorn in the 
flesh to prevent being lifted up above measure. Marvelous are 
these revelations of the jewels of God's love and plan! I fear of 
missing them, but cannot think that any can be permitted to 
develop capacity to taste to exhilaration of this new wine, and 
yet miss the fruition. 



There is a promise connected with spiritual hunger, but this 
surely goes beyond that. It is delicious feasting on the fat things 
themselves. 

JOHN C. STEVENS. 



I have received the Dawn, and have not ceased until I have 
gone through it. What a feast of fat things is opened to those who 
will run patiently the race for the crown. If I could not get 
another Dawn, money to any amount would not buy the one I 
have. It is another book I shall prize above rubies. 

JAMES PUTTICK. 



"I do not say that there is no other such book as Millennial 
Dawn, the Plan of the Ages, but if there is another such work I 
am sorry I did not come across it sooner in life. No treatise on 
the Bible known to me will hold a candle to this book. It starts 
just where I have always thought a theological book ought to 
start, by proving and establishing a groundwork for faith before 
it addresses faith. It shows the reasonableness of believing that 
there is a God, an intelligent Creator, then aside from the Bible 
shows that the fact of a Bible as a revelation of God's will and 
plan is reasonable. Then it shows in few words the oneness and 
harmony and reasonableness of the Bible itself. But this last it 
proves beyond question as a whole, for from first to last every 
argument is based upon reason and Scripture, and by the 
comprehensiveness and grand symmetry of the Plan of the Ages 
which this volume presents, it proves beyond question, not only 
that the Plan is a divine one, but at the same time, that the Bible 
which contains that plan is a divine revelation. 

It is valuable beyond price to all truth seekers-- skeptical and 
others~but who to-day, amid the clamoring creeds, is not in 
doubt and to some extent skeptical? He who has not longed for 
some more tangible, more reasonable and more solid basis of 
faith and hope than is generally possessed by Christians, either 
has little brain capacity or will not allow himself to think. 

Oh! I long to have fellow-Christians illumined by the light of 
God's Word which this book so marvelously reflects. And 
imbued with its spirit of consecration, all would indeed be saints. 
I shall do what I can to bring it to the attention of the household 
of faith, believing that I can in no other way do them so much 
good, or so honor God. It cannot fail to bring forth rich fruit of 
grace, knowledge and love wherever it is read, or rather where it 
is studied prayerfully by earnest, truth-seeking children of God. 

As for me, my feet had well nigh slipped~I was almost an 
Infidel, disgusted with the unreasonableness of much of the 
theology and the contradiction one of another of the various 



religious denominations, all of which I ignorantly supposed to be 
taught in the Bible. But I thank God that the "glad tidings of 
great joy which shall be unto all people," as presented in the Plan 
of the Ages, reached my eyes and heart. It has put a new song in 
my mouth, even the loving kindness of our God. For this I shall 
ever praise the giver of every good, and in my humble way shall 
delight to spend and be spent, in letting the light of the Plan of 
the Ages shine into other and still other hearts, to refresh and 
bless and strengthen them as my own has been." 

W. BELL. 



"I have read Millennial Dawn with great interest and am 
reading it a second time. I think it the best book I ever read, 
except God's book, the Bible. I purpose sending for more and 
lending them to worthy ones wherever I can find them; so that 
they also may know the riches of the grace of our God." 

J. T. WILSON. 



"I am delighted with the book, and think it likely to induce the 
careful investigation of educated skeptics. I have already had 
five copies and now want forty more. I want to do what I can to 
put this book into the hands of truth seekers. I long for the next 
volume." 

E. HORNE. 



Both Church and State are shown to be involved in the trouble 
of the Day of the Lord, social, political and financial. In no other 
book are the Scriptures bearing on these topics so pertinently 
applied. Mankind will soon be asking the question, "Watchman, 
what of the night?" and the answer is here given—The morning 
cometh— the blessed reign or Day of Christ— and also the night; 
for the word of warning it gives is needed concerning "Jehovah's 
Day" which closes the world's sad 6,000 years of night, and 
introduces the Millennial age of glory, the world's Sabbath. I 
wish a million readers were each in possession of a copy. Its 
composition, thought and importance of subject, are all that 
could be desired. 

B. ADAMSON. 



"I am surprised at the truth it reveals. Truly "the half was never 
told." I am greatly blessed in the study of God's Word, which is 
made more plain." 

C. E. COOK. 



A volume that will surely be appreciated by Bible students, is 
Millennial Dawn, The Plan of the Ages. It is the first of a series 
of volumes designed to make plain the teachings of the Bible, in 
a manner calculated to arrest skepticism, by Reason and 
Scripture, the special aim being to lend a helping hand to 
Christians in putting on the whole armor of God, that in the 
present confusion, the skepticism and tendency toward Infidelity, 
they may be able to stand. It is certainly a book that will be 
welcomed even by those of skeptical minds, for a kindly feeling 
of forbearance and respect for opposing opinions pervades its 
pages, and the objectionable dogmatism and evidences of 
bigotry, so common in the majority of such arguments, are 
evidently unfamiliar to the mind of the truly Christian and 
scholarly editor. Millennial Dawn will, we predict, have a very 
large sale. We heartily commend it to our readers. —Detroit 
Commercial Advertiser, Sep. 24, 1886. 



"Words fail me to express my appreciation of the book. The 
reading of it was the grandest feast I ever enjoyed. How much I 
wish that every earnest seeker after the truth could have a copy 
of it. If it were possible to spare the money I would order several 
copies to lend, but for the present I am doing what I can with my 
one copy." 

N. RANEY. 



Millennial Dawn. This is the first volume of a series under this 
title, and treats, as the author terms it, of the "Plan of the Ages." 
The second volume will be upon the "Times and Seasons" of 
Scripture. This volume takes up the subject at a point where the 
skeptically inclined will be most interested and proceeds with the 
important theme in logical order, step by step presenting the 
truths which the author finds in the Bible bearing upon the 
subject. The author, while a close reasoner, is eminently 
scriptural, bringing forth a "Thus saith the Lord," to substantiate 
all his arguments. The subject and its treatment are deeply 
interesting, and all seekers after the so-called hidden truths of 
Revelation will be delighted to find a treatise that explains so 
clearly things but half understood or mysterious before. —Indiana 
Farmer. 



R898 : page 8 

The Pacific Congregationalist says: "In Millennial Dawn, Vol. 
I., we have a much more pronounced and perfected scheme than 
they have yet given us at Andover. The author has given to his 
well-printed book of 351 pages the sub-title, The Plan of the 

Ages." 



page 8 

New York, August 23, 1886. To the Author of Millennial Dawn: 

DEAR BROTHER: Truly the entrance of his Word giveth light! 
Your book, Millennial Dawn, has been used by God to so 
illuminate his divine revelation that the glorious view seems to 
have left me like one in a trance. Trained, as I have been, in the 
most rigidly Calvinistic school of thought, my whole self 
naturally and quickly assumed the defensive as I caught the spirit 
of the book in its opening pages. But God had beyond all doubt, 
been preparing my mind and heart for the childlike reception of 
his truth. And laying aside all prejudice, preconceived notions, 
and "traditions of the elders," I closeted myself for the greater 
part of three days with my Bible and Dawn, and earnestly 
seeking, in prayer, the guidance of God's Holy Spirit to lead me 
into all truth, I feasted upon the fat things and drank in the 
precious truth until I could almost say with Paul, "Whether in the 
body I cannot tell; or whether out of the body I cannot tell: God 
knoweth." 

I have long since become dissatisfied and disheartened 
concerning the clash and din of jarring discord among opposing 
creeds and rival sects composing the heterogeneous "mass of 
baptized profession"~each division, large or small, wresting the 
Scriptures to conform to its own particular phase of belief, 
causing the Word to appear so distorted that its divine Author 
would fail to recognize his own production. 

But, blessed be God, the Scriptures, in reality, cannot be broken, 
and however men may seem to pervert them to support their 
peculiar views, they remain unchanged and unchangeable—the 
Rock of Eternal truth! I praise God that he has made you 
instrumental in opening my eyes to behold the beautiful 
symmetry which the Word exhibits in the marvelous 
combination of its manifold and multiform parts, and in 
unstopping my ears to hear the delightful harmony which its 
many and varied notes produce when taken in their entirety. 

S. I. HICKEY, Presbyterian Minister. 



Millennial Dawn has highly delighted and consoled me. Indeed 
aside from the Bible, no book is so highly prized by me. I have 
books which cost many times more than the Millennial Dawn, 
but, if I could not get another, I would not part with it for all of 
my books and many more besides. 

G. W. DICKSON. 



VALUABLE AIDS IN BIBLE STUDY. 

The Emphatic Diaglott, Greek-English New Testament,. ..$1.50 
Young's An. Greek, Hebrew and English Concordance,.... 2.50 

These are Special Prices to ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
subscribers. 

Address, TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, No. 40 Federal 
Street, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 


