Announcements
● Literature offer for August: Any 32-page brochure, except the School brochure. September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? October: Subscriptions for either Awake! or The Watchtower or for both magazines. November: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures with the book The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?
● Everyone associated with a congregation should renew their subscriptions to The Watchtower and Awake! through the congregation. It will be helpful if all requests for literature and other items are made through the congregation rather than sent in to the Society by individuals.
● Congregations should begin requesting the 1992 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses with their September literature request. The new calendar will be especially attractive and instructive, combining photographs of the Promised Land with artwork of related Biblical scenes. Both the pictures and the events will be more meaningful to us. The 1992 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses  will be available in Chinese, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Serbian, Spanish, and Swedish.
● From August 28 through August 31, the Society will be taking an inventory of all literature on hand in Brooklyn Bethel. Because of this inventory, no congregation literature requests will be processed for shipment or for pickup during those days.
● Each congregation will receive three Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature. Please fill out the forms completely, and send the original to us no later than September 6, 1991. Keep a carbon copy for your files. We are sending a third copy for use as a work sheet.
● An adequate supply of forms for use during the 1992 service year is being sent to each congregation. These forms should not be wasted. They should be used only for their intended purpose.
● New Publications Available:
How Can Blood Save Your Life?​—Arabic
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Laotian, Urdu
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Serbian
How to Find the Road to Paradise (for Muslims)​—French
● New Audiocassettes Available:
Hosea through Malachi (set of three audiocassettes)​—French

