Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 5
Song 165
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Suggest one or two magazine presentations that would be appropriate for the local territory, and encourage all publishers to go out in field service this weekend. Bring Reasoning book to Service Meeting next week.
20 min: “Praise God’s Name to the Full.” Question-and-answer discussion. Conclude with a well-prepared demonstration showing how the current Topic for Conversation might be used. Adapt to local circumstances. After introducing or identifying himself appropriately, a publisher might say: “Today we are discussing with our neighbors the need to have an optimistic outlook for the future. World leaders frequently speak about their plans for a better world. On what do their hopes rest? Do you believe that men are capable of bringing in a better world? [Allow response.] The prophet Jeremiah had something to say about this as recorded at Jeremiah 10:23. [Read.] We can be optimistic about the future only because we have learned about the promise God himself made. And his promise will not fail. Here is what the apostle Peter wrote. [Read 2 Peter 3:13.] Notice how this sure promise from God is highlighted in this brochure.” Publisher then proceeds to show the householder appropriate information in the brochure being presented.
15 min: “Planting and Watering​—Steps Toward Making Disciples.” Discuss with audience paragraphs 1-9 of insert, page 3. When discussing paragraphs 7-9, make practical application of material by use of very brief interviews of publishers who have been able to do what is mentioned or local experiences that illustrate the points. Make sure that experiences or interviews are brief and to the point.
Song 130 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 12
Song 72
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Read to congregation acknowledgments and expressions of appreciation from Society for donations sent in. Also, commend the congregation for support of local congregation’s needs. Encourage participation in field service on weekend and at other times when there are arrangements for group witnessing.
15 min: “Be Whole-Souled in the Field Ministry​—Part 2.” Encouraging and instructive talk covering material in article and illustrating use of Reasoning book. Not necessary to have others demonstrate points mentioned, but speaker can simply show how to find and use material in this fine field service instrument. Briefly demonstrate value of practice sessions in preparing for field ministry. If time permits, may invite publisher to explain how he or she does this.
20 min: “Planting and Watering​—Steps Toward Making Disciples.” After a brief introduction tying in material covered last week, conduct a question-and-answer review of paragraphs 10-20 of insert, pages 3 and 4. Some publishers may be able to relate how they have improved their ministry and started Bible studies through application of suggestions presented in previous issues of Our Kingdom Ministry.
Song 48 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 19
Song 174
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. “Working Hard at Doing God’s Will.” Encourage brothers to make advance plans for attending 1992 special assembly day program. Announce date and place if known. As time allows, suggest which articles in current magazines may be most appropriate to present from house to house this weekend.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In Frequently Worked Territory.” Questions and answers. Make local application of information or adapt to needs of congregation.
15 min: “Congregation Book Study Arrangement​—Part 2.” Encouraging talk by an effective book study conductor.
Song 25 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 26
Song 134
15 min: Local announcements. Detailed discussion of congregation’s field service arrangements and what is being done to provide encouragement and assistance for the pioneer publishers. Give particular attention to the needs of those who may be starting their pioneer service September 1. Encourage participation in field service this weekend, and remind publishers to pick up supply of Creation book for use in field service starting Sunday, September 1. Announce special field service arrangements for Monday, September 2.
15 min: Local needs. May use information in cover articles of June 8, 1991, Awake! as basis for a talk or discussion on subject of gossip.
15 min: Question Box. Discussion with audience. Demonstrate how publisher might introduce information about voluntary donations in a direct and simple manner. If householder should ask how much an item costs, the publisher could reply: “There is no charge for our literature, but if you would care to make a small donation to our worldwide Bible educational work, we would be happy to accept it.” Or, when appropriate, the publisher may introduce the subject by saying: “You may be wondering how it is that Jehovah’s Witnesses are able to do this work.” Publisher can pause briefly for possible response, then continue: “All of Jehovah’s Witnesses are volunteer ministers who receive no pay for their work. This includes those who produce and distribute the literature. We and others who appreciate the value of this Bible educational work support it by our voluntary donations. If anyone wishes to make a small donation, it is gladly received.” Publisher may then pause, allowing for response from householder. Remind publishers to make wise use of literature and explain donation arrangement discreetly to people who show genuine interest and take literature.
Song 16 and concluding prayer.

