Be Whole-Souled in the Field Ministry
Part 2​—Building Up Enthusiasm
1 It is easier to be enthusiastic about an activity when we enjoy it. It is also generally true that a person enjoys doing something for which he is prepared. That certainly is true in fully accomplishing our ministry.​—2 Tim. 4:5.
PREPARATION ESSENTIAL
2 Our enthusiasm in the field ministry is directly related to how well we have prepared and how often we go out in service. For example, if someone we meet in the house-to-house ministry identifies himself as a Muslim, what could we say? A well-prepared publisher might respond: “That’s interesting. I have not talked with many Muslims. But I have read something about a few teachings of your religion in this handbook. [Turn to page 23 of the Reasoning book.] It says you believe that Jesus was a prophet but that Muḥammad was the last and most important prophet. Is that not so? [Allow response.] Do you also believe that Moses was a true prophet? [Allow response, likely in the affirmative.] Could I show you in the Holy Writings what Moses learned from God about God’s personal name?” You could then read Exodus 6:3. In this way, you may get an interesting conversation started.
3 It is difficult for many of us to remember specific page numbers. But with a little preparation and practice, we can use the section called “Conversation Stoppers” near the beginning of the Reasoning book. Included in that section are several pages of information to help us respond to people who identify themselves with a particular religion.
4 The Reasoning book also has a fine section on introductions. Why not pattern your introductions after these? We may need to adapt our presentation to the situation. At the end of many of the subjects in the Reasoning book, there is a section “If Someone Says,” providing pointed material in answer to specific questions or objections related to the subject. All this fine material, however, is valuable only to the extent that we use it in our preparation.
HOW TO PREPARE
5 Be alert to any publications that will be discussed at the Service Meeting and have these with you to refer to during discussions and demonstrations. In this way, you can benefit more fully from the preparation of others.
6 It is beneficial to spend some time preparing for service. Be sure you have obtained the literature you need. Take a few minutes to look at the Topic for Conversation. Review the scriptures used, and check for specific talking points in the literature to be featured. Doing this together as a family can be helpful.
7 Have practice sessions. You can practice at various times​—after the Congregation Book Study, at social gatherings, in car groups, between doors. Giving presentations and discussing and demonstrating how to handle objections can be quite enjoyable and provide fine occasions to sharpen our skills.
8 Diligent preparation will build our enthusiasm for the ministry so that we can become skilled workers and reap joyful satisfaction.​—John 2:17.

