Congregation Book Study Arrangement
Part 2​—Need to Prepare and Participate
1 Jehovah’s Word pronounces happy the person who finds wisdom and gets discernment, for the reward is great. (Prov. 3:13, 14, 16-18) Spiritual wisdom is precious and life saving. It enables a Christian to use the knowledge he acquires from God’s Word to good advantage in active worship, in solving day-to-day problems, and in making decisions concerning his goals in life.
2 The Congregation Book Study has been designed to help us study and apply God’s Word and in this way grow in wisdom and spiritual comprehension. Regularly attending the Congregation Book Study, therefore, should be an integral part of our personal program for acquiring wisdom.​—Prov. 4:7-9.
PREPARE THOROUGHLY
3 Some of those associated with the first-century congregation did not exert themselves vigorously to learn the truth and keep up with advancing light. They remained babes in Christ and thus were unacquainted with the word of righteousness. (Heb. 5:11-13) The apostle Paul exhorted the congregation to “press on to maturity.” (Heb. 6:1) Obviously, this requires more than casually listening to others discuss the truth. Thought and research are required to arouse our “clear thinking faculties,” and we must exert ourselves vigorously.​—2 Pet. 3:1, 2; Luke 13:24.
4 Thorough preparation for the Congregation Book Study enhances our understanding and builds appreciation for the material. Effective preparation, however, requires more than reading the paragraphs and quickly underlining the basic answers to the questions. We need time to savor the material by meditating upon its meaning and its value to us personally. Look up the cited scriptures and think on how they relate to points in the paragraphs. Look up words not fully understood.
5 For some of us, personal study may be hard work, and it does take time; but, oh, how beneficial! Paul pointed to the results of such intense study, saying: “But solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their perceptive powers trained to distinguish both right and wrong.” (Heb. 5:14) Such personal study helps us to grow to maturity, so that we can determine the right course when we are faced with decisions to make.
PARTICIPATE
6 We should strive to participate in each meeting. Why? Not only are our well-prepared comments an expression of our faith but they also encourage and build up our brothers. (Rom. 10:10; Heb. 10:23-25) Active participation in the Congregation Book Study also plays an important part in our spiritual development. If experienced ones, children, and newly interested persons all comment freely, the group enjoys a rich variety of expressions. This is educational and refreshing to all.​—km 3/86 p. 3.
7 If we diligently prepare for the Congregation Book Study, regularly attend, and freely participate, our search for wisdom will be successful and we “will find the very knowledge of God.”​—Prov. 2:4, 5.

