Praise God’s Name to the Full
1 How we rejoice over Jehovah’s many blessings! In the United States during this service year, there have been new peaks in publishers, pioneers, and home Bible studies. There was also a fine Memorial attendance of 1,910,194. Thousands of publishers have attended special conventions in various lands, and all of us have benefited from the bountiful supply of spiritual food provided in our fine circuit assembly and special assembly day programs. We have also received many other blessings.
2 How can we show our appreciation for all that Jehovah does for us? We can do this by praising God’s name to the full!​—Ps. 145:21.
KEEP ON PRAISING GOD’S NAME
3 How can we praise Jehovah’s name to the full during August? We will continue featuring the magazine-size brochures. By preparing diligently and carrying a selection of these brochures with us in field service, we will be equipped to praise Jehovah and possibly help others learn how they too can praise him.
4 The Topic for Conversation is “A New World​—By Whom?” We could prepare appropriate introductions based on the information on pages 9-15 of the Reasoning book. Some householders will readily discuss with you what world leaders are saying about present hopes for making the world better. Although most people long for peaceful conditions, Jeremiah 10:23 shows that man cannot resolve his own problems. It is reassuring to know that God’s promise to do something about world conditions today will not fail. This promise is found at 2 Peter 3:13. If the householder appears to be genuinely interested, offer an appropriate brochure.
PREPARE WELL
5 Preparation is essential if we are to be effective in teaching others. Why not prepare with other family members, with the one who taught you the truth, or with someone in your book study group? By rehearsing your presentation, you will feel more confident and manifest personal conviction when speaking to people in the territory.
6 Our presentations should reflect our interest in people. Emphasize the Bible’s promise of a new world to offer hope to depressed and discouraged ones. When the householder accepts the brochure, you may demonstrate our Bible study program. Or you may decide it would be more appropriate to do that on the return visit.
7 As we come to the end of this momentous service year, what a joy it is to be the recipients of so many blessings from Jehovah! May all of us use this remaining month of the 1991 service year to praise Jehovah’s name to the full as we eagerly look forward to serving Jehovah forever in his new world.

