Presenting the Good News​—In Frequently Worked Territory
1 Preaching in frequently worked territory poses special challenges. How do you keep the message fresh and appealing? What approach should be taken toward some who seem to have decided that they are definitely not interested? What can be said to those who say we call too often? How can the simplified literature distribution arrangement be handled in often worked territory?
BE POSITIVE
2 Contrary to what some might think, territory that is worked often and thoroughly generally produces better results than that where we call less frequently. So one of the first hurdles to overcome is any negative thinking about calling regularly at the same doors. People need to be given every opportunity to hear the Kingdom message. It would be a mistake on our part to conclude that Jehovah has judged as unworthy those who have not responded favorably despite our having called on them many times.
3 Showing empathy is especially important in frequently worked territory. Having a specific message that addresses what affects people in their local neighborhood will likely produce a positive response in some who otherwise would not listen. Are you staying abreast of current events, and are you prepared to show how the Bible’s message can help people deal with problems they face?
VARY APPROACH
4 Vary your approach in often worked territory. One time you may use a tract as part of your introduction. On another occasion one of the more than 40 introductions suggested in the Reasoning book on pages 9-15 may be tailored to address local concerns. You may even wish to refer to your last visit in the neighborhood, thus minimizing this as a basis for objection. If you took note of a meaningful comment the householder made during your last visit, such can be used as a stepping-stone to further interest-arousing conversation.
5 View people as Jehovah does, and keep on showing concern for those who may have told us that they are definitely not interested. Jehovah made repeated appeals to his ancient people despite their apathy toward his messengers. (2 Chron. 36:15; Jer. 7:13) Many who at one time felt that they were not interested are our brothers and sisters today. Even bitter opposers have been won over to the truth. These are now grateful that someone patiently continued to call on them with the good news.
KEEP GOOD RECORDS
6 It is of utmost importance to keep a good house-to-house record. Following up on those who were not at home will ensure thorough coverage of territory and increase the time between our calls on those who are home. Some have also found it good to exchange not-at-home records from midweek activity with those who work territory on weekends. This effectively varies the times households are called on and increases the possibility of finding people who are consistently away during certain times of the day and on certain days of the week. Additional suggestions can be found in The Watchtower of July 15, 1988, pages 15-20.
7 Jehovah knows when sufficient effort has been made to reach all who will hear. Under Christ’s leadership, we will continue obeying him, confident that the work will be done within the time allotted.​—Ezek. 9:11.

