Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING APRIL 5
Song 24
 4 min: Local announcements and field service arrangements. Include appropriate Announcements.
15 min: “What Will the Memorial Move You to Do?” Question-and-answer coverage. Read paragraphs.
12 min: Aiding New Ones to Attend Meetings.
(1 min.) Introduction by chairman.
(5 min.) (Scene I) At conclusion of Bible study, two publishers give Memorial invitation to new one and invite to Memorial. Also, discuss article “Celebrating the Death of the Greatest Man Ever on Earth” in April 1, 1981, Watchtower; read paragraph 9. Make plans to be in attendance together.
(5 min.) (Scene II) Following Memorial celebration on night of April 19, new one invited to April 26 Watchtower study. Now, at first Bible study after Memorial, same new person informs the two publishers that he is planning to accept the invitation he received at the Memorial to attend April 26 Watchtower study. They prepare first few paragraphs of article “Worker-Ministers.” Arrange to sit together at Kingdom Hall.
(1 min.) Chairman briefly reviews points and encourages follow-through.
10 min: Demonstration for current Topic of Conversation. Stress a transitional talking point from latest Watchtower and offer subscription.
 4 min: Review meeting highlights and encourage all to follow up any interest recently found in territory.
Song 91 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 12
Song 116
 5 min: Accounts report, local announcements and field service arrangements.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News—House-to-House Work Brings Personal Benefits.” Question-and-answer discussion. In considering the material under paragraph 3, ask audience for personal experiences that relate to the points listed. Make discussion practical with a view to encouraging fuller share in the house-to-house work.
12 min: Talk based on article “Are You a Subscriber?” Ask audience for suggestions as to who might be prospective subscribers and for any appropriate experiences.
10 min: Memorial and field service announcements. Brief demonstration on use of April 1 Watchtower and Memorial invitation in calling on interested persons. Encourage all to do Bible reading for the Memorial and to plan for a full share in field service this weekend. See Announcements.
Song 4 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 19
Song 5
 5 min: Local announcements and field service arrangements.
18 min: “Appreciating the Watchtower Study.” Question-and-answer discussion to be handled by the Watchtower study conductor, if possible. Allow for personal expressions of appreciation, particularly from those associated many years. Commend congregation for their efforts.
 9 min: Preparing Memorial attenders for this week’s Watchtower study. Demonstration showing how a publisher who had invited Memorial attender to Watchtower study on April 26 can go about acquainting that one with the Watchtower study. Point out the study schedule on inside back page, questions on bottom of page; explain how meeting is conducted and why it is beneficial to attend. Show example in this week’s lesson of how scriptures are clarified.
13 min: Discussion of Question Box. Sister approaches book study conductor inquiring about the possibility of inviting her Bible student in service. Together they review suggestions. Sister expresses gratitude for assistance.
Song 57 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 26
Song 115
 5 min: Local announcements and field service arrangements.
12 min: Consider progress being made by congregation in offering subscriptions and placing magazines during this month. How did April special issues of magazines help? Have a few experiences prepared beforehand showing how publishers started magazine routes. What are some of the advantages in regularly delivering magazines to interested persons?
18 min: Elders may use this time to consider what is needed locally, or a Scriptural talk based on article “Do Not Isolate Yourself” in November 15, 1980, Watchtower, may be presented. In either case, include commendation for efforts in bringing new ones to the Memorial and Watchtower study. Encourage follow-through on helping such interested ones.
10 min: Preparing for special field service first Sunday of May. Review how congregation has been doing regarding first-Sunday-of-month field service, and where and how improvement can be made. Also review offer, Topic for Conversation, and suggest talking points in latest magazines. Encourage all to share in field service this Sunday.
Song 55 and prayer.

