Part VI—Congregation Meetings: Appreciating the “Watchtower” Study
1 In Bible times an invitation to sit at the table of a king to dine on food prepared and served by his royal servants was a great honor, an expression of the king’s “loving-kindness.” (2 Sam. 9:7-13; 1 Kings 2:7) Today, do we not feel deeply grateful for what the Great King, Jehovah, has done on our behalf? Through his Son, Jesus Christ, he has arranged a bounteous table and has given all of his people a standing invitation to enjoy the best in wholesome, healthful spiritual food. The Master, Jesus Christ, has appointed a “faithful and discreet slave” to serve “food at the proper time.” (Matt. 24:45-47) What has been the principal means through which the anointed “slave” class has distributed the “food”? Clearly, for over 100 years it has been The Watchtower.
HOW DO YOU VIEW “THE WATCHTOWER”?
2 Knowing that the “slave” class is Christ’s instrument for dealing with the congregation today should make our heart very receptive to what The Watchtower says. Also, knowing that The Watchtower endeavor to hold closely to the Scriptures builds confidence and makes us eager to examine each issue as we receive it.—Acts 17:11; see also 1964 Watchtower, page 574.
3 Vital truths have been brought to the attention of Jehovah’s people through The Watchtower. From the start, it has been boldly highlighting God’s heavenly kingdom as man’s real hope; giving proof that Christ’s presence is invisible; and announcing that 1914 marks the end of the Gentile Times. The need to preach the established Kingdom, the clear distinction between Jehovah’s organization and Satan’s, the hope of eternal life on a paradise earth—all have been discussed. Scripturally in their proper time. The Watchtower, from its first issue, has always built up appreciation for the value of Jesus Christ’s ransom sacrifice and this continues to motivate us in our service.
4 While we have seen the world sink deeper and deeper into corruption with each passing decade, Jehovah has protected us with timely warnings against sexual immorality, drugs, and so forth, and set out procedures for disfellowshiping unrepentant wrongdoers to safeguard the congregation. The Watchtower has helped us to train our conscience in ever so many areas of life so we can enjoy a good relationship with Jehovah. We appreciate so much Jehovah’s patient, progressive leading of us.—Prov. 4:18.
HOW TO BENEFIT FULLY
5 Considering The Watchtower together as a congregation certainly contributes to our unity of thinking and builds in us a solid, Bible-based faith. (1 Cor. 1:10) But how can we individually contribute to making each Watchtower study the spiritual highlight of the week, both for ourselves and our brothers? Three things are necessary to fully benefit from the Watchtower study: (1) Personal and family preparation. Do you have time set aside for this? What works best for your family? During such study, do you pay particular attention to the scriptures, noting how they are used or applied? Why would this be good? (2 Tim. 2:15) (2) Attend regularly. Are there some of us who habitually leave after the public talk? (3) Participate freely. We should not feel that a long, involved comment is necessary. Short, to-the-point answers are often better. An effort to comment in our own words will doubtless increase our understanding of what is printed and be more motivating to others. Take the initiative to look up and make application of cited scriptures. Comments that make practical application of points or include relevant experiences are appreciated by all
WHAT THE ELDERS CAN DO
6 Watchtower study conductors do well to review their teaching methods from time to time. They can ask themselves: Am I commenting too frequently? Are the main points being highlighted? Are the brothers being encouraged to participate? Is the Bible being used during the study? Am I well prepared? Other elders designated by the body of elders as good teachers should be scheduled to conduct periodically. (Note September 1977 Our Kingdom Service, page four.)
7 Do you have a hearty spiritual appetite? (Matt. 5:3) If so, then you are invited to the King’s table to partake with all of his people in the abundance of spiritual good things generously provided through his “slave” during the Watchtower study. May all thanks and praise go to Jehovah, our Grand Teacher.—Isa. 54:13.

