Presenting the Good News—House-to-House Work Brings Personal Benefits
1 “Pass through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and you must put a mark on the foreheads of the men that are sighing and groaning over all the detestable things that are being done in the midst of it.” That was the way the man with the recorder’s inkhorn was to carry out his commission from Jehovah in the final days of ancient Jerusalem.—Ezek. 9:2-11.
2 Today, throughout the world, a similar work is carried out by Jehovah’s Witnesses by means of a vigorous house-to-house campaign of taking the good news to people, searching for those who want to learn the truth and warning others who do not want to hear. Have you taken up this lifesaving work? Are you sharing in it as fully as your personal circumstances will allow?
3 Our efforts in this work are rewarded in the realization that thousands are helped each year to learn the truth. We also receive numerous personal benefits when we regularly and diligently share in the house-to-house preaching work. How? Well, consider the following:
● It sharpens our appreciation for the truth. The more we engage in the house-to-house work, the more we come to see the “sighing and groaning over all the detestable things.” We are convinced that Bible prophecy is being fulfilled and we appreciate that the only solution to mankind’s problems lies with Jehovah’s kingdom through Jesus Christ.
● It helps us to develop and perfect the fruitage of the spirit. Obviously it takes all the fruits of the spirit—love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control—for us to meet the challenge of the house-to-house work and persist in it.—Gal. 5:22-24.
● It helps us to conquer fear of man. Do you recall how you felt the first time you went from house to house? Gradually, though, we come to realize that the all important thing is to preach the good news and to sound the warning, and, in comparison, men and their rebuffs become quite insignificant. Like Jeremiah, we come to feel the assurance of Jehovah’s backing, which, in turn, builds up our faith.—Jer. 1:17-19.
● It keeps us humble. We soon learn that it is not in our own strength or ability that we can carry on this work. Rather, as long as we remain humble and are “not rebellious” and do “not turn in the opposite direction,” Jehovah will give us “the tongue of the taught ones” and we will know “how to answer.”—Isa. 50:4-6.
● It strengthens our ability to defend the truth. To be able to use the sharp, two-edged sword, God’s Word the Bible, effectively, we need practice. As we regularly use the Bible in the house-to-house work, we find it is “alive and exerts power.”—Heb. 4:12.
● It is invigorating spiritually and physically. Regular participation in the house-to-house work helps to keep us spiritually alert and results in a good conscience, contributing to our joy. For many, the physical exertion and exercise involved has brought about improvement in physical health.
4 Considering the many benefits that the house-to-house work brings both to those who listen to us and to ourselves, surely we have every reason to “stay by these things,” that is, to share in it fully and regularly.—1 Tim. 4:16.

