Question Box
● When can a Bible student and others be invited to share in field service and thereafter be counted as a publisher?
Certainly there is good reason to rejoice when a new one wishes to join us in our public evangelizing work. At the same time, we recognize the need of safeguarding the name of Jehovah and the congregation from any reproach. This calls for discernment on the part of both the elders and the publishers.
Generally speaking, the publisher conducting the weekly Bible study is in a good position to evaluate the new one’s spiritual progress. By listening to his speech and observing his conduct from week to week, a discerning teacher can see if the student has allowed God’s Word to take root in his heart, causing him to bring his life into harmony with Jehovah’s righteous standards.—Jas. 1:21; 1 Thess. 2:13.
Before inviting a new one to join us in public preaching, however, it is good to review the questions listed on page 129, paragraph one, of the Organization book. If you, the teacher, can answer in the affirmative the eleven questions presented there, then doubtless your Bible student can also do so and is ready to take part with you in the work. If, though, you are unsure about something, then on an appropriate occasion you can review selected scriptures, inviting the student’s expressions to make sure he understands the importance of observing all the Scriptural requirements, including refraining from the use of tobacco. (Matt. 28:20) Of course, if you feel the need for advice, talk to an elder, possibly your book study conductor. It may be that he will talk to the new one if this appears advisable.
When a new one turns in his first field service report, the congregation secretary should take note of this and inform the service overseer. At his earliest convenience, the service overseer will want to discuss the new one’s qualifications with the brother or sister conducting the Bible study. Thereafter, he will arrange to talk personally with the new one to get better acquainted and to discuss the responsibilities and joys connected with bearing public witness to Jehovah’s name and kingdom. Finally, after conferring with the presiding overseer, the service overseer may ask the secretary to make out a Publisher’s Record Card for the new publisher if he qualifies. In this way, the elders would be in a better position to assist new ones. Direction on counting children as publishers is given in the Organization book, page 130, paragraph one.
As we all keep Jehovah’s high standards in mind, we can be assured of his continued blessing and spirit on our work as the number of disciples grows from year to year.

