What Will the Memorial Move You to Do?
1 On Sunday, April 19, 1981, after sundown, we will be gathered at our meeting places to commemorate the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. (1 Cor. 11:24, 25) What a heartwarming occasion this proves to be each year! We are grateful to have our mind and heart refreshed about the significance of what he did in our behalf. We are pleased when many interested ones assemble with us. But a large attendance is not our main concern. Rather, we want these interested persons to attend because information presented about the ransom can reach their heart, moving them to share in pure worship.—Rev. 7:14, 15.
INVITE OTHERS TO MEMORIAL
2 We personally want to remember God’s beloved Son by imitating his compassion for those not “related to us in the faith” and invite them to meet with us. (Gal. 6:10) Today, as never before, they are truly “sheep without a shepherd.” (Matt. 9:36) How good to have the fine information provided in the April 1, 1981, issue of The Watchtower to bring to them. The timely article entitled “Celebrating the Death of the Greatest Man Ever on Earth” should be an excellent means to stir interest in this observance. It has a fresh approach to the subject and this should make our invitations more appealing.
3 Be sure to use the special Memorial invitation printed for the occasion. This invitation has helped interested ones to appreciate the importance of the Memorial and the benefit of attending. It would be good to extend one to every person we have record of showing interest.
INVITE TO REGULAR MEETINGS
4 All newly interested persons attending the Memorial should be presented with a copy of the March 15, 1981, issue of The Watchtower. It features the subject “Glorifying the Ministry” as the first study article scheduled for April 19. The second study article entitled “Worker-Ministers” is scheduled for study on April 26, the week following the Memorial. The purpose is to whet the appetite of the interested persons to come to the April 26 Watchtower study. Extend a warm, friendly invitation to all to attend. For the benefit of new ones who have not yet had an opportunity to attend a Watchtower study, we suggest that you give them an idea of how the study is conducted, using the questions at the bottom of the page. It may even be possible for you to do this that same night following the Memorial celebration, or sometime before the day of the study. You may even be able to prepare with them part of the assigned material, thus making it easier for the individuals to follow the study procedure during the meeting.
5 Why not also encourage these new ones to attend the public talks regularly. If there is a list of upcoming talks on the information board, point out some of the subjects that will be discussed. Mention the fact that 60 new talks will be given during the next 12 months or so, some having started already in March. Let them know that you plan to hear these talks that will be presented on important Bible topics. They are welcome to attend whenever possible. You may wish to share a few points from talks already given, explaining how these have enlightened and strengthened you. Only a few new talks have been given thus far, so most of this fresh material is yet to come in the weeks ahead. Encourage them to benefit from such meetings even as you regularly do.
REMIND OF RESPONSIBILITY
6 Too, the significance of the Memorial occasion may prompt us to discuss the meaning of Christian discipleship with those studying, helping them appreciate how the truths they learn should be affecting their lives and activity. If their heart responds, then it may be an appropriate time to invite them to join in making a public declaration with their mouth for salvation. (Rom. 10:9, 10) We can help them realize that the time left for doing this is growing steadily shorter.
7 The Memorial celebration is a special night when we are reminded of what Jehovah has done for us through his Son’s sacrifice. By attending, our determination to follow Christ’s self-sacrificing example is renewed. We rejoice that Christ Jesus is actively guiding and directing us in our modern-day disciple-making work. May the time and effort that we devote in sacred service this month reflect our heartfelt remembrance of him. Thus we will move ahead unitedly in teaching others to have this same appreciation.—Matt. 28:19, 20.

