Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“Your People Will Offer Themselves Willingly”
THE mighty Syrian army chief Naaman has leprosy. If left untreated, this loathsome disease can result in disfigurement and death. What is Naaman to do? Among those of Naaman’s household is a little girl, “captive from the land of Israel.” She boldly speaks out and identifies the prophet Elisha as the one who can heal Naaman.—2 Kings 5:1-3.
Because of her courageous stand, Naaman seeks out Elisha and is healed. Furthermore, Naaman becomes a worshiper of Jehovah! This experience, recorded in the Bible, took place in the tenth century B.C.E. (2 Kings 5:4-15) Today, many youths show similar courage in speaking out in behalf of Kingdom interests. The following experience from Mozambique bears this out.
Six-year-old Nuno is an unbaptized publisher of the good news. Even before he became an unbaptized publisher, Nuno would gather the children in his neighborhood, offer a prayer, and teach them the Bible, using the publication My Book of Bible Stories.
Many times Nuno wakes up early Saturday morning and reminds his family: “Today we go out in the field ministry.” His zeal for the ministry is manifest in other ways. While accompanying his parents in the street ministry in Maputo, Nuno often approaches people on his own. On one such occasion, a businessman came up to him and asked: “Why are you selling these magazines?” Nuno said: “I’m not selling the magazines, but I do accept contributions to help finance the preaching work.” The businessman responded: “Although I’m not interested, I’m impressed with your attitude and ability. I would like to make a contribution to this work.”
On another occasion, Nuno approached a man on the street and offered him the book True Peace and Security—How Can You Find It? The man asked: “Don’t you attend that school over there?” “Yes,” Nuno replied, “I attend that school, but today I’m presenting an important message from this book. It shows you that you can live in the new world that God will bring, as shown in the picture in this book.” Little did Nuno realize that the man he spoke to was a teacher at his school. Not only did the teacher accept the book but now he also regularly receives the Watchtower and Awake! magazines from Nuno.
When Nuno is asked why he likes to engage in the preaching work, he says: “I want to speak to people and teach them about Jehovah and his Son, Jesus Christ.” He adds: “And if the people don’t want to listen, there is no reason to get upset.”
Worldwide, thousands of youths like Nuno “offer themselves willingly” to teach and preach about God’s Kingdom. (Psalm 110:3) But this does not happen by chance. Parents who teach their children about Jehovah from infancy, set a good example in the ministry, and zealously pursue Kingdom interests will be richly rewarded.

