Make Good Use of Older Books
1 Man has stored away millions of old books in libraries in every corner of the earth. Yet, of what everlasting benefit have they been to the human race? (Eccl. 12:12) Of much greater worth are publications that focus attention on God’s Kingdom and on what it will do for mankind. Most congregations have in stock a variety of such books that were published prior to 1985. During January we will offer these older books to the public.
2 They Have Real Value: While some of us may feel that these books are out-of-date in comparison with our newer publications, we must remember that they contain Scriptural truth. The Kingdom message that they explain is still valuable today and, if heeded, can be lifesaving. (John 17:3) Therefore, we should put forth an extra effort to make good use of these older books.
3 Underscoring their value is the experience of a woman who inherited a number of older Watch Tower publications from her grandmother. A Witness asked the woman if she had any idea of the publications’ real value. The woman replied: “I don’t know their value, but how can I find out?” The woman accepted a Bible study, came into the truth, and thereafter treasured her grandmother’s library. What a valuable inheritance that collection of older books proved to be!
4 Get Them Into Circulation: In addition to offering the older books from house to house, be sure to offer them when making return visits on people who you know enjoy reading our publications, including those who subscribe to The Watchtower and Awake! and who are on your magazine route. For those who are studying the Bible with you, selected older books can provide a background knowledge that will broaden their understanding of the truth. Do not forget to obtain any of the older books that are missing from your personal collection. In this way, you will accumulate a valuable theocratic library, which can be used to enrich your periods of personal study.
5 Rather than keeping our older books in storage, let us make good use of them to stimulate the people we meet to “fear the true God and keep his commandments.”​—Eccl. 12:13.

