Our Resolve​—To Pursue Jehovah’s Way of Life
1 A highlight of the “God’s Way of Life” Conventions was the resolution that was adopted in the concluding talk. It began with the declaration: “We . . . wholeheartedly agree that God’s way is the best way of life.” Recall some high points of that resolution to which we said, “AYE!”
2 It is our resolve to remain clean before Jehovah, without spot from the world. We will continue to put God’s will first in our lives. Using his Word, the Bible, as our guide, we will not deviate to the right or to the left, thus confirming that God’s way is far superior to the way of the world.
3 The world in general disregards God’s way of life and reaps the consequences. (Jer. 10:23) We must therefore continue to be taught by our Grand Instructor, Jehovah, who says: “This is the way. Walk in it, you people.” (Isa. 30:21) Jehovah’s way of life, as set forth in the Scriptures, is superior in every respect. In order to pursue that way, it is imperative that we take full advantage of all that Jehovah teaches us.
4 Jehovah’s Superior Teaching Program: Jehovah teaches us the real purpose of life and how to use our lives to the best advantage. He teaches us how to improve the quality of our lives mentally, morally, and spiritually. He teaches us how to live at peace with our brothers, our family, and our fellowman. He does this through his textbook, the Bible, and through his organization.
5 Our congregation meetings are of great importance in this regard. As we regularly attend and participate in all five meetings, we receive comprehensive training as ministers of the good news and a well-balanced education in Christian living. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Our Grand Instructor further provides theocratic education through assemblies and conventions. Our goal should be never to miss a meeting or a session if our health and circumstances permit us to attend.
6 May we diligently continue pursuing God’s way of life in the days ahead, all to Jehovah’s praise and to our everlasting benefit!​—Isa. 48:17.

