Overseers Taking the Lead​—Congregation Book Study Conductors
1 It is an outstanding privilege for a qualified elder or ministerial servant to serve as a Congregation Book Study conductor. Looking after the spiritual needs of those in his group is a serious responsibility. His duties fall into three categories.
2 Capable Teaching: It requires thorough preparation for the Congregation Book Study conductor to impart understanding to the group each week. He seeks to enhance appreciation for the material being studied. Instead of commenting excessively himself during the study, when necessary he will formulate additional pointed questions to draw out the main points of the lesson. His challenge is to make the study interesting and instructive and to involve everyone in the discussion. His objective is to build up spiritually, to highlight the practical value of the study, and to make the material reach both mind and heart.​—1 Thess. 2:13.
3 Helpful Shepherding: The Congregation Book Study conductor is “like a hiding place from the wind and a place of concealment from the rainstorm.” (Isa. 32:2) He really cares for all in his group and sees to it that spiritual help is provided when one of those in his charge is discouraged.​—Ezek. 34:15, 16; 1 Thess. 2:7, 8.
4 Zealous Evangelizing: The Congregation Book Study conductor is conscientious about making practical arrangements for all in his group to participate fully in the field ministry. He takes the lead in the evangelizing work, knowing that the regularity, zeal, and enthusiasm he shows for the service will be reflected in the rest of the group. (Col. 4:17; 2 Thess. 3:9) In time, he endeavors to work in service with each member of his group. If we want to sharpen our preaching and teaching skills in the ministry, the Congregation Book Study conductor can help us to attain our goal.​—1 Tim. 4:16; 2 Tim. 4:5.
5 We are truly blessed with these gifts in men who stand ready to offer us spiritual assistance and loving support. (1 Thess. 5:14) May we show our appreciation for this wonderful provision from Jehovah by our regular participation in the book study and our faithful support of the evangelizing work.​—Heb. 10:25.

