Service Meetings for January
Week Starting January 4
Song 36
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. If meeting times changed January 1, remind all to use handbills that show the new schedule.
15 min: “Make Good Use of Older Books.” Questions and answers. Mention older books that are in stock locally. Point out some of their interesting features, and explain how they might be presented to others. Encourage all to offer these books in field service and when witnessing informally during January. Include a demonstration of a brief, simple presentation.
20 min: Making a Legal Choice for Nonblood Management of Health Care (Acts 15:28, 29). Talk by a qualified elder, based on question-and-answer guide that accompanies the Society’s health-care durable power of attorney, or proxy, form and the sheet entitled “Information About the Society’s Health-Care Durable Power of Attorney (DPA) Forms,” both dated January 1997. Advance Medical Directive/​Release card: Following this meeting, baptized Witnesses will be given a new card, and those with unbaptized minor children will receive an Identity Card for each child. These cards are not to be filled out tonight. They should be filled out carefully at home but NOT signed. Signing, witnessing, and dating of all cards will be done after the next Congregation Book Study, under the supervision of the book study conductor. Before signing, ensure that the cards are filled out completely. Those signing as witnesses should actually see the cardholder sign the document. By adapting language from this card to their own circumstances and convictions, unbaptized publishers may write out their own directive to use for themselves and their children. Durable power of attorney, or proxy, form: This has been prepared by the Society and is a more comprehensive health-care document that provides primary legal protection. Many doctors have reacted very favorably to this document because it contains detailed information needed to treat Witness patients effectively. Publishers who have not already filled out this form and who wish to do so can obtain a copy from the congregation secretary. (It is not necessary to fill out a new one each year. However, if a publisher has moved to another state, he would need to execute a new form in order for it to be effective in that state.) Additionally, if a durable power of attorney, or proxy, form has been executed, you should write on the front of the Advance Medical Directive/​Release card, preferably in your own hand: “I have also executed a health-care power of attorney.” Book study conductors should make a checklist to ensure that all assigned to their group have the assistance they need to fill out the Advance Medical Directive/​Release card and durable power of attorney, or proxy, form. For the best legal protection, both documents should be filled out.
Song 61 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 11
Song 88
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
20 min: “Our Resolve​—To Pursue Jehovah’s Way of Life.” A talk. Include encouragement for all to attend the five weekly meetings of the congregation regularly.
15 min: “Exercise Patience.” Discussion between members of a family. They review ways they can demonstrate patience to a greater degree in their ministry. Include appropriate comments from the June 15, 1995, Watchtower, page 12.
Song 135 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 18
Song 169
 5 min: Local announcements.
10 min: Local needs.
15 min: “Overseers Taking the Lead​—Congregation Book Study Conductors.” Talk by an exemplary book study conductor, who reviews his duties. He shows how such work contributes toward the progress and spiritual well-being of the congregation. Include key comments from Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, pages 43-5, 74-6.
15 min: “Starting Studies in the Require Brochure.” Question-and-answer consideration.
Song 197 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 25
Song 201
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Adjustment in Hour Requirements for Pioneers.” Talk by elder. Commend pioneers in congregation, and encourage more publishers to take up auxiliary and regular pioneer service, having in mind extra activity during March, April, and May. Include information from February 1997 and July 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry inserts.
20 min: Are You Examining the Scriptures Daily? Talk and audience discussion. Each year the Society provides the booklet Examining the Scriptures. Do you individually or as a family group make good use of this publication? Explain the beneficial reasons why we should consider the scripture text for each day. Discuss comments from the foreword of Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1999, pages 3-4. Invite publishers to relate the special effort they are making to consider the daily text and comments faithfully as individuals and families.
Song 225 and concluding prayer.

