Starting Studies in the Require Brochure
1 Reports from around the world show that the brochure What Does God Require of Us? is a powerful tool to teach people the truth. Thousands of Bible studies are being started each week in this brochure. Have you been successful in starting and conducting a Bible study in the Require brochure?
2 While most find it easy to place the brochure, some find it difficult to know what to say to get into the study. What methods have others found to be effective in starting Bible studies using the Require brochure? The following suggestions should be helpful.
3 Offer to Demonstrate the Study: When making the initial call or a return visit, rather than simply offering a Bible study to the householder, we can demonstrate how the Bible study course will be conducted. This will tend to remove the mystery and subsequent anxiety that many householders associate with the word “study.” Once we learn to demonstrate it, we will find that with a simple introduction, we can get right into the study.
4 Preparation Is the Key: Our enthusiasm for starting Bible studies is directly related to how well we have prepared. Advance preparation will help us overcome any hesitancy we may have in sharing in the Bible study work. By practicing our presentation several times, we will be more conversational, able to express ourselves naturally and in our own words. This not only will help us to relax but will put the householder at ease as well.
5 When rehearsing, it is helpful to time your presentation so that you can inform the householder how long it will take to demonstrate the study. After introducing himself, one brother says: “I stopped by to show you our free Bible study program. It takes about five minutes to demonstrate. Do you have five minutes?” Lesson 1 of the Require brochure can be demonstrated in about five minutes. Of course, only selected scriptures can be read in this amount of time, but by completing the first lesson in a few minutes, the householder is able to experience his first study. Then let him know that when you return to study Lesson 2, you will take only 15 minutes.
6 The following presentation has proved to be effective:
▪ “I would like to demonstrate for you a very simple, yet accelerated, home Bible study course using this brochure What Does God Require of Us? Many have found that in as little as 15 minutes a week for 16 weeks, they can find satisfying Scriptural answers to these important Bible questions.” Briefly show the table of contents. Turning to Lesson 1, say: “If you can give us about five minutes, we would like to show you how this works. Lesson 1 is entitled ‘How You Can Find Out What God Requires.’” Next read the three questions, and explain the numbers in parentheses. Read paragraph 1, and show the householder how to locate the answer. The householder may be asked to read paragraph 2. Then say: “Based on this information, how would you answer this question? [Read the question again, and allow the householder to comment.] You will notice that there are scriptures associated with each paragraph. These direct our attention to the Bible’s answer to these questions. For example, let us read 2 Timothy 3:16, 17 and see if it supports the answer you gave concerning the author of the Bible.” After reading paragraph 3, considering the question, and reading John 17:3, draw the householder’s attention to the knowledge he or she has taken in by reviewing Lesson 1. At this point you can turn to Lesson 2 and read the last question, “What are two ways we can learn about God?” Then ask: “When would you have about 15 minutes so that we can do Lesson 2 and find the answer?”
7 It is important to keep the discussion simple and commend the householder whenever possible. When arranging for another visit, instead of asking if he wishes to continue, simply encourage him to follow the same procedure for the next lesson. Let him know that you look forward to returning. Some publishers have offered to do a lesson over the phone if scheduling became difficult. You may also encourage the student to put the brochure in a safe, convenient location so that it will be handy for your next visit.
8 Be Determined: While the key to success is preparation, we must be determined to follow through. Teaching a lesson in a few minutes can be challenging, so be determined to practice the presentation as many times as necessary in order to be fluent when demonstrating the study. Try to demonstrate a study with everyone you meet at the door, informally, and in telephone witnessing. If you are having difficulty starting a Bible study, do not be discouraged. Success in starting Bible studies requires determination and a sincere desire to impart the truth to others.​—Gal. 6:9.
9 By applying these suggestions, you too may have the privilege of helping someone on the road to life, by starting and conducting a Bible study in the Require brochure.​—Matt. 7:14.

