“Exercise Patience”
1 As we see the end of Satan’s old system drawing ever nearer, it is vital that we “exercise patience” while waiting on Jehovah’s day of deliverance. Especially at this late hour, wicked enemy forces are determined to divert our attention from the foremost issue of Jehovah’s sovereignty and tempt us to be distracted by multitudes of personal interests. In this way, Satan would trick us into giving up or slowing down in the Kingdom-preaching work. (Jas. 5:7, 8; Matt. 24:13, 14) In what ways can we manifest such needed patience?
2 By Being Forbearing: When we encounter apathy or opposition in our ministry, forbearance will help us to persevere in preaching. We will not be easily intimidated or offended if people we meet are abrupt or unkind. (1 Pet. 2:23) This inner strength can prevent us from speaking negatively of people in our territory who show indifference or animosity toward our work, realizing that such talk would discourage us and those who work with us in the ministry.
3 By Patient Persistence: It can tax our patience when after having a good discussion in field service, we cannot find the interested person at home again. The same is true if those with whom we study are slow to make progress or to take a stand for the truth. However, patient persistence is often rewarded with good results. (Gal. 6:9) A sister made a number of return visits on a young woman before a Bible study actually got under way. On the first five visits, the woman was preoccupied with other matters. On the sixth attempt, the sister got drenched in a thunderstorm, only to find nobody at home. Nevertheless, determined to give the woman one more chance, the sister called again and found the woman ready to study. Thereafter, the student made steady progress and in a short time dedicated her life to Jehovah.
4 We know that Jehovah’s day will not be late. So we wait on his outworking of matters, knowing that divine patience will produce good fruitage. (Hab. 2:3; 2 Pet. 3:9-15) We must exercise patience as Jehovah does and not give up in the ministry. “Through faith and patience,” look to Jehovah to reward you for your hard work.​—Heb. 6:10-12.

