Is Man Incapable of Peace?
$500,000,000,000 is spent each year on armaments. Is war a basic part of human makeup?
IT MAY certainly appear that way. Man presently spends $500 billion (U.S.) a year on armaments. It has been said that the world has known only 26 days of peace since the end of World War II. When people are not fighting neighboring countries, they are often fighting among themselves​—one religion against another, children against their parents, husbands against their wives. Japan, a country long noted for its diligence, harmony and parental respect, is experiencing a 42-percent increase in juvenile crime. Called the “Japanese youthquake” in a recent issue of Newsweek, much of the crime seems to be “senseless rage” against teachers, parents and the police.
Some say man is basically a warring animal and incapable of peace. As Dr. Polykarp Kusch, a 1955 Nobel laureate and professor of nuclear physics at the University of Dallas, said: “Ultimately, as major resources disappear, we will go at each other with bows and arrows and poleaxes.”
But is war a basic part of man’s makeup? No. The many examples of people who do live at peace with one another is proof of that. Take, for example, the Tasaday people, living in the Philippine rain forest. A scientist who lived with them for some time said: “They don’t know about killing, murder, war! Never heard of them.” Then, too, how about the more than 2,000,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses, who live virtually in every land in the world and yet are not involved in any nation’s conflicts? A Roman Catholic nun, writing in the Portuguese Catholic missionary periodical about Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mozambique, said: “How different the world would be if we all woke up one morning firmly decided not to take up arms again, whatever the cost or the reason, just like Jehovah’s Witnesses!” So man is capable of peace. But if that is so, just why are there wars?
Why Is There War?
On the surface there appear to be several reasons. At the time, they seem plausible to the nations involved. Wars have been fought over mutual boundaries. Real or imagined fears of economic discrimination often lie at the core of others. This appears to be one reason why Japan began its expansion into Manchuria prior to World War II. The United States was in the middle of its great depression of 1929. The resultant nationalistic protectionist policies of the United States and other trading partners were a factor in Japan’s decision to try to reach out to nearby countries to increase her influence and expand her economic potential.
Nationalism, prejudices, injustices and communication difficulties have been at the root of other conflicts. In all too many cases, armies have carried out the orders of leaders, such as Hitler, Napoleon and Alexander the Great, who have shown an excessive desire for personal glory and honor.
However, in addition to these obvious surface reasons, what do the Scriptures say are the basic causes of war? The Bible shows that at the core of the problem of war lies man himself. Well has the statement often been made that wars are not caused by guns, tanks and bombs, but by humans who, it might be added, are selfish. Replace such selfish attitudes as prejudice, hatred and jealousy in man with love, compassion and forgiveness and we would see the end of wars as well as all other forms of strife. Jesus said: “Out of the heart come wicked reasonings, murders.”​—Matthew 15:19.
But why are these flaws in man? Are these things part of his basic makeup​—the way he is made? No. The Bible shows that God made man good, perfect. As Ecclesiastes 7:29 explains: “See! This only I have found, that the true God made mankind upright, but they themselves have sought out many plans.” It was only after men sought independence from God and his rule, and thereby sinned, that selfish thoughts and desires began to form in their mind and heart. These then led to anger, strife and war.​—Genesis 4:5.
The Bible gives another contributing cause for war when it says at 1 John 5:19: “The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.” This wicked one, Satan the Devil, has had a profound effect on mankind’s history and its wars. His desire has been to turn all men and women away from God’s rule. And war has served that purpose well. By working through those who form and mold public opinion and thinking, Satan has been successful in fomenting wars with their God-dishonoring results.
The Bible also points to the lack of a strong universally recognized government as another contributing factor to conflict. Scientist Isaac Asimov said: “The international cooperation must take the form of a world government sufficiently effective to make and enforce the necessary decisions, and against which the individual nations would have neither the right nor the power to take up arms.”
But don’t we have an attempt at just such a world government right now in the United Nations organization? No, because all the member nations have held onto their own national sovereignties and have refused to turn over full power to the United Nations. It appears that the U.N. is merely a forum for discussing policy differences rather than a central government to which all submit. In times of conflict between its member nations, it has been able only to shake a disapproving finger, but has shown little power to stop the war. The United Nations is not the needed world government.
What About Wars Mentioned in the Bible?
Of the wars mentioned in the Bible, many appear to have had God’s approval. Why is that? A close look at those wars that had God’s backing will reveal them to be examples of Jehovah’s exercising his rights as the Universal Sovereign. As the “Judge of all the earth,” he certainly has the right to remove wickedness and immorality from the earth. (Genesis 18:25) At times Jehovah used phenomena such as flood and earthquake to do this, while at other times he used certain nations as his executioners.​—Genesis 6:5-8; Numbers 31:3.
We see this particularly in the case of the nation of Israel. They were commanded by God to clear out certain descendants of Canaan from the Promised Land. Moses sets out clearly the reason for this at Deuteronomy 9:4 when he says: “It is for the wickedness of these nations that Jehovah is driving them away from before you.” Halley’s Bible Handbook states, on page 161, about these people: “Canaanites worshipped, by immoral indulgence, as a religious rite, in the presence of their gods; and then, by murdering their first-born children, as a sacrifice to these same gods. It seems that, in large measure, the land of Canaan had become a sort of Sodom and Gomorrah on a national scale. . . . Did a civilization of such abominable filth and brutality have any right longer to exist? . . . Archaeologists who dig in the ruins of Canaanite cities wonder that God did not destroy them sooner than he did.”
Interestingly, the Bible shows that soon Jehovah will again exert his authority as the Supreme Sovereign of the Universe by bringing to an end all the present-day violators of his moral laws.​—1 Corinthians 10:11, 12; 2 Thessalonians 1:6-9.
What Hope Is There for a War-Free World?
The Bible speaks of Jehovah as “the God who gives peace.” (Romans 15:33) Since man’s efforts for peace have all ended so dismally, let’s look at what Jehovah purposes for peace.
The peace that God offers is not based on fear of the other countries’ missile count or on mutual peace treaties. The Bible shows that his way to peace starts with education, the bringing about of a real change in people’s thinking and in attitudes that lie at the root of the problem. Leaders of countries have long used education to get their children to follow them into war. For example, Mitsui Sanshiro, who spent 12 years with the Japanese army in Manchuria, and who is now a Christian witness of Jehovah, recalls being taught Shūshin, or “ethics,” from his very first year in school until he graduated. In their “ethics” classes, they were taught that it was a great honor to give their life for their country and emperor. Jehovah, on the other hand, will educate his people in the ways of peace. As Isaiah 54:13 says: “All your sons will be persons taught by Jehovah, and the peace of your sons will be abundant.”
Through Bible study many Christians are learning to pursue the ways of peace. One Japanese man tells how he changed from a professional revolutionary to a peaceful Christian through just such a study. In college he read the best-selling book Toshi Ronri, or “City Logic,” which showed in detail the corrupt change of society in cities. He allowed himself to become heated up over speeches and books he read on existentialism, Communism and other radical philosophies.
He felt he must do something to bring about a change. He eventually joined and took a lead in activities of an ultraradical “Red Army.” Their goal was to bring about a change in the government by violent revolution and to replace it by a new proletarian (workers’) society. In time, however, he became disillusioned by the internal fighting and even murder of dissidents within the group, as well as the injuring of so many innocent citizens to achieve their aims. He left the group and later began a study of the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. He found in its message what he had been looking for, the basis for a true peace and hope of a better world. He also saw the effects that education in peace had already brought about among Jehovah’s Witnesses. Now he, together with his wife and three children, spend many hours each month telling others about God’s purpose for peace.
The need for a central world government that everyone will willingly subscribe to has long been recognized as a key element in the quest for world peace. The desire to establish that government has been behind many a would-be world conqueror’s efforts, as well as the setting up of the United Nations.
The Bible book of Daniel shows that Jehovah will set up just such a world government, destroying all present divisive forms of rule. It says at Daniel 2:44: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”
That world government of God will bring about some very necessary changes to accomplish peace. It will destroy all weapons. (Isaiah 2:4; Psalm 46:8, 9) It will remove all national boundaries, making it possible for an even and reasonable distribution of the world’s population and its resources. It will make possible one universal language for all​—a problem that has long been a contributing barrier to world peace. That government will bring about a climate wherein man can return to peace with his Creator and to perfection in mind and emotions, all of which are essential for a true, lasting peace.​—Zephaniah 3:9; Revelation 21:3, 4; 22:2.
But isn’t that all a little Utopian? Won’t there be those who simply will not go along and conform to this peace-keeping and peace-enforcing world government by God? That is a realistic possibility and one with which the Bible deals. Even today, many show a strong inclination to give in to inherited imperfections and resist the thought of recognizing God’s right to rule and obeying his laws. As was shown earlier in this article, Jehovah will again exert his rights as Creator and Sovereign and will remove those rebels, after giving them a sufficient opportunity to learn and respond. This will be a must to protect the interests of those who truly want a lasting peace. Psalm 37:10, 11 says: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more. . . . But the meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”
Happily, the Bible shows that we are living in the time when we will begin to see the fulfillment of these marvelous promises. God himself will soon remove all instigators and supporters of war. What unspeakable joy! The dream of the ages is about to be fulfilled. There will be true peace, a lasting one! God’s will is absolutely certain. Will we submit to it? This is an individual choice for each one of us to make. As God’s Word states: “I have put life and death before you, the blessing and the malediction; and you must choose life in order that you may keep alive, you and your offspring.”​—Deuteronomy 30:19; Joshua 24:15.
[Blurb on page 6]
Member nations have refused to turn over full power to the U.N. In times of conflict it has had little power to stop the war
[Blurb on page 8]
The need for a central world government has long been recognized as a key element for world peace. The world government of God will bring about the necessary changes
[Blurb on page 9]
God’s way to peace starts with education, bringing real change in people’s attitudes
[Picture on page 5]
A contrast to much of the war-torn world, peaceful Hiroshima Park, Japan, makes one think of the words of Psalm 37:10, 11: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more . . . But the meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”
[Picture on page 6]
Symbol of nations beating swords into plowshares​—U.N. building
[Picture on page 7]
Peace Park, Nagasaki, Japan, symbol of man’s prayerful desire for peace

