God’s Word Is Alive
What Will Judgment Day Be Like?
THE Bible gives a picture of Judgment Day that is much different from the way many persons imagine it. The day is not one to be dreaded or feared. Look at these pictures. They give some idea of how wonderful Judgment Day will be for humankind.
The Scriptures show that God has appointed Jesus Christ to be the Judge during Judgment Day. (Acts 17:31) And we can be confident that he will be fair and just in his judgment.​—Isaiah 11:3-5.
Contrary to popular opinion, Christ will not judge those who are resurrected on the basis of their past sins, many of which may have been committed in ignorance. The Bible explains that at death a person is set free or released from any sins he committed. It says: “He who has died has been acquitted from his sin.” (Romans 6:7) This means that when a person is resurrected he will be judged according to what he does during Judgment Day, not on the basis of what he did before he was resurrected.
Judgment Day, therefore, is not a literal 24-hour day. It will be 1,000 years long. It is the same 1,000-year period during which Christ and his associate kings will rule over redeemed mankind. (Revelation 20:4, 6) During this time people will work together toward making the earth a paradise. In due time the dead will be welcomed back to life on earth.​—Luke 23:43.
What happiness there will be when families long separated by death are joined together again! Yes, how pleasant to live in peace, to enjoy good health and to receive instruction regarding God’s purposes! During Judgment Day all who are alive on earth will be learning about Jehovah God and his ways. They will have opportunity to obey and serve him.
Those who choose to serve Jehovah during Judgment Day will be in line to receive everlasting life. But, even under these best of circumstances, some will refuse to serve God and will turn to wickedness. As the scripture says: “Though the wicked one should be shown favor, he simply will not learn righteousness. In the land of straightforwardness he will act unjustly.” (Isaiah 26:10) So wicked persons who refuse to change their ways will be destroyed. Only the righteous will be permitted to enjoy the paradise earth.

