Zealous Parents Produce Missionaries
OVER three thousand years ago childless Hannah, a faithful woman in Israel, promised her firstborn son to Jehovah’s service if she was granted a child. Jehovah answered her earnest prayers and she fulfilled her promise. Her son Samuel became a full-time servant of God and a Bible writer.​—1 Samuel 1:4-28.
Many Christian parents in modern times have been examples to their children in Jehovah’s service and have encouraged them to become full-time servants like Samuel, rather than plan for a secular career. This point was brought home forcibly on March 7 at the graduation of the 72nd class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead located in Brooklyn, New York. For five months the 42 students had received intensive training for missionary work in foreign fields. What attracted many of them to full-time service? Three fleshly sisters can answer that question​—Brenda, Rhonda and JoDene Rittenbach:
“We were brought up in a happy theocratic home where our parents helped us to love and live the truth. They set the example. At different times, as circumstances permitted, they engaged in auxiliary pioneer service (60 hours a month of Christian ministry) along with us, especially at vacation time,” explained Brenda.
“They also taught us to take a practical view of pioneer service,” added JoDene, “by sitting down with us and reviewing our responsibilities in the home and in the pioneer service. They helped us to plan things realistically rather than have a starry-eyed approach.”
With their six children now grown up what is the situation in the Rittenbach family? The three daughters will soon be serving in Colombia. Three married sons (with their wives) are also in full-time service. And what are mother and father doing? They are working full time at Watchtower Farms in New York State!
There is no doubt that Janice Peterson from Ontario, Canada, was influenced by her parents to take up full-time service. “My father was a pioneer minister before he married. Once married and with children, his goal was to pioneer with the family and serve where the need was great. His ambition was fulfilled in 1969 when all of us, including my crippled mother, moved to Nicaragua. What a joy when my father and I were able to serve together there as special pioneers! Now my husband and I will soon be serving in South America.”
In some cases even grandparents have influenced the lives of these graduates. Ross Miller’s grandmother was a colporteur (pioneer) in the early part of the century and her zeal has influenced two generations. Her son, Ross’ father, used to serve as a special pioneer and in the Brooklyn Bethel headquarters of the Watchtower Society. Ross’ mother has also been a pioneer. He has an uncle and aunt who are serving in the Mexican field. Without a doubt zealous parents and relatives can influence the next generation.
Several more in this class are thankful for the fine examples and encouragement received from their parents, many of whom were present at the graduation exercises.
All 2,044 who attended the graduation rejoiced in a fine program that included encouraging talks by Bethel elders as well as an excellent variety of experiences, music and a Bible drama presented by the students. Everyone greatly appreciated the dynamic talk by 88-year-old president of the Watch Tower Society, F. W. Franz, on the topic: “Carry On as Men.” He emphasized that all Christians, female as well as male, must serve courageously, especially in these dangerous pre-Armageddon days.​—1 Corinthians 16:13; Psalm 68:11.
The 42 students from 5 different countries have been assigned to serve in 18 lands across 4 continents. Their missionary service will no doubt be a fine contribution to Kingdom expansion.

