Making God’s Service Our Chief Joy
THERE are many activities that result in a measure of joy to those who engage in them, especially if done from humanitarian motives. But none of these, nor all of them put together, can compare with God’s service or worship when it comes to giving one rich and enduring joy. Yes, as foretold, “my own servants will cry out joyfully.”​—Isa. 65:14.a
A Christian’s joy is a pleasurable feeling of satisfaction in knowing that he is doing the right thing, pleasing God. It comes from knowing that we are doing good work that benefits others, furthers God’s interests and magnifies his name. The realization of such things brings us a joyful sense of contentment and inner tranquillity that can always be ours.​—Phil. 4:4.
To be able to make God’s worship or service our chief joy we must dwell on the things that will give us joy. We cannot expect to have this joy if we dwell on unpleasant things or experiences. Rather, we must look at our ministry positively, at what it all accomplishes in fulfilling God’s purposes, in separating people, in witnessing to his name and kingdom and in proving our integrity.
How do we show that we are making God’s service our chief joy? By thinking about it, by talking about it whenever opportunity affords, by seeking first God’s kingdom. (Matt. 6:33) We also show it by buying out time from worldly pursuits and pleasures for it​—for meetings, for personal study and for the field ministry. (Eph. 5:15, 16) We show it by taking good care of our physical powers, avoiding overindulgence in food and drink, the keeping of late hours, undue excitement, all of which are so likely to rob us of our vital powers that we could otherwise use in God’s service and to the upbuilding of our brothers and ourselves.​—1 Cor. 9:25.
And, of course, we show we make God’s worship our chief joy by freely contributing of our means according to what we have, cheerfully, remembering that the more we give proportionately, the greater our joy.​—Luke 21:1-4; Acts 20:35; 2 Cor. 8:12; 9:7.
Finally, let us never forget how important a good condition of heart is toward making God’s worship our chief joy.​—Isa. 65:14; Prov. 4:23.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, June 1, 1966.

