“School and Jehovah’s Witnesses”​—The Brochure Is Helping
Children returning to school this fall need all the help they can receive, particularly those trying to abide by godly principles. Two years ago the 32-page publication School and Jehovah’s Witnesses was provided to give this help.
AS A family, have you reviewed the contents of School and Jehovah’s Witnesses? Note the opening words of the publication: “This brochure is published to promote understanding and cooperation between Jehovah’s Witnesses and school authorities. It is our desire to cooperate with all who are working for the success of basic educational programs offered in school.”
So you will want to make sure that schoolteachers and principals receive a personal copy. “It is important that parents become acquainted with their children’s teachers​—making arrangements to meet and talk with them,” the brochure says. Therefore, if the teacher has not already received the brochure, this meeting would be an appropriate time to present it and explain its features. It really is a help!
Help to Teachers
A mother from Peoria, Illinois, writes: “Our son’s teacher has thanked us many times for giving her the brochure. She has said that it has helped her ‘not just to go along with but really to understand the Witnesses’ stand on many issues.’
“Because of this, we have been able to keep open a channel of communication. Our son’s teacher has remarked to us that she keeps the brochure on hand, and if she is not sure if our son should participate in some school activity, she will check the brochure before class and dismiss him quietly to some other project if need be. . . .
“Many times she has written my husband and me for further explanations. We have been able to give additional information to her throughout the school year, and have even been able to clear up a lot of wrong information she had concerning the Witnesses.
“This brochure has truly achieved its purpose in our case, making for a better relationship between school, student, and parents.”
At times a teacher may not have properly understood the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Then he or she gets the reputation of being uncooperative. A mother from Salem, Oregon, writes regarding her daughter’s third-grade teacher who had such a reputation:
“Shortly after school began we had our first parent-teacher meeting. I presented the teacher with the brochure School and Jehovah’s Witnesses. I pointed out its cooperative attitude, showing that Jehovah’s people want to be partners with the teachers. I suggested he might prefer to keep this brochure as a guide for understanding our child and other Witness students he may have in years to come.
“His response rather surprised me, as I expected to have my first experience with an uncooperative teacher. He eagerly took the brochure, looked through it quickly and sounded sincere as he replied that he would really appreciate having something to explain our beliefs and practices.
“I returned a few days later and asked the teacher if he had found time to look through the brochure. He said that he sat up in bed and read it completely​—front to back. He agreed that the information was very well presented; he very much appreciated having it. I told him that if he ever had any questions regarding it or our child’s actions to please let me know. He assured me that he would.
“One month later, while the class was busy with Halloween preparations, our daughter showed us a workbook and explained that she was the only one in class who had it. Her teacher had given it to her and told her it was to work in whenever the class was doing something she did not feel she should be doing.
“This brochure, School and Jehovah’s Witnesses, is truly the finest piece of tact and cooperative spirit and practicality.”
Many other families who have put the School brochure to use have made similar expressions. They have been delighted with the positive response of teachers who appreciate the guidelines that are provided.
Help to Witness Students
In particular, Witness students are benefited, and many have expressed gratitude. A girl from Ontario, Canada, reports:
“Our history teacher was talking to the class about how he feels when people at hockey games and other sporting events do not stand up for the national anthem. He said that this was disrespectful not only to the country but to others too. I wanted to talk to him after class, but I didn’t have the opportunity to do so. Instead I wrote him a letter and enclosed with it the brochure. . . . To my surprise he wrote me back. This is what he wrote.
“‘Your religious beliefs are your own. They are highly personal, worthy of respect and due consideration, by you and those who do not hold with your faith. Please, never interpret my feelings and opinions as a criticism of you or your beliefs. I hope to express the attitudes of respect and tolerance and would actively support any person’s right to freedom of religion. . . . Thank you for the brochure, it was very enlightening.’”
Time and time again the School brochure has helped teachers to appreciate the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses and to deal understandingly with students. Young ones who are trying to abide by godly principles are thus helped. As the girl from Ontario said: “It has made it a lot easier for us to talk to teachers and fellow students about our beliefs.” So be sure that teachers receive the brochure and are encouraged to read it.

