VOL. XXXI SEPTEMBER 15 No. U 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Present Truth Re Advocate and Mediator 291 

A Covenant By Sacrifice Not the New 

Covenant 292 

A Question Re the Mediator 293 

The Divine Plan of the Ages in Brief 294 

The Superiority of the Sarah Covenant 295 

When Will Opportunities for Service Cease? 296 

"Through Much Tribulation Ye Shall 

Enter the Kingdom" 297 

Is the Reading of "Scripture Studies" Bible 

Study? 297 

Was Jacob's Course With Esau Dishonorable? 299 

Esau Cared Only for the Earthly Part 

of the Birthright 300 

Jacob Was Not Reproved of the Lord 300 

The Trial Hour (Poem) 300 

Three Tempting Questions 301 

Such Shall Not Inherit the Kingdom of God 302 

Some Interesting Letters 303 

page 290 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



DETROIT, MICH., SEPT. 18 

Morning Rally, 9:30 o'clock at Vermont Hall, Grand River 
and Trumbull avenues. Discourse for the Public by Brother 
Russell at Light Guard Armory 2:30 p.m. Topic "Hereafter." 

KNOXVILLE, TENN, SEPT. 24-26 

Railroads have granted the very low rate of one cent per 
mile during the Appalachian Exposition now being held in 
Knoxville. This rate is open to all and good for the dates of 
the convention. 

Many of the friends throughout the South who could not 
go to Jamestown because of the great distance, will rejoice 
to know of a convention so much nearer home. For particulars 
as to lodging, meals, etc., address Brother R. A. Parham, 
5 Maloney avenue, S. Knoxville, Tenn. 

Brother Russell's topic for the Public discourse will be 
"Hereafter." This Sunday meeting will be held at Staub's 
Theatre, corner Gay and Cumberland Sts., at 3 p.m.; other 
meetings will be held at Market Hall. It is expected that 
Brothers Stevens, Bohnet, Raymond and Rutherford will also 
be speakers. 



MANCHESTER, N.H., SEPT. 25 

The Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony, at 10:30 a.m. 
and the Discourse for the interested at 7:30 p.m., will be in 
the Dearborn Memorial Hall, corner Lake avenue and Hall 
street. Discourse for the Public at Keith's Theater, Hanover 
street, near Elm, at 3 p.m. Topic, "Overthrow of Satan's 
Empire." 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., OCTOBER 2 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock, 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks St. The evening 
Praise service, 7 p.m., and Question Meeting at 7:30 
o'clock, will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the 
Public at 3:00 p.m., by Brother Russell, will be in the Brooklyn 
Academy of Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. Felix St. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered: (1) 138; (2) 165; (3) 135; (4) 145; (5) 
170; (6) 283; (7) 60; (8) 208; (9) 179; (10) 172; 
(11) 301; (12) 229; (13) 50; (14) 22; (15) 30; (16) 
32; (17) 12; (18) Vow; (19) 324; (20) 103; (21) 46; 
(22) 286; (23) 325; (24) 105; (25) 127; (26) 130; 
(27) 93; (28) 281; (29) 164; (30) 95; (31) 7. 



R4680 : page 291 

PRESENT TRUTH--RE ADVOCATE AND MEDIATOR 

A GENTLEMAN who fancies himself commissioned 

to be the Advocate of the New 

Covenant, but who has not yet come to see 

that the New Covenant could not be the 

Old Covenant, takes us to task saying: "Four 

years ago it was Present Truth that the 

Editor of THE WATCH TOWER needed a 

Mediator between God and Himself. Three 

years ago it became Present Truth that he 

does not need a Mediator between God and 

himself. Did the Editor of THE WATCH TOWER leave the 

Present Truth?" 

We reply, No, the Editor of THE WATCH TOWER 
did not leave the Present Truth. He kept all the 
Truth that he then had and has added to it. The light 
has scattered some more of the darkness, so that, with the 
very same thought that he had four years ago, he now 
sees that he used the wrong word in expressing that 



thought. He now sees that he should have used the 
Scriptural term Advocate instead of the word Mediator. 
He now sees that himself and others in the past have used 
language too carelessly, because of the general confusion 
and mix-up handed down from the dark ages. 

He now sees that the Scriptures nowhere say that the 
Church has a Mediator or ever will have a Mediator, and 
that they nowhere say that the Covenant of sacrifice, 
under which the Church is developed, has a Mediator. 
The Editor of THE WATCH TOWER is learning day by 
day more clearly to rightly divide the Word of Truth and 
to use Scriptural terms only. The Scriptures do say, "We 
have an Advocate with the Father." (I John 2:1.) They 
do not say anywhere, We have a Mediator between God 
and us. The Editor of THE WATCH TOWER is trying to 
assist God's people to think and speak correctly respecting 
the great work of Atonement for sin, the merit of which 
lies in the sacrifice of Jesus and the privilege to share in 
which is granted to the elect during this Gospel Age. 

The same critic innocently asks for any Bible text to 
show that the Church, the Bride of Christ, does not need 
a Mediator. How foolish! Does the Bible undertake 
to say all the things that are not so? One would think 
that no special ability would be necessary to discern that 
there is no need of a Mediator between friends. We 
never had this thought! When we used the word as 
respects the Church we used it thoughtlessly, just as our 
opponents are using it now; we used it without noticing 
that the Bible nowhere intimates a Mediator between the 
Father and the Church. It is because Present Truth is 
progressive that we have clearer light on the same facts 
than we had four years ago, even as we then had clearer 
light than we enjoyed years before that. The Editor of 
THE WATCH TOWER has believed in Jesus as his Redeemer 
from childhood. He did not understand the philosophy 
of The Divine Plan of the Ages then, but nevertheless, 
his simple faith was a sufficient basis for a consecration 
of his all to the Lord, and a sufficient basis for the Divine 
acceptance of the sacrifice and the begetting of the holy 
Spirit. Since then the light of this harvest time has 
been shining more and more clearly as the years go by. 
The light of Present Truth does not contradict the light 
of past Truth, but confirms it and further clarifies our 
vision and increases our hope and our joy. And is not 
this true of all of God's people now walking in the narrow 
way? Those who are now "waking up" to a realization 
of the fact that for seventeen years they have been in 
darkness are acknowledging that they have not been walking 
for those seventeen years in the "path of the just, 
which shineth more and more unto the perfect day." For 
the past seventeen years of their lives, the seventeen years 
of their best Christian experience, they believed that the 
Vine and the branches are one— that the Head and his 
Members are one; that the sufferings of The Christ are 
one— that the Church fills up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ— that the death of Christ is one— 



that the Church becomes dead with him sacrificially, after 
having been justified through faith in his blood, his 
sacrifice. For seventeen years they believed that the 
Prophet spake of the sufferings of Christ (Head and 
Body) and the glory that shall follow; that to be dead 
with him signifies to be baptized into his sacrificial death 
as in contrast with Adam's penalty— death. And to drink 
of his cup signifies a share of his sufferings and that the 
hope before all such is, that "if we be dead with him, we 
shall also live with him"; and "if we suffer with him, we 
shall also reign with him." For seventeen years these 
friends told us that they believed and rejoiced in St. 
Paul's sentiments of Phil. 3:9-1 1, the hope to be found in 
Christ (members of his Body), not having their own 
righteousness, which is of the Law (Covenant), but that 
which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which 

R4680 : page 292 

is of God by faith (not by the New (Law) Covenant), 
that we might know him and the power of his resurrection 
(sharing his resurrection as his members) and the fellowship 
of his sufferings (being partakers of the sufferings 
of Christ), being made conformable unto his death (not 
a different death from his, but a similar one— not a death 
as a sinner, but a sacrificial one), if by any means I might 
attain unto The resurrection of The dead. 

We are not murmuring nor complaining against these 
friends because of the great loss which they have sustained 
—the loss of spiritual sight into the deep things of God— 
into "the mystery, which is Christ in you the hope of 
glory." We compassionate their loss and remember the 
Master's words, "If the light that is in thee become darkness, 
how great is that darkness!" While not attempting 
to judge the hearts of any who have gone out from us, 
we may be confident that the Lord did not allow them to 
go out without a sufficient reason. We regard their loss 
of spiritual sight as a Divine judgment upon them, just 
as truly as we regard the opening of the eyes of their 
understanding as a mark of Divine favor. Remembering 
that the Lord is not dealing arbitrarily either in receiving 
his people into the light nor in casting some out of the 
light, we are bound to suppose that there were conditions 
of heart in these, our friends, with which the Lord was 
not well pleased. The lesson to us is that we must walk 
in the light and that we must put away from our hearts 
and, as far as possible from our flesh, everything contrary 
to the Divine standards of meekness, gentleness, purity, 
justice, love, "if by any means we would attain unto The 
resurrection of The dead." 

Before dismissing this subject we must answer another 
foolish question, namely, What answer do we make to the 
following:— 

A certain sister owning property in her own name 
found that her husband had taken possession of it, rents, 
monies, all, and that he ignored her entirely in the matter. 



Upon her request to have some of her own money and 

property given her by her father, the husband became 

angry and sought out some of our opponents. The latter, 

after the usual course, partially misrepresented our teachings 

respecting the atonement for sin. The husband replied, 

That's what my wife says. She says, "Jesus didn't 

die for you; he died for me— but not for you; I will die 

for you." What will we answer to this? We answer 

that we would not believe a man on oath who was trying 

to cheat his wife out of her own money. We do not believe 

that the wife said anything of the kind, nor that 

she has any such idea. We believe that the husband misrepresented 

his wife's statement, just as our opponents 

uniformly misrepresent THE WATCH TOWER statements. 

A half-truth may be an untruth, if it gives a misconception 

and is intended so to do. A truthful statement would not 

serve the purpose of our opponents, for the Truth is 

logical as nothing else is. St. Paul remarked, "We be 

slanderously reported." The same is true today. The 

self-contradictions of our opponents are remarkable. In 

one breath they tell us that they have been deceived by 

us for seventeen years. In the next they say that we have 

changed within the last three years. In the next they 

affirm that they are in accord with everything in the 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES, and yet they are opposing them as 

best they are able. Oh, inconsistency, thou art not a 

jewel; nor dost thou reflect beauty or credit upon 

anybody! 

A COVENANT BY SACRIFICE NOT THE NEW 
COVENANT 

In all of our writings for the past thirty years we have 
pointed out the New Covenant as coming fully into operation 
at the close of this Gospel Age. We have pointed out 
that it is the Covenant under which restitution blessings 
are to come to the world of mankind. We pointed it out 
as the Keturah Covenant— separate and distinct from the 
Hagar Covenant, under which natural Israel was developed, 
typified by Ishmael and separate and distinct also 
from the original Abrahamic Covenant, typified by Sarah, 
whose seed Isaac typified The Christ, Head and Body. 
We saw and pointed out to others, so that they saw, that 
the antitypical Isaac— The Christ, Head and Body— is the 
Melchisedec Priest, of which Jesus is the Head and the 
Church his Body— the great Priest under whom the New 
Covenant is to be made effective to Israel and to the 
world of mankind through Israel. We pointed out also 
that the elect Church of this Gospel Age, a "Royal Priesthood," 
must all offer sacrifice; as the Apostle declares, 
"Every priest is ordained of God to offer both gifts and 
sacrifices for sin." We pointed out that our Lord Jesus 
is the great High Priest of our profession and that he 
offered himself in sacrifice and that he required that all 

R4681 : page 292 



who would be with him in his Throne must walk in his 
steps— after being justified through faith in his blood. We 
pointed out that this is what is referred to in the Scriptures 
as the Covenant by sacrifice, "Gather my saints 
unto me, those who have made a Covenant with me by 
sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) We associated this sacrificing of 
the earthly nature by all those who would be partakers of 
the divine nature with the Apostle's exhortation of 
Hebrews 9:23. We called attention to the fact that the 
word sacrifices is in the plural and refers not only to the 
most important sacrifice made by our Lord and Redeemer, 
but that it applies also to the sacrifices of all those whom 
he accepts as his members of the Royal Priesthood. These 
are the "better sacrifices," which were typified by the 
bulls and goats of the typical Atonement Day. 

We saw and mentioned that the Church as priests, 
while under the Covenant of Grace, the primary Covenant, 
the Sarah Covenant, have a work to do in connection 
with the New Covenant. As the Apostle says, "We are 
able (or qualified) ministers (or servants) of the New 
Covenant." But we see more clearly now than we did ten 
years ago just how we serve the New Covenant— that as 
members of the Body of the Mediator of that Covenant, 
we are associated with him in making preparation for 
its inauguration. We are serving it in the sense that he 
served it, only in an inferior degree and not individually, 
but in him, as "members of the Body," members of the 
"Royal Priesthood," to whom "old things have passed 
away and all things have become new." We see now more 
clearly than ever the meaning of our precious relationship 
to God in Christ as members of the antitypical Isaac, 
through whose mercy Israel and the world shall obtain 
mercy, under the provision of the New Covenant put into 
operation as soon as the Royal Priesthood shall have 
completed the appointed work of sacrifice.— 
Romans 11:27-30. 

Our opponents can all agree that they disagree with 
THE WATCH TOWER, but they cannot agree amongst themselves 
on anything doctrinal. Nor do they see, seemingly, 
that fault-finding is not proof. Let them try to set forth 
The Divine Plan of the Ages from their own standpoint. 
They cannot do it. Their theories are illogical and inconsistent. 
They take our logical presentation as a basis and 
make a few turns and twists to suit themselves, failing 
to see that whatever they add or subtract is so much 
confusion. That is the reason why so many who leave the 
Truth take a few paces after the claimed "new light" and 
then drop out forever into the blackness of outer darkness 
of unbelief and uncertainty about everything. 

R4681 : page 293 

Let such of our opponents as are honest sit down 
calmly and figure out the Covenants and their mediators. 
Thus only will they see the weakness of their present 



attitude. 

(1) Which was the original Covenant to which the 
Law was added four hundred and thirty years after.— 
(Gal. 3:17)? 

(2) Would it be proper to speak of that original 
Covenant as the same that God promised he would make 
"after those days" and which he styles the "New 
Covenant"? 

(3) If so, of what use is language, except to mislead 
and confuse? 

(4) It is admitted that St. Paul declares that the original 
Covenant had no Mediator; that it was a uni-lateral 

or one-sided Covenant which needed no Mediator. 

(5) On the contrary, it is admitted that the Mosaic 

or Law Covenant was a type of the New Covenant— that 
it could not be a type of a Covenant which preceded it. 

It is conceded that the Law Covenant and its priests 
and their services typified the New Covenant with its 
higher or "royal priesthood" and antitypical Atonement 
Day and "better sacrifices," whose blood is brought into 
the antitypical Most Holy to make sin-atonement and 
whose bodies were burned outside the antitypical camp— 
Heb. 13:11. 

If a type cannot follow its antitype, surely, then, it 
could not be "added" to its antitype. Surely no great wisdom 
is necessary to see this. "We, brethren, as Isaac was, 
are the children of the promise"— the children of the original 
Sarah Covenant— barren for nearly two thousand 
years. 

The Redeemer is our Advocate, through whose imputed 
merit we, with him, are admitted to membership 
in the Spiritual Seed under his "Covenant by sacrifice"— 
symbolized by the offering of Isaac. Sacrificing with him 
and accepted as his members we shall soon with him constitute 
the great antitypical Moses (Acts 3:22,23), the 
Mediator of the New (Law) Covenant— between God and 
men— through Israel after the flesh. 



R4681 : page 293 

A QUESTION RE THE MEDIATOR 

CAN you quote any statement in the Scriptures 
to the effect that the Abrahamic Covenant 
did not have a Mediator? 

We answer that there is no direct statement 
in those words, nor is it necessary. 
What is not stated is not to be understood. 
That is a rule of all reason and logic. It 
is what is stated that is to be taken into 
consideration. There was no mediator 
mentioned. It is for those who claim that 
the Abrahamic Covenant had a Mediator to prove it. 

The Apostle Paul in his epistle to the Hebrews (6th chapter) 



tried to show the strength and power of the 
Abrahamic Covenant; but he does not tell us of or 
point to any Mediator as having had charge of it. 
On the other hand, he does point to God's Word and 
God's oath as the foundation of that Covenant. He says 
that it was approved to us by two immutable things— that 
God could neither lie nor break his oath. The Apostle 
very particularly shows that the Law Covenant was 
added to the Abrahamic Covenant and that, added 430 
years afterward, it had a Mediator. 

So St. Paul proceeds to explain that in the case of that 
original Covenant, because there was but one party, there 
was no need of a Mediator. A Mediator stands between 
two parties to see that each does his part. Moses was 
the Mediator of the Law Covenant. He stood between 
God and Israel. (Deut. 5:5.) On the one hand he represented 
God and on the other, Israel. But as respects 
the Abrahamic Covenant there was only one party. God 
is that One. Therefore there was no need of a Mediator. 
Why not? Because God did not make any condition with 
which the Seed of Abraham would have to comply. He 
gave his oath to this Covenant, instead of a Mediator. 
God said I will do it; therefore there was no place for a 
Mediator. And there was no Mediator. The original 
Covenant did not say how many additional or subordinate 
Covenants would be made. 

As to the promised Seed of Abraham, God did not 
explain how he would secure to Abraham such a wonderful 
Seed as would bless all the families of the earth. Abraham 
did not know how this was to be done. We know 
how God secures to Abraham this wonderful Seed. He 
set before his Son the promise of a great reward. And 
he, for the sake of the glory set before him, humbled 
himself to become a man. When he left the heavenly 
glory he was merely preparing to fulfil the Covenant. 
He was not yet the Seed of Abraham. Jesus the babe 
was of Abraham's seed according to the flesh, but not 
the Seed of Abraham mentioned in the Covenant. Even 
when Jesus was thirty years of age he was not the Seed 
of Abraham referred to in that Covenant. It was not 
until he voluntarily offered himself in consecration at 
Jordan that he became the Seed of Abraham. At that 
very moment the Seed of Abraham began to be represented 
in him— when he received the begetting of the 
holy Spirit. He reached completion as the Head of that 
Seed when on the third day he arose from the dead to 
the spirit condition. In other words, the Seed of Abraham 
was not yet in existence when God made that 
promise or Covenant to Abraham. 

Then Jesus set before his followers that same joy; 
and when we consecrate similarly we enter into a Covenant 
with God by sacrifice, as "members" of the Anointed 
One. We thus agree to present our bodies, to lay down 
our lives. And we have the promise that God will raise 
us up as the Body to the same exalted condition of 
heavenly glory to which he raised our Redeemer and 



Master. "If ye be Christ's (if ye comply with the conditions), 
then are ye Abraham's Seed and heirs according 
to the promise." (Galatians 3:29.) In a certain 
sense we are already the Seed of Abraham, but not until 
we share "his (Jesus') resurrection" will we be the Seed 
in the complete sense. The first work which that Seed will 
do will be to extend this great promise that God has made 
world-wide. Its utmost breadth will be attained by 
instituting a New Covenant with Israel by which Israel 
may attain eternal life on the human plane, and all nations 
through Israel. 

A Covenant between two parties, both contracting, 
requires a Mediator. As, for instance, in the ordinary 
affairs of life, the general law of the State steps in and 
serves as mediator between all contracting parties. And 
so in contracts between God and men, it is necessary to 
have a Mediator. But suppose you said to me, I intend to 
give you tomorrow this diamond ring. Should I ask, 
Where is the Mediator? Who will guarantee to me 
that you will give me the ring? You would probably 

R4682 : page 294 

answer, There is no need of a Mediator; it is a voluntary 
gift. And so in our Covenant of sacrifice. It is a voluntary 
act. God has made a certain provision: "Blessed 
are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear." 
We agree to enter into our sacrifice voluntarily and our 
Advocate agrees to help us. If we do these things that 
we have agreed to do, we get the reward— glory, honor 
and immortality. 

THE OATH AS INSTEAD OF A MEDIATOR 

In the Abrahamic Covenant God's oath, attesting his 
Word, served to ratify the Covenant, to make it binding, 
to hold it sure. It thus took the place which might have 
been occupied by a Mediator, had there been conditions 
mutually binding upon the Almighty and upon some of his 
people. There was no Mediator, because, as already stated, 
the promise was an unconditional one: God proffered to 
do certain things— to provide through Abraham's posterity 
a Seed capable of blessing the world. Hence no 
Mediator was necessary. 

But notice that St. Paul, in speaking of this Abrahamic 
Covenant (Heb. 6:17), declares that God "confirmed 
it by an oath." The word here rendered confirmed 
is defined by Strong's lexicon, to interpose (as, 
arbiter). Young defines the Greek word mesiteuo, rendered 
confirmed in our text, "to be or act as a Mediator." 



R4682 : page 294 

THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES IN BRIEF 



GOD proposed in himself before the foundation 

of the world the great Plan re Redemption, 

because he foreknew man's fall and the 

death penalty he would put upon it. For 

the first 1656 years up to the flood God permitted 

the holy angels to demonstrate their 

inability to recover the sinner to righteousness. 

On the contrary, the contagion 

of sin spread to some of the holy angels. As 

the Scriptures declare, "The sons of God 

saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, and they 

took unto them wives of such as they would. And there 

were born unto them children, which were giants and men 

of renown. (Gen. 6.) And the earth was filled with 

violence and sin— to such an extent that God declared 

that the imagination of the human heart had become only 

evil and that continually. Foreknowing this God had already 

arranged that one of the aqueous "rings," still 

suspended above the earth, should descend, causing the 

flood, which wiped out that order of things, destroying 

every human being, except righteous Noah and his family, 

of whom it is written, "Now Noah was perfect in his 

generation (there was no admixture of angelic seed).— 

Genesis 6:9. 

Thus the angels were tested by contact with sin for 
centuries— so that all of those who desired had opportunity 
to transgress the Divine Laws. The disobedient ones are 
referred to in the New Testament as those angels who 
kept not their first estate or spirit condition, but who 
preferred to live on the earthly, animal plane. These 
were restrained in chains of darkness until the great Millennial 
morning— cut off from fellowship with God and 
the holy angels and no longer permitted to materialize and 
thus to commingle with humanity.— 2 Peter 2:4. 

When God's due time came he called Abraham to make 
of him a type of himself, and to give him a son, Isaac, to 
be a type of Christ, and to call for Isaac a Bride, Rebecca, 
who would be a type of the elect Church of this Gospel 
Age. And as with Rebecca came maids, so with the elect 
Church comes the "great company" class. As Abraham 
offered Isaac on the altar in a figure and he was recovered 
from death in a figure, so God really offered his Son in 
death and recovered him out of death actually by resurrection 
from the dead. As all that Abraham had he gave 
to Isaac, so it is that all the blessings that God has to give 
to all others of the human family who will become his 
people will come through the antitypical Isaac. And when 
Rebecca became Isaac's bride and joint-heir, she became 
sharer with him in all the joys and privileges which 
were his. Thus was represented the future glory of the 
Church with Christ in blessing all the families of the 
earth. 

Moreover a double figure is used to represent The 
Christ, namely, Jesus the Head and the Church his Body. 
In the fulfilling of this figure the Apostle tells us that all 



of the consecrated overcomers are members of the Isaac 
class, saying, "Ye, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children 
of the promise." The Church as the Bride is pictured in 
St. Paul's statement, "If ye be Christ's, then are ye 
Abraham's Seed and heirs according to the promise"— 
the promise that through us the world shall be blessed.— 
Gal. 3:29. 

ABRAHAM'S WIVES TYPICAL 

While the foregoing is a brief synoptical picture of 
the whole, the details of Abraham's life represent the 
details of the Divine Plan of the Ages. As Abraham had 
the promise that he should be the Father of many nations, 
it implies that, eventually, many peoples of the world will 
become God's children— but only through Isaac and 
through the promise made respecting Isaac's work. 
Furthermore, the Seed of Abraham, it was foretold, would 
be as the stars of heaven and as the sand of the seashore. 
The stars of heaven represent the spiritual Seed of Abraham. 
The sand of the seashore represent the multitudinous 
earthly seed, the human family brought back to 
life during the Millennium, the result of the redemptive 
plan. 

St. Paul gives us the key to the entire situation in the 
suggestion that Abraham's wives were typical of Covenants 
and this explains to us the seemingly harsh treatment 
of Hagar. Abraham was obeying Divine instructions, 
and the Divine instructions were so shaped as to 
constitute the matter in type a picture and lesson for our 
instruction. Abraham's first wife was Sarah. St. Paul 
explains that Sarah typified a fundamental promise, and 
her name, Sarah, signifies princess or chief one. This 
princess Covenant, the one upon which all the others depended 
for their fulfillment, is the one which fulfills its 
mission or purpose in the development of the spiritual 
Seed— Isaac— "We as Isaac was are children of the promise." 
This Covenant has nothing whatever to do with 
the development of any other children of God except 
through the Isaac class, the Mediator class, the great 
Prophet, Priest and King class, through which all of God's 
blessings are to descend to humanity. 

Because Sarah was to serve as a type of spiritual 
things she was barren for long years, to teach that God's 
primary Covenant with Abraham would be barren (unfruitful) 
for long centuries. Meantime, in order to make 
another type, Sarah's bondmaid, Hagar, was given to 
Abraham for a wife, Sarah seeking to appropriate the 
child of Hagar as the Seed of promise— as her own. 
Hagar represented the Law Covenant made with Israel 
at Sinai, as St. Paul explains. The child or offspring of 

R4682 : page 295 

that Covenant was the Jewish nation, Israel in the flesh. 
The fact that Sarah sought to recognize Ishmael as her 



son and held Hagar in her arms at the time of his birth, 
implied that the Law Covenant with Moses as its Mediator 
would, for a time, seem to constitute Israel the heir of 
the original Covenant— which included the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. But this was not the Divine 
will. 

APOSTOLIC EXPLANATION OF COVENANT TYPES 

And so, in God's due time, Sarah brought forth Isaac, 
who typed the true heir of the Covenant or Promise. 
This birth of Isaac was represented primarily by the 
begetting of our Lord Jesus Christ by the holy Spirit to 
the spirit nature; and, later on, by his resurrection to the 
perfection of spirit nature; and in a larger sense, as St. 
Paul explains (Ye, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children 
of promise), the birth of Isaac represented the begetting 
by the holy Spirit of the entire Church, which is 
the Body of Christ. Then came the persecution, the 
mocking of Isaac by Ishmael and the subsequent casting 
out from Divine favor of the Hagar or Law Covenant 
and her child, the Jewish people. They have been outcast 
for centuries and were about to die— about to lose their 
national identity, about to be absorbed by other nations, 
just as Hagar and Ishmael, after being cast out, wandered 
through the desert until they had eaten their loaf and had 
drank the water they had with them and Ishmael was 
ready to die. Then the angel of the Lord drew their 
attention to a spring of water in the desert and, after 
their refreshment, counseled their return and submission 
to the Divine arrangement— their recognition of the 
Sarah Covenant and spiritual Israel. We have come 
close to this very point of time now. The poor Jews, 
losing hope, were about ready to die, to give up all faith 
in the promises. But, behold, at the opportune time, a 
well-spring of hope revives them and the message to them 
is that there is a spiritual Israel and also a natural Israel 
and that their blessings are along natural lines and must 
come to them through the recognition of the glorified 
Mediator of a New (Law) Covenant. 

The Apostolic explanation of this wonderful system 
of types stops here. And we would be inclined to stop 
here also, were it not that other Scriptures clearly point 
out that later on, after the death of the Hagar Covenant 
and after the principal Covenant shall have accomplished 
its purposes in the bringing forth of spiritual Israel, the 
antitypical Isaac, a New Covenant is due to be introduced 
"after those days"— after the interim of this Gospel Age 
specially set apart for the development of the antitypical 
Isaac. That New Covenant is referred to by St. Paul. 
When discussing this very subject he says respecting 
natural Israel's restoration to Divine favor, "This is my 
Covenant with them when I shall take away their sins; as 
concerning the Gospel they are enemies for your sakes; but 

R4683 : page 295 



as touching the election, they are beloved for the fathers' 
sakes,...for as ye in times past have not believed God, 
but have now obtained mercy through their unbelief; 
even so have these also now not believed, that through 
your mercy they also may obtain mercy. For God hath 
concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy 
upon all."— Rom. 11:26-32. 

The same great Covenant, future for Israel, is referred 
to by the Prophet Jeremiah. (31:31 .) Israel is there told 
that after certain days God will make a New Covenant 
with them, not the Sinaitic Covenant— not the Hagar 
Covenant— and just as surely not the Sarah Covenant, 
which gives birth only to a spiritual Israel. The prophecies 
respecting that New Covenant are earthly, restitutionary. 
Under it, "after those days," God will take away 
the stony heart out of their flesh and give them a heart of 
flesh— he will make them tender-hearted human beings, 
loving, kind, etc. But he will not make of them spirit 
beings or New Creatures. 

The Mediator of that New Covenant, Israel understood, 
will be a greater Mediator than Moses, though like 
unto him in the sense that Moses was the type or small 
fore-finger of him. Even so the Mt. Sinai Covenant, with 
Israel as the Ishmael class gendered thereunder, were 
typical of the greater blessings and upliftings to be accomplished 
by the New (Law) Covenant. For these reasons the 
Lord did not confuse the types by reinstating Hagar as 
Abraham's wife after the death of Sarah, as representing 
a renewal of Divine favor toward Israel and the use of 
natural Israel as the earthly channel of Divine favor and 
blessing to all the families of the earth. Instead, God 
permitted Hagar to cease as a type after showing her 
subserviency to Sarah and the recovery of her child, the 
Jew, from perishing. When Abraham, after the death of 
Sarah, took another wife, Keturah, we have every reason 
to believe that she, also, was a type and represented a third 
Covenant. And her many children represented typically 
the many people, kindreds and tongues of the world which 
will ultimately become, under the New Covenant arrangement, 
children of the Highest. 

THE SUPERIORITY OF THE SARAH COVENANT 

Nevertheless it should be continually borne in mind 
that in this series of types the Lord everywhere showed 
the superiority of the Sarah Covenant. In one sense of 
the word Sarah was Abraham's only wife, because Hagar 
and Keturah are mentioned merely as concubines. Thus 
the Divine Plan all centered in the promise, "In thy Seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." Nevertheless 
the Jew and his Law Covenant have been used of the Lord 
as a supplementary means of blessing and instruction to 
the Church and to the world. Likewise in the future the 
blessings that will go to Israel and through Israel to the 
world under the New Covenant will all depend upon the 



first Covenant, the Sarah Covenant, the spiritual one 
and its spiritual Seed— The Christ, Head and Body. 
The New Covenant can go into effect as a better 
Covenant than the Mosaic one only by reason of having a 
better Mediator than Moses, "The Mediator of the New 
Covenant"— The Christ. And he will become the Mediator 
of that Covenant and put it into effect for the blessing of 
all through or by means of his "better sacrifices." First, 
the sacrifice of Jesus, the foundation of all reconciliation 
with the Father— "and we through him." Secondly, the 
Father's acceptance of the Church as members of the Body 
of Christ, upon the condition mentioned by St. Paul, "I beseech 
you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present 
your bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable unto God." 
These are the better sacrifices which the great Mediator 
presents to Justice, all founded upon the merit of the Lamb 
of God which taketh away the sin of the world. His merit 
will be shared in, through God's arrangement, by the "little 
flock," the Royal Priesthood, who not only by faith accept 
the Redeemer's merit, but who, by grace, also lay down 
their lives. They become dead with him, that they may 
also live with him and share his glory, honor, immortality, 
Kingship, Priesthood, Mediatorship, etc. 

"Ah, these are of a royal line, 

All children of a King, 
Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 

And lo, for joy they sing! 

"Why do they, then appear so mean? 

And why so much despised? 
Because of their rich robes unseen 

The world is not apprised." 



R4683 : page 296 

WHEN WILL OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE CEASE? 

THE question has frequently been asked, If 
after the door of opportunity to enter the 
"narrow way" shall have closed and one 
should then find himself still in heart accord 
with the Lord and his Plan, but cut 
off from all opportunity of service, should 
he believe that he has made his calling and 
election sure? 

We answer that we would not think that 
this fact would constitute a ground or warrant 
for concluding that such had made his calling and 
election sure. It might be considered, rather, as an indication 
to the contrary, yet we think we should not, under 
such circumstances, be discouraged, but conclude that 
if our hearts had continued loyal to the Lord we were 
now merely enduring a test of faith and that the proper 



course would be to stand firm in the faith, in the spirit 
of the words of Job, "Though he slay me, yet will I trust 
in him." It seems that the Lord desires his people to 
abide in his love continually and has made the arrangement 
that our standing in him, our peace of heart, shall 
depend upon our faithfulness to conscience and to duty, 
or rather our faithfulness to duty, according to our 
conscience. 

Evidently the condition which the Lord desires most 
is that we shall day by day keep close to him; that we 
shall see that no day passes by in which we have not 
striven to do the Lord's will, and that if we have failed 
to do the Divine will, according to our conception of that 
will, we should at once take the matter to the Throne of 
Grace in prayer and supplication until we have the realization 
of Divine forgiveness and reconciliation. Thus 
living day by day we may feel sure that we are abiding 
in the love of God and may feel each day that so far as 
that day is concerned we had made "our calling and election 
sure"; that we are abiding in that condition which 
would make sure to us the "prize" at the end of the way. 

MADE SUPPLICATION TO HIM WHO WAS ABLE TO 
SAVE HIM OUT OF DEATH 

But if in any degree we should seem to be separated 
in a measure from the Lord and his love and lack the 
realization of his favor we should not conclude that we are 
not in the right condition of full acceptance with him, 
because we know that our Lord, as he neared the end, 
had considerable fear of this kind. He had a fear that 
he had not fully complied with all the conditions, and 
"with strong crying and tears" he made supplication "to 
him who was able to save him out of death, and was 
heard in respect to the thing which he feared." He 
feared that he had been unfaithful; he feared that in 
some way, unintentionally, he had failed to conform to 
the Divine requirements. 

Again, we remember that in his dying hour, it was 
the Father's will that he should experience a full cutting 
off and hiding of the Father's face, so that he cried out 
in his anguish, "My God! My God! Why hast thou forsaken 
me?" What have I done that I should be denied 
fellowship with thee? And so, if this was true of him, it 
might be true of any of his disciples; our conscience, 
therefore, might not always be a safe guide as to what 
would constitute an acceptable condition with the Lord. 
So the Apostle Paul, after referring to the fact that 
others might misjudge us and that it was a small thing 
that he should be judged of his brethren or of any man, 
continued, "Yea, I judge not mine own self." I realize 
that I am not competent to judge even my own case. 
There is One that judgeth me, even God. 

So it is in our experiences. We have found some 
with very sensitive consciences who are continually inclined 
to reprove themselves as always failing, as always 



doing something wrong. It seems to be their normal condition 
to feel so. Such persons might easily make a mistake 
respecting the diagnosis of their case. Others, the 
very reverse of this, continually feel well satisfied with 
themselves, even though they are not in full harmony 
with the Lord. So those who are overly conscientious 
and those who are lacking in conscientiousness in their 
judgment of themselves, should seek to make up these 
deficiencies of their own conscience so that they can 
arrive at a right judgment, can be in harmony with the 
Divine judgment. 

CHRISTIAN GROWTH NECESSARY 

At the same time we are to remember that all that we 
can do that will constitute us acceptable in coming to 
the Lord will be the exercise and cultivation of faith. 
Our faith should not be in ourselves, because such faith 
is merely self-confidence. We are to realize that we have 
nothing that would commend us to God. We are to realize 
that we come short continually; that it is not possible 
for any one to come up to the perfect standard; therefore 
we are to be continually in the attitude represented 

R4684 : page 296 

in the Lord's prayer, "Forgive us our trespasses," feeling 
sure that we have trespassed, and seeking meanwhile to 
minimize these trespasses, to be so faithful that these 
will become less and less daily in the Lord's sight. 

But from our own experience we would consider the 
proper thought to be, "Have I lived today as best I knew 
how, and are the accounts right with the Lord, and is 
there anything that I can do better tomorrow than today, 
in the light of the experiences of today? Can I be wiser, 
can I be stronger, can I be more self-sacrificing?" When 
we are doing the best we can do, we are to know that the 
Lord does not expect more than that of us. 

We remember a remark made by a brother at one of 
the conventions. He said, "I am doing the very best 
that I can, and I am trusting in the Lord." We remember 
our reply that we thought that a very wonderful testimony 
—for any one to be able to say, conscientiously, 
that he was doing the very best that was possible for him 
to do. Personally, we never know when we have done 
the very best possible. We always try the next day to 
see if we can do better; but if any one has reached the 
place where he has done the very best possible, he has 
surely done well. We feel at times that we have done 
the very best, yet we very rarely close a day in which 
we come to the conclusion that we have done the very 
best we could possibly do in every particular, in every 
item of the day; and so we try to mark those points in 
which we might have done better, that we may have 
the benefit of those experiences on the morrow. 

But if our hearts have been loyal to the Lord and we 



have been serving him to the best of our ability, striving 
to bring every word and every action and every thought 
into full subjection to the will of God— if this has been 
our endeavor, then we may feel satisfied that God is 
pleased with us; that we are in the condition that he has 
declared is acceptable with him; that we are in the way 
to gain the great "Prize" he has to give. But we are not 
guaranteed this for the morrow, but only for that moment; 
and so the Lord wishes us to live moment by 
moment and to realize his blessing moment by moment, 
and not to think that our case is decided and ended. 
Our question, then, should not be, "Will we feel satisfied 
at some future time?" but rather, "What is my experience 
now, this moment?" Sufficient unto each day are its 
trials and difficulties. 

R4684 : page 297 

"THROUGH MUCH TRIBULATION YE SHALL ENTER 
THE KINGDOM" 

The question is also asked, Should we assume that 
none will remain on this side of the vail long after the 
Harvest work is fully closed? 

Our thought is that there will be privileges of service 
down quite close to the time of trouble; that there will 
not be a long period of waiting in which we would have 
no opportunities of service. Of course, this is purely 
conjecture; nothing that we think of in the Scriptures 
states so positively, but there are so many ways of service 
that we can hardly imagine that all opportunities of 
service would be cut off. If we were cut off from public 
service, there would still be a great deal of service, or 
opportunity for service, in a private way. We can hardly 
imagine such a condition arising in the world as would 
cut us off from all service, public and private, until the 
time of trouble would be so thoroughly upon the world 
as to stop business and all else. It is our expectation that 
nearly all the saints will be gone by the time the trouble 
is so intense that there will be no opportunity for service 
of any kind. 

Suppose, however, for illustration, that for some reason 
the mails would close, or some other situation should 
arise that would practically separate us from the world 
in general, we would still have opportunities of serving 
one another, and many of the Lord's people have found 
that their severest trials come in the rendering of service 
to those closest to them. We have known of cases where 
husbands found it very much easier to render service to 
others than to their own families, their wives and children. 
We have known of instances in which it was the same 
with the wife, and with the children. Sometimes our 
severest trials, therefore, may lie very close at home, and 
our very best opportunities for service consequently may 
be very close at hand. So we think that when the time 
comes when all opportunities of service shall be cut off 



it will mean that the end is close and that the time of 
trouble is here; and if any of us were here under these 
conditions, we should fear that we were going to be of 
the "great company" and have our share in the "time of 
trouble." 

But, on the other hand, we do not know to what extent 
this trouble that will prevail upon the "great company" 
may be in some measure also upon the "little flock." 
Many of the "little flock" may go into a great deal of 
trouble. We do know that all the Church, the "little 
flock" and the "great company" will suffer great tribulation. 
The Scriptures say of the "little flock," "Through 
much tribulation we must enter the Kingdom," and it will 
be through much tribulation that the "great company," 
though failing to get a place in the Kingdom class, will 
be fitted for their position; so there will be "much tribulation" 
for both classes. Perhaps this will be the outward 
tribulation. We are not competent to say at this time; 
we do not see clearly what the Lord meant when he said, 
"Watch, ye, therefore, that ye may be accounted worthy 
to escape those things coming upon the world and to 
stand before the Son of Man." We do not know whether 
he meant that we should be accounted worthy to escape 
all this outward trouble coming upon the world in general 
and to literally stand before the Son of Man, in the 
sense of being translated, perfected New Creatures beyond 
the vail, or whether, on the other hand, he may have 
meant, "Watch," in your course of life, and be so faithful 
to the Lord that you may be accounted worthy to stand 
and not fall in the day of the presence of the Son of Man, 
escaping those things which are coming upon the world 
in the sense of not having the anguish of mind that will 
be upon the world while being in some of the tribulation 
with them. 



R4684 : page 297 

IS THE READING OF "SCRIPTURE STUDIES" BIBLE STUDY? 

THE plan of reading twelve pages of the 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES each day, tried 

by so many, results in more Bible study than 

any other way that we know of. We believe 

that it is not so much the time that is 

given to Bible study, but the amount of 

study done and the amount of information 

gained, that counts. We all know people 

who have spent days and weeks and years 

in the study of the Bible and have learned 

little or nothing. We think the idea that Bible study is 

merely the time spent in handling a Bible and reading 

over some verses is a mistaken idea. 

It is a great deal like hunting or fishing. Some people 
go hunting every year, and though they do a lot of hunting, 



it is no sure indication of how much they get. Some 
do a lot of fishing, but do not get many fish. Bible study 
is very much the same. It is not the amount of time we 
spend in poring over a passage, but the amount of information 
we secure from the Bible. 

The six volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES are not intended 
to supplant the Bible. There are various methods to 
be pursued in the study of the Bible and these aids to 
Bible study are in such form that they, of themselves, 
contain the important elements of the Bible as well as 
the comments or elucidations of those Bible statements, 
on exactly the same principle that our Lord and the 
Apostles quoted from the Old Testament, and then gave 
elucidations of those Old Testament passages. Many of 
the elucidations were such that if we had not had them, 
had not had specific interpretations, we might never have 
been able to discern the proper application of them. 

THE HARVEST THE DUE TIME FOR A CLEAR UNFOLDING 
OF THE TRUTH 

The applications of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES are, of 
course, based upon those of the Lord and the Apostles. 
We do not feel that it would be in our province to give any 
interpretation except that which would be either already 
given by our Lord and the Apostles or such as would so 
fit and dovetail with their interpretations as to leave, in 
our judgment, no doubt as to the proper application of 
the Scriptures referred to and explained. 

Those parts of the Bible which once we thought we 
understood well, we find that we did not understand at 
all. Some of the very things relative to the Ransom, relative 
to Salvation, we did not understand. Looking back 
over our experiences, we fully believed that there was a 
God and that he would reward those who diligently sought 
him, and that he had sent Jesus his Son, but how and 
why, we did not comprehend. We had wrong ideas as to 
what was the penalty for sin; wrong ideas as to why a 
Savior should come; entirely wrong ideas as to what the 
Savior did; wrong ideas as to what he was to do in the 
future, and as to what would be our relationship to the 
Father and the Savior. We knew, in some sense of the 
word, that we were called to be a son, but how to become 
a son and what was meant by the begetting of the holy 
Spirit, and kindred terms, we did not comprehend; and 
in our experience we have found none who ever did comprehend 
these things. 

R4685 : page 298 

So we believe that the thought for us to take in this 
connection is that it is because we are living in this particular 
time, in the ending of this Age, that we are favored 
with such a clear unfolding of spiritual things. It 
is also our thought that present blessings of a temporal 
kind, such as the electric light, are due for similar reasons. 



We believe that any other explanation would confer 
too great honor upon the individual connected with 
the production. The very ablest minds in the world have 
examined these subjects, but now, by God's grace, we 
have come to the place where the vail is taken away and 
where we can see the real meaning of God's Word— not 
merely one person can see it, but hundreds, thousands, 
see it. 

We think that we get the right conception to thus 
view it rather than to think that we had some great power 
which enabled us to put together a great system of 
theology, more wonderful than all other systems of theology 
put together— a thousand times more wonderful. 
Therefore, the simplest way to explain the matter is to 
acknowledge that the Lord's due time has come and that 
he has guided to the right understanding. 

If, then, the Lord has provided us with something in 
our day that other days than those of the Apostles knew 
nothing about, no matter how good nor how wise they 
were— for us to ignore the line of teaching which has 
been thus developed would be, in our judgment, to ignore 
the Lord's providences. It is for each one to think for 
himself, however, and to guide his conduct in every way 
accordingly. 

If the six volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES are practically 
the Bible topically arranged, with Bible proof-texts 
given, we might not improperly name the volumes— 
the Bible in an arranged form. That is to say, they are 
not merely comments on the Bible, but they are practically 
the Bible itself, since there is no desire to build any doctrine 
or thought on any individual preference or on any 
individual wisdom, but to present the entire matter on the 
lines of the Word of God. We therefore think it safe to 
follow this kind of reading, this kind of instruction, this 
kind of Bible study. 

Furthermore, not only do we find that people cannot 
see the Divine Plan in studying the Bible by itself, but 
we see, also, that if anyone lays the SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
aside, even after he has used them, after he has become 
familiar with them, after he has read them for ten years 
—if he then lays them aside and ignores them and goes 
to the Bible alone, though he has understood his Bible for 
ten years, our experience shows that within two years he 
goes into darkness. On the other hand, if he had 
merely read the SCRIPTURE STUDIES with their references, 
and had not read a page of the Bible, as such, he would 
be in the light at the end of the two years, because he 
would have the light of the Scriptures. 

Our thought, therefore, is that these SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES are a great assistance, a very valuable help, in 
the understanding of God's Word. If these books are to 
be of any value to us it must be because we see in them 
loyalty to the Word of God, and as far as our judgment 
goes, see them to be in full harmony with the Word and 
not antagonistic to it. Therefore, in reading them the 
first time, and perhaps the second time, and before we 



would accept anything as being our own personal faith 
and conviction, we should say, "I will not take it because 
these studies say so; I wish to see what the Bible says." 
And so we would study the Scriptures in the light of 
these SCRIPTURE STUDIES; we would prove every point, or 
disprove it, as the case might be. We would be satisfied 
with nothing less than a thorough investigation of the 
Bible from this standpoint. 

If, after doing that, we should find the books to be 
in accord with the Bible, then we would think we were 
logical in saying, "I will not need to go through that 
process now every time that I read the SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 
for I have looked up those texts of Scripture and 
know certainly that the New Testament proves all those 
points." If, at the same time, in any future reading, we 
should come to a place where something did not seem clear 
to us and we thought of some Scripture which seemed not 
as harmonious with it as we had previously thought, we 
would think it our duty to refer at once to the Scriptures, 
because the Scriptures are the standard, and in that reference 
to the Scripture it would be with a view to discerning 
whether or not we had been mistaken in our previous 
examinations. 

"THEY SHALL BE ALL TAUGHT OF GOD" 

We would conclude, practically, that we could not understand 
anything about the Bible except as it was revealed. 
We would, therefore, not waste a great deal of 
time doing what we know some people do, reading chapter 
after chapter, to no profit. We would not think of 
doing it. We would not think we were studying the 
Scriptures at all. We would think we were following 
the course that had been anything but profitable to ourselves 
and many others in the past— merely reading over 
the Scriptures. We would say that the same Heavenly 
Father who had guided us to this Truth, to this understanding 
of the Scriptures as his children, if he had some 
further information for us he would bring it to our 
attention in some manner; and therefore we would not 
see the necessity of reading the New Testament every 
day or every year; we would not consider that necessary. 
We would consider that the Scripture which says, "They 
shall be all taught of God," would imply that in his own 
appointed way God would bring to our attention whatever 
feature of Divine truth would be "meat in due season for 
the household of faith." 

Further, we would say that now, having satisfied ourselves 
respecting what the Divine Plan is, we would 
understand that we had reached the place that the Apostle 
speaks of as being a qualified ambassador of God, a qualified 
minister of the New Covenant, and that, as a servant 
or minister of the New Covenant, we now had a 
responsibility in making known these things that we had 
learned; that we were not put here primarily to read the 
Bible, but primarily to serve the Lord and his Truth. 



It was quite proper, however, that before we came to a 
knowledge of the Truth, and when we were in measurable 
discontent of mind as to what was the Truth, that we 
should refrain from telling anybody else. 

We remember very well in our own personal experience 
that after we had tried some street preaching, etc., 
we came to the conclusion that there was something 
wrong; that we did not understand what we were trying 
to tell to others; that we did not understand with sufficient 
clearness to properly present it and make sure that 
we were representing the Lord and his message aright, 
and we said to ourself, "I will stop any endeavor to teach 
others until I know what I believe." 

We think that should be the attitude of every one 
of us. Why should we attempt to preach or teach anything 
that we do not understand? So, after God favors 
us in this time with an understanding of Present Truth, 
he has given us a knowledge of more truth than we 
could have gained in a thousand years if we had read and 

R4685 : page 299 

studied unaided; and now we can attempt to present it to 
others. Why has he given us a knowledge of this Truth? 
He wishes us to be "thoroughly furnished unto every 
good word and work." Therefore, we should study that 
we may be able to speak the word of the Lord freely 
and know that we are not misrepresenting the Divine 
purpose and plan and character; and we ought therefore 
to give the more earnest heed to the opportunities for 
service and consider that the information which has been 
given us has been given for the very purpose that we 
may impart it to others— to those brethren and sisters of 
the Lord's family, some of whom are in Babylon yet, 
honest at heart, perhaps, and very desirous of knowing 
the truth, though perhaps very much blinded as we once 
were. 

"SCRIPTURE STUDIES" NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR 
THE BIBLE 

This is not, therefore, putting the SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
as a substitute for the Bible, because so far as substituting 
for the Bible, the STUDIES, on the contrary, continually 
refer to the Bible; and if one has any doubt as to a 
reference or if one's recollection should lapse in any degree, 
one should refresh his memory, and, in fact, should 
see that his every thought is in harmony with the Bible 
-not merely in accord with the SCRIPTURE STUDIES, but 
in accord with the Bible. 

We might remark that quite a number of the friends 
in the Truth are making it a rule to read twelve pages of 
the SCRIPTURE STUDIES a day, and that we do not know 
one who has been following this course and making use 
of the various means of grace the Lord has provided 
(Dawn and testimony meetings and Sunday meetings 



and Pilgrim meetings and the Berean lessons, Manna 
text, etc.), who has gone out of the Truth. We know a 
great many who, on the contrary, have been of the opinion 
that they knew these things long ago, while in fact 
they do not know half of what they did know— they have 
forgotten more than half of what they read and they are 
those who are now stumbling— going into outer darkness. 

We are not wishing in this to say anything against 
one's poring over chapters that he does not understand 
and others do not understand, hoping that he might light 
on some truth. We have no objection to this. He has a 
perfect right to do so if he wishes. He has a right to 
spend weeks and years in this way if he chooses, but 
the chances even then are that when he does light on 
something he will have it all wrong. 

Furthermore, we would suggest that merely reading 
twelve pages of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES would not be 
studying in the proper sense of the word— neither studying 
the Bible nor studying the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. A 
proper study would be to think of the meaning of every 
word and every sentence. The thought is, it is not to see 
how much one can read, but to make sure that one goes 
no further than he comprehends or understands, whether 
that means one page or twenty pages. We should not 

R4686 : page 299 

consider it a Scripture study in any sense of the word 
unless our thought has grasped the matter from the 
standpoint of seeking to know what the Scriptures teach 
and seeking to call to mind these Scriptures that are 
being explained and to call to mind other texts, perhaps, 
that are not cited, or of which only a small portion is 
cited. 

If one will do all this it will not be merely a reading 
but a study; and from this standpoint, whoever reads two 
pages of SCRIPTURE STUDIES each day with the suggested 
passages connected with those two pages, would do more 
Scripture studying in that time than he could do by any 
other method. Whenever he reads these pages and calls 
the corresponding or connecting Scriptures to mind he 
is drawing from the whole Bible, from Genesis to Revelation, 
with practically every page he reads. Now is it 
possible to find any other Bible study that would accomplish 
as much for us in the same time as this would do? 
If there is we ought to take it. If there is not, then we 
have our option. 



R4686 : page 299 

WAS JACOB'S COURSE WITH ESAU DISHONORABLE? 

THE question has been asked, Why did Jacob 
take from his brother Esau the birthright 



and blessing? Why did he not give him the 

pottage when he was hungry, instead of 

selling it to him? We think it fair to infer 

that both Esau and Jacob were hungry. 

The proof that Jacob was hungry was that 

he had prepared the pottage. We also have 

proof that Esau was hungry; but we have 

no evidence as to which was the more hungry. 

We will suppose that they were about alike hungry 

and that there was not enough for two to get a meal. 

Esau made it known that he wanted something to eat and 

Jacob thought this a proper time for him to secure something 

which Esau had, but which Esau did not really 

want. 

It is also reasonable to suppose that the whole life of 
Esau was careless of religious matters and interests. He 
married into families of surrounding heathen people, entirely 
in disregard of the promise made to Abraham, getting 
several worthless wives, according to his mother's 
statement. This being true, it seems quite likely that 
he and Jacob had many talks about God's promise to 
their grandfather Abraham, and how the fulfillment of 
the promise would come about, and that Esau had all 
along been an unbeliever; and now, when the opportune 
time came and they were both hungry and the food was 
there, Jacob said, "You don't care for your birthright, 
Esau, and you do not appreciate this promise made to 
Abraham; it does not count for anything to you; I will 
tell you what we will do. You may have the supper and 
I the birthright. Is it a bargain?" Esau said, "It is a 
bargain, for I am more desirous of the supper than the 
birthright." 

It was a fair transaction. If one buys a house at a 
bargain and both buyer and seller are satisfied with the 
transaction, we would not say that it was cheating or robbery; 
and so with Jacob. The Abrahamic promise, so far 
as Esau's expectation was concerned, was not worth anything. 
He had no confidence in the promise. The Apostle 
Paul calls our attention to the matter and says that Esau 
was profane; that is, he did not count the promise of God 
as worth anything; he was willing to sell it for a mess 
of pottage, as though he was getting the better of the 
bargain, probably saying to himself, "That poor brother 
of mine does not know what life is; if he would only take 
a few lessons from me he would begin to live. Here he 
is believing something that God said to grandfather Abraham, 
and he thinks he will get something wonderful out 
of it some day. I do not think it worth considering." And 
so Esau doubtless thought he was the gainer over Jacob 
in getting the supper. 

R4686 : page 300 

ESAU CARED ONLY FOR THE EARTHLY PART OF 
THE BIRTHRIGHT 



It has also been asked, "Why did Jacob attempt to 
deceive his father?" Jacob was trying to obtain that 
which he had bought and which he saw the seller would 
not deliver. Jacob knew his brother was a dishonest man 
to start with. All the arrangements were made for Esau 
to receive the blessing that he had sold, and now he was 
about to steal it. Jacob must have reasoned, "I will try 
to prevent his stealing it; I have bought the birthright; 
I have a right to represent Esau in this matter; I shall 
merely try to have justice done, to get my father to do 
that which is right and proper, that which I know is 
God's will, because God told our mother about the matter 
at the time of our birth— that the blessing was to come to 
me; and here in God's providence it has come to me in 
a legitimate way by my brother's not caring for it and 
my caring a great deal for it. Now it is only a question 
as to how I shall get it. As a matter of fact, Esau does 
not value the birthright except from the earthly standpoint. 
I know he does not care a whit for the promise 
made to father; he has no confidence in it. All he thinks 
about is the property that will go to me if I am recognized 
as the elder son." 

Jacob knew that he would be in trouble if he would try 
to get the blessing, and yet he was so in love with the 
promise that a great blessing would come out of it, that 
he was willing to forego everything. He was willing to 
become an outcast from his home if he might only have 
the spiritual part of the promise, and so he left his home 
with the distinct understanding that he was losing his 
father's earthly possessions and getting only the spiritual 
blessing which Esau did not desire. He did not attempt 
to take from Esau the portion that Esau wanted. 

Some one might query, if Jacob knew that the Lord 
promised him this blessing through his mother, was it not 
a lack of faith for him not to recognize that the Lord 
would give it to him without any deceit or misrepresentation? 
We suppose that if Jacob had lived in our day 
and had all the advantages that we have, the instructions 
of the Old and New Testaments and the begetting of the 
holy Spirit, he might have learned to exercise his faith, 
which was already a strong faith as respects God's promise; 
he might have learned to wait on the Lord. We 
have many advantages over him in all these respects. 
He had very few examples before him respecting the 
waiting on the Lord or anything of that kind, and he did 
at least show his zeal and energy and confidence in God 
in the course that he took; and for a person not begotten 
of the holy Spirit we think he did wonderfully 
well. 

JACOB WAS NOT REPROVED OF THE LORD 

We think it well for us to remember in this connection 
that we should measure all of our ideas according to the 
Divine standard, and if we do not do so we make a 
mistake. The Divine standard rules. Now, according to 



the record, there was not a word said by the Lord against 
Jacob in this whole procedure, and if God had nothing 
to say against him, who are we that we should have? 

When Jacob fled to Padan-aram for fear of his 
brother, forsaking his home and all the property that was 
his according to his purchase, willing to let it remain 
permanently in the hands of Esau, as he had intended to 
do anyway— when he fled from home and had nothing 
but a stone for his pillow, that very night the Lord appeared 
to him in a dream; a vision or picture was given 
him of the blessing that was his. This indicated that 
God's favor was with him. Now to think that God could 
and would conspire with an evil person is not our way of 
reasoning on the matter. We do not object to others 
reasoning differently. We will reason according to the 
standard the Lord raised, and say, "Thus it is written." 

It may be that there was something not written in the 
record that might give a different view of the matter, 
one more easy to comprehend. The Apostle Paul commends 
Jacob's faith, but counts Esau's selling the birthright 
as reprehensible, and tells us that we should not be 
like the "profane person who sold his birthright." (Heb. 12:16.) 
In this Paul seems to intimate that there may be 
some who wish to sell their birthright and others who may 
wish to buy the birthright. 

The Jews in our Lord's day who failed to accept the 
invitation of the Lord and who were not Israelites indeed, 
these sold, for the "mess of pottage" of earthly blessings 
and earthly favor, their heavenly, their spiritual rights; 
and we who are Gentiles and to whom this right did not 
appertain by nature, have been invited in to see if we 
will appreciate the privileges and win the prize— and we 
will win the prize; we will get the birthright of Esau and 
the Esau class will not get it. 



R4688 : page 300 

THE TRIAL HOUR 
EPH. 6:10-18. 

The "hour of temptation" has come to the Church, 

The time of her testing is here, 
And storm-clouds of ominous portent roll up, 

Betokening the tempest is near. 

The carnage grows fiercer 'twixt error and truth, 

The hosts of the foe press around 
As the day waxes late and the shadows grow long, 

And their tauntings and boastings abound. 

And many who fought in the ranks by our side, 

Have been pierced by the enemy's dart; 
Their "shield" and their "helmet" lie prone in the dust, 



And the "arrow" has smitten their heart. 

Their arm lost its cunning in wielding the "sword," 
Their "breastplate" was loosed from its place, 

The "helmet" was lost and the shafts of the foe 
Smote them down and they sank in disgrace. 

O, dear fellow-soldiers! O brethren in Christ! 

Let us gird up our "armor" anew! 
Let us heed the sure Word of our leader and "Head" 

And be loyal and steadfast and true. 

The night hastens on— only one hour to fight; 

No thought now of wavering nor fear; 
Our Captain calls, "Onward!" then close up the ranks, 

For the hour of our victory is near. 

Courage, comrades! The banner of truth waves aloft; 

No such banner was ever unfurled! 
We will follow its lead e'en thro' carnage and blood, 

For by it we shall conquer the world! 

Tho' feet may grow weary and hearts throb with pain, 

Let us never give up in the fray; 
Our Captain is strong and can know no defeat, 

And will guide to the end of the way. 

Soon the fight will be over, the conflict be past, 
And the "roll-call" will sound thro' the sky, 

Will you answer your name? Shall I answer to mine? 
Can we gladly respond: "Here am I!" 

O, God of the battle, our Father, to Thee 

With strong supplication we cry! 
The conflict is deadly and wily our foe, 

Yet we know that deliverance is nigh. 

And thou who hast guided and led all the way 

Wilt guide 'till the victory is won, 
'Till the night is all spent and the glad day has dawned, 

And we hear thy sweet plaudit, "Well done!" 
ALICE G. JAMES. 



R4686 : page 301 

THREE TEMPTING QUESTIONS 

-MATTHEW 22:15-22;34-46.-SEPTEMBER 18- 

Golden Text:— "Render unto Caesar the things that are 
Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's." 

THE Pharisees and Sadducees of our Lord's 
day were the leaders of religion. They had 



formed a trust or federation, so to speak, and 

rarely made an attack upon each other, 

although their doctrines were directly opposed. 

The Pharisees acknowledged God 

and the prophets and the Law, and believed 

in a future life by a resurrection from the 

dead, and believed in a coming Messiah to 

exalt their nation and through it to bless the 

world. The Sadducees believed nothing of the kind— they 

were agnostics, Higher Critics. They were making the 

R4687 : page 301 

best of the present life, doubting any future existence. 

The Pharisees opposed Jesus because he did not acknowledge 

them, but criticised them, and showed the hypocrisies 

of their claims to be perfect and holy in the keeping of 

the Law, and reproved them for their lack of sympathy 

with the poor and less pretentious. 

The Sadducees opposed Jesus because, from their 
standpoint of unbelief, he was a fraud. But even as a 
fraud they would not have bothered themselves to oppose 
him, only that they perceived that he was gaining an influence 
with the people— an influence which they feared 
might, sooner or later, lead to some disturbance of the 
peace and unfavorably influence the conduct of the Roman 
Empire towards the Jews. So while the Sadducees 
and Pharisees both opposed Jesus, their opposition was for 
different reasons. 

The triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem, and the 
crying of the multitude, "Hosanna to the Son of David," 
the Messiah! awakened envy in the minds of the Pharisees. 
But in the Sadducees it produced a fear that the 
common people should become so aroused as to involve 
their nation in some strife with the Empire. The Pharisees 
strove to turn away the sympathy of the people from 
the Great Teacher, and, to this end, sought to catch him 
in his words by putting the question, 

"IS IT LAWFUL TO GIVE TRIBUTE?" 

They reasoned that if Jesus would say, It is not lawful, 
they would have little difficulty in having him arrested as 
a leader of sedition and thus compel Pilate to put him to 
death. They reasoned further that if Jesus should answer 
that it was lawful to give tribute to Caesar he would 
thereby alienate the sympathy of the multitude, which 
cried "Hosanna!" after him; for the Jews held, almost 
superstitiously, the idea that they, as God's Kingdom, must 
not pay tithes to any earthly Kingdom— that it would be 
irreverent to do so, excepting under compulsion. We notice 
how artfully they endeavored to ensnare the Master 
by complimenting him upon his truthfulness, saying, "Master, 
we know that thou art true!" Not only so, but they 
sought to impress upon him their appreciation of him as 
a Teacher— that he would teach the light, the Truth, at 



any cost. And so they said, "Thou teachest the way of 
God in truth!" And further, they fortified their position 
by saying, "We know that thou regardest not the person 
of men!" 

These treacherous compliments were intended to ensnare 
him, but he promptly answered, "Why tempt ye me, 
ye hypocrites?" Why do you veil your base designs under 
guise of speaking for the Truth? "Show me the tribute 
money." This was, literally, the census coin in which the 
tax was to be paid. They handed him a denarius, the 
usual wage for the day laborer, corresponding in value to 
about seventeen of our cents. Jesus asked, "Whose is 
this image and superscription?" They answered, "Caesar's." 
Jesus replied, "Render unto Caesar the things that 
are Caesar's and unto God the things that are God's." No 
wonder the wily Pharisees were troubled to know how to 
catch him in his words! On the contrary, they were 
caught; for all of their complimentary remarks stood to 
his credit in the minds of the common people. 

WHOSE WIFE SHALL SHE BE? 

Next, the Sadducees, the agnostics, tried to entrap the 
Great Teacher by asking one of their stock questions. 
Seven different brothers in turn married the same woman 
and all died before she did. To which of them will she 
be wife in the resurrection? They did not ask, To which 
will she be wife in heaven or Purgatory or eternal torture, 
for neither Jesus nor the Jews held any such teaching. 
The Pharisees and Jesus taught the resurrection of the 
dead, and it was against this teaching that the Sadducees 
aimed their sarcastic question. 

Note the majesty of the Master's answer: "Ye do err, 
not knowing the Scriptures, neither the power of God!" 
You do not understand the Scripture teaching respecting 
such questions, and you are ignoring in your question the 
great Divine power which, at that resurrection time, will 
be exercised and will straighten out all the difficulties of 
the situation. Then the Great Teacher proceeded to inform 
them that such as would (gradually) attain to the 
resurrection, such as would get a complete raising up out 
of sin and death conditions, would "neither marry nor be 
given in marriage," but would be sexless, as are the angels. 
Thus the supposed great and unanswerable question of the 
Sadducees fell flat and their ignorance was exposed. 

WHICH IS THE GREAT COMMANDMENT? 

Next, one of the Doctors of the Law endeavored to entrap 
the Lord on a question of the relative importance of 
the Divine commandments, asking which Jesus considered 
the great one of all. The Great Teacher promptly divided 
the ten commandments into two, according to the Law 
(Deut. 6:5), and answered, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all 
thy mind." This is the first and great (chief) commandment. 



And the second is like unto it— "Thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments 
hang all the Law and the Prophets." What could the 
Lawyer say to such a summarization of the Law? He 
had nothing left to say. He was answered as never before. 

THEN JESUS TURNED QUESTIONER 

The Great Teacher asked the Pharisees, "What think 
ye of the Messiah? Whose Son is he?" They answered, 
"The Son of David." The Teacher then queried, "How 
then doth David in spirit (prophetically) call him Lord, 
saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right 
hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool? If David 
then calleth him Lord, how is he his Son?" 

Of course the question was too deep for the Pharisees. 
The Great Teacher could answer all of their questions, but 
they could not answer his. How beautifully clear we see 
it to be that the Messiah, according to the flesh, was born 
of the lineage of David, but that God's purposes were not 
fully accomplished in Messiah of the flesh— that he lay 
down his flesh, sacrificially, and was raised from the dead 
to the plane of glory, honor and immortality, "far above 
angels, principalities and powers." We perceive that in 
the days of his flesh he was the Son of David, but that in 
his glorification he is David's Lord in that David will receive 
through him, in due time, not only resurrection from 

R4687 : page 302 

the dead, but also the blessings of participation in the 
Messianic Kingdom. The father of Messiah in the flesh 
will thus become the son of the Messiah of glory, whose 
earthly life is to be the restitution price for the whole 
world, including David. Thus it is written, "Instead of thy 
fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make 
princes (rulers) in all the earth."— Psa. 45:16. 

AN ILLUSTRATION IN AN EARTHLY PRINCE 

At a German function in Berlin the story goes that a 
Colonel met a young officer unknown to him whose only 
decoration was a large medallion set in brilliants. The 
Colonel inquired, "Lieutenant, what is that you have on?" 
The young man replied modestly, "An order, Colonel." 
The Colonel replied, "Not a Prussian Order; I know of 
none such." "An English Order, Colonel," said the young 
man. "And who in the world gave it to you?" asked the 
Colonel. The reply was, "My grandmother." The old 
Colonel began to think that the young man was making 
game of him and inquired, "And who may your grandmother 
be?" To his utter astonishment and dismay the 
answer was, "Queen Victoria, of England." Here was a 
Prince in disguise. And so Jesus was the great King of 
Glory in disguise. "He was in the world and the world 
was made by him, and the world knew him not."— 



John 1:10. 

R4687 : page 302 

SUCH SHALL NOT INHERIT THE KINGDOM OF GOD 

--GALATIANS 5:15-26.-SEPTEMBER 25.- 

Golden Text:— "If we live in the Spirit, 
let us also walk in the Spirit." 

ST. PAUL was a practical man, not merely a 

theorist; he brought his teaching down to 

a practical level which his readers could 

comprehend. Today's Study is one of these. 

Like all of St. Paul's epistles and entreaties, 

it is addressed to the Church, to those who 

have turned aside from the broad road of 

selfishness and worldliness, to walk the narrow 

way, in the footsteps of Jesus, and 

thereby to become joint-heirs with Jesus in 

his Messianic Kingdom, which is shortly to bless the world. 

Nevertheless, many who are not saints, many who are not 

wholly consecrated to God, may draw valuable lessons 

from the Apostle's words in this lesson, as well as in 

others. Many lessons of life specially applicable to those 

who have made a consecration to be the Lord's followers 

are valuable also to the remainder of mankind. 

The Christian has, so to speak, stepped out of his old 
self and become a New Creature, a Spirit being, which 
merely resides in the flesh and has interests that are distinctly 
separate and often antagonistic thereto. The Apostle 
urges these to walk in the spirit; that is to say, to let 
their daily course of life be in accord with their new 
nature. So doing, they will resist and not fulfil the desires 
of the flesh. Why? Because they will realize that there 
is an antagonism of interests as between the desires of 
the flesh and their desires as New Creatures. The two 
are at warfare, the one desiring against the other. There 
may be a truce for a time, but there will never be peace 

R4688 : page 302 

between them. Our interests as New Creatures are along 
spiritual lines, while our depraved appetites and tastes go 
in the opposite direction. Hence the Apostle said, "Ye 
cannot do the things that ye would!" As New Creatures 
you would follow in the footsteps of your Master, perfectly, 
but having fallen flesh, you cannot do this! You can 
only hobble after him at very most. But if we take 
this position and become his followers, we will be no 
longer under judgment according to the flesh, but will be 
judged as New Creatures, perfect in will— rendering the 
best obedience to righteousness we are capable of, under 



our handicap of imperfect human organism. 

THE FRUITAGE OF THE FALLEN FLESH 

In order that none might make a mistake as to what 
would constitute the desires of the flesh, the Apostle recites 
them and declares that they are manifest or openly 
discernible, namely: "fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, strife, jealousies, wraths, 
factions, divisions, heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revelings 
and such like, of the which I forewarn you, that they 
which practise such things shall not inherit the Kingdom 
of God." These are works of the fallen flesh and antagonistic 
to righteousness. All of God's people are to resist 
them, if they would not lose his favor. They have the 
seeds of all these iniquitous things in their flesh, received 
by heredity; but their minds, their wills, have been 
changed, converted, turned around, to righteousness— to 
the doing of the will of God. As New Creatures they must 
not practise the fleshly things, else they will not grow in 
the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit and will not be fit 
for the Kingdom. 

The Apostle does not here say that if anyone were 
overtaken in a fault and lost his temper, for instance, and 
got into strife, that this would bar him forever from the 
Kingdom. He might, indeed, through tears and prayers 
and Divine forgiveness, come back into harmony with God 
and subsequently become a valued soldier of the Cross 
and follower of the Lamb. But if any practise such 
things they should know that they are developing and 
strengthening a character contrary to the one which God 
will approve— they are going backward and not forward. 
Let us note the difference between an accidental slip with 
a penitent recovery, and a wilful practising of a wrong 
course. Alas! how many Christians have the evidence in 
themselves that they will not inherit the Kingdom of God 
—unless they make a fresh start and reverse the order of 
their living ! 

THE FRUITAGE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 

If the Apostle led us into a tangled wildwood of human 
selfishness, thorns and thistles, as a specimen of the 
fruitage of the fallen flesh, he next leads us in the opposite 
direction, and shows us the fruits and flowers of sweet 
odor which belong to the Garden of the Lord. He tells 
us that these delightful fruits of the Spirit should more 
and more be cultivated, and should be developed to perfection 
in our hearts, and, as far as possible, should overrun 
and cover and choke out the imperfections of our flesh. 
The fruits of this garden are all the fruits of the Spirit of 
God— all such as he originally planted in man and which 
have become vitiated through sin— all such as he now has 
implanted afresh and would develop in the hearts of his 
sanctified ones. The fruits of the Spirit, which should be 
manifest in all of the followers of Jesus in more or less 



perfection are these: "love, joy, peace, long-suffering, 
gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, temperance; 
against such there is no law." 

The Apostle explains that those who have become 
Christ's followers have crucified the flesh with the passions 
and desires thereof. They have voluntarily agreed 
that they will live contrary to the emotions and desires of 
the fallen flesh. He urges, If we live by the Spirit, by the 

R4688 : page 303 

Spirit let us also walk! It is the Spirit of God which has 
quickened us and which ultimately is to perfect us. But 
it can perfect us only if we are led by it and walk in its 
ways. Otherwise we will not be fit for a place in the 
Kingdom, whatever other place in God's arrangements we 
may have. One of the most dangerous besetments of the 
Christian is vanity. It leads to more trouble, provokes 
more quarrels and envyings than is generally supposed. If 
we are walking after the Spirit of our Master, it will mean 
that instead of being vainglorious we will be meek, humble, 
teachable. And only such will eventually be ready for the 
glory, honor and immortality which God will bestow upon 
the faithful at the Second Coming of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ. 



page 303 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We desire to express to you and your most efficient committee 
our thanks and appreciation for your untiring efforts 
for the comfort of the brethren, and also to congratulate you 
upon the success of the great Convention at Celoron. It was 
good to be there. How we enjoyed your generous and cordial 
hospitality at Peacock Inn and your talk on Monday 
evening, Aug. 1 ! Nothing cold about the reception but the 
cream; that was very cold and delicious. As long as memory 
lasts we shall revert to that happy evening and those six hundred 
friends, bound together by bands of Love and Truth, 
which will endure throughout eternity. Some months ago 
we took the Vow, and are glad that we did. 

Your Sisters in Christ, 

MRS. F. A. STEELE, 
CLARA P. STEELE. 



DEAR PASTOR:- 

Thirty years ago at a meeting for children I saw Jesus as 
my Savior, and I was very happy. I had the desire to speak 
to everybody I met about my Savior, and oh, such a longing 
to go to China as a missionary overtook me; but when I came 



to be about sixteen years of age I read Calvin's Confession 
of Faith. I spoke about it to my father, who was a strict 
United Presbyterian, and very strong on election, as set forth 
in the Confession of Faith. Very soon I lost the joy I had 
and became sad and indifferent about trying to bring others to 
Jesus, as I felt they were powerless to make themselves of the 
Elect. 

Thank God, two months ago he drew my attention to a 
notice in a barber shop window of your prospective lecture 
on "Hereafter." I went and heard you, and have since read 
the DAWN-STUDIES. I cannot express the blessings I have 
received through them. 

I felt constrained to write you, as I thought you would 
also like to know that I have taken the Vow. I trust to pay 
it unto the Lord in his strength. 

Yours in the love of God, 

MRS. HELEN HANDASYDE. 



ALLEGHENY, PA., Sept. 4. 

BELOVED BROTHER:- 

The closer I get to the places where you have walked and 
labored the most, the more I am impressed with the closeness 
of your walk with God, and the more do I desire to follow in 
your footsteps. 

As I have just viewed your old home, gone all through the 
old Bible House, stood in the pulpit occupied by you for so 
many years, and have now looked around over these beautiful 
hills over which you have gone, my heart goes down deep into 
my consecration vow, and I am renewedly determined to be 
found, by his grace, faithful unto death. With much fervent 
love I remain 

Your brother in Christ, MENTA STURGEON. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I take this opportunity of writing you in regard to a 
rather strange experience which I have had out in this western 
country. 

A new Methodist minister was sent in here about six 
weeks ago and, after looking the field over, decided to organize 
a Sunday-school in this neighborhood. The school was 
organized two weeks ago, and I was unanimously chosen as 
Bible teacher for the whole school. On the following Tuesday 
this man visited at the house where I and my son have 
been working, and, after some conversation, started to catechise 
me, with the result that he decided to dispense with 
my services and appoint another in my place. The matter 
came up on Sunday last, and, after explaining to the congregation 
that I was not a safe man to have as teacher, requested 
them to appoint another. 

The congregation, however, were not satisfied with this 
way of doing things, and suggested that I have a chance 



to defend myself, which was granted, with the result that 
I was reappointed by the people and the preacher set aside. 
We are to have our first study on Sunday next. I have been 
wondering just what course would be best to pursue, and 
would like to have the benefit of your counsel in this matter. 

None of these people has ever heard about or read any 
of your literature, and are somewhat curious to know just 
what we teach. I have thought of starting with "Some things 
to remember when studying the Bible and the importance 
of sound doctrine," and then follow it up with Ransom and 
Restitution lessons, etc. 

Yours in the Master's Service, W. G. O. 



DEAR SIRS:- 

I have read three volumes of your SCRIPTURE STUDIES and 
some of the pages many times. I am deeply interested in 
what I have learned and am trying hard to get others interested. 
My religious faith is Baptist. The members of my 
Church snub me sometimes, and my pastor snubs me all the 
time, because I believe what I have heard and read. My 
pastor has openly denounced me from his pulpit, which I 
feel badly about, but I can never give up that which I believe 
to be truth. 

Any one of your tracts that is best suited to the needs of 
my pastor would you please send it to me or to him. 



OUR DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We have just returned from San Francisco, where we enjoyed 
a feast at Brother McMillan's meetings. Since we are 
now alone here we sometimes attend the classes at San 
Francisco and Oakland, seventy-five miles distant. No ! we 
are not alone; we always claim the promise. 

We greatly enjoyed the privilege of distributing Peoples 
Pulpit announcements of the meetings. In this town we mail 
a good many Peoples Pulpits and on Saturdays we place 
them in the farmers' rigs as they are tied at the plaza. 

While working among the flowers in my greenhouse I 
discovered a vegetable cure for eczema and inflammations 
of the skin. I know it is good, for I cured myself with it. 
I call it "Floral." It seems to be another evidence of the 
nearness of the establishment of the Kingdom. 

We want to express to you in a few words that this 
great Truth is becoming more of a reality to us as the end 
of the course draws near, and we strive the more to make 
our calling and election sure. We do thank our Heavenly 
Father for the increasing light he is giving us through that 
willing servant to those who hunger and thirst for it. 

G.J. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Love and greetings in the one hope of our calling, to be 
joint-heirs with our Lord and Saviour. 

It is my earnest desire to be more faithful daily in living 
my consecration vow— to scrutinize my every thought and 
word and act more closely, so that I may be the better enabled 
to serve the Lord and his dear Flock. I want to be more 
and more thankful for the wonderful way he is leading me. 
I raise my voice in thanksgiving to our dear heavenly Father 
for permitting me to read the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
which have answered the questions that I had been asking 
much of my life. Next to the Bible, they are the most excellent 
books ever written; they have helped to bring me much 
closer to our dear Redeemer. May the Lord's richest blessings 
be with you, dear Brother Russell, throughout your 
pilgrim journey. 

Enclosed please find draft; may it help to carry on the 
good work in the Lord's service. 

Yours in his service, B. A. KRENZ. 



page 306 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The Atonement Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-1/2.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 305 



SEMI-MONTHLY 