Learn From God’s Word
Why Learn From God?
This article raises questions you may have wondered about and shows where you can read the answers in your Bible. Jehovah’s Witnesses would be pleased to discuss these answers with you.
 1. Why learn from God?
God has good news of something better for mankind. He tells us about it in the pages of the Bible. The Bible is like a letter to us from our loving Father in heaven.—Read Jeremiah 29:11.
 2. What is the good news?
Mankind needs good government. No human ruler has ever relieved mankind of violence, injustice, disease, or death. But there is good news. God will give mankind a good government that will bring freedom from all causes of suffering.—Read Daniel 2:44.
 3. Why is it vital to learn from God?
Soon God will clear the earth of people who cause suffering. Meanwhile, he is teaching millions of meek people to enjoy a better way of life, based on love. From God’s Word, people are learning how to cope with life’s problems, how to find real happiness, and how to please God.—Read Zephaniah 2:3.
 4. Who is the Author of the Bible?
The Bible is made up of 66 small books. Some 40 men wrote them. The first five were written by Moses about 3,500 years ago. The last was written by the apostle John over 1,900 years ago. But the Bible writers wrote God’s thoughts and not their own. So God is the Author of the Bible.—Read 2 Timothy 3:16; 2 Peter 1:21.
We know that the Bible is from God because it accurately foretells the future in detail. No man can do that. (Isaiah 46:9, 10) Also, the Bible bears the unmistakable stamp of God’s loving personality. It has the power to change people’s lives for the better. These facts convince millions that the Bible is God’s Word.—Read Joshua 23:14; 1 Thessalonians 2:13.
 5. How can you understand the Bible?
Jesus became famous as a teacher of God’s Word. Although most people he spoke to were familiar with the Bible, they needed assistance to understand it. To help them, Jesus referred to one Bible text after another and explained “the meaning of the Scriptures.” This feature, “Learn From God’s Word,” will use the same method to help you.—Read Luke 24:27, 45.
Few things are as fascinating as learning from God about the purpose of life. But some people may not be pleased that you are reading the Bible. Do not be discouraged. Your hope of enjoying everlasting life depends on your getting to know God.—Read Matthew 5:10-12; John 17:3.
For more information, see chapter 2 of this book, What Does the Bible Really Teach?, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

