A Letter of Appreciation
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES each year print and distribute tens of millions of copies of the Bible and of books that help in understanding the Bible. Recently, a Bible student from Texas, U.S.A., received from her 20-year-old nephew a letter of appreciation for copies of these publications that she had provided him. The following, in part, are his comments regarding this literature:
“Dear Aunt Irene and Family,
“. . . It’s now 1:00 a.m., so I’m not sure how long this letter will be, but I’ll try to say what I want to say, and that mainly is thank you!
“The books you sent me are really amazing! They are truly more than I expected. They add spice to everything; that one little ingredient that makes it interesting and worth the effort to read.
“Life . . . by Evolution or by Creation is a real gripper! The authors of this book need a hearty handshake! The explanations are down to earth, logical, and sensible. My favorite line in the book is ‘Life being created by accident is comparable to an unabridged dictionary resulting from an explosion in a printing shop.’ Awesomely put!
“Paradise [You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth] is another well-written book. This one recaps many things I’ve read but with more style and confidence than other material. This book I’ve yet to finish.
“Reasoning [From the Scriptures] is the dictionary I’ve always wanted. Logical reasoning on basic concepts I’ve failed to grasp before; Biblical viewpoints on present topics. Absolutely astounding! Definitely a book to look into; I have to thank you again.
“Questions [Young People Ask​—Answers That Work] is a book that happened to come in handy today. I used it to give advice to a dear friend of mine who is having a few dating problems. The logical answers really made sense to her. I’ve also found it to be personally helpful in understanding myself a little better. Thank you.
“And last but definitely not least, the New World Translation. This version is so much easier to understand than my KJV [King James Version] that I find myself referring to it more often than the other . . . God bless you for these valuable gifts! . . .
“Without the books you’ve sent me I would probably still be drowning in self-pity, but now I have the instruments to deal with my situation, and that’s something that’s hard to repay. Jesus would be proud of you. And I am too!
“I’ve learned so much in so little time, it’s exciting! I never thought the Bible could be so interesting and stimulating. I now have solid reasons for pushing through the muck of life Satan has thrown at me, and I want to share it with the world. Thank you!
“Please give my regards to the family. . . .
“I pray for you all!
Thankfully,
Michael”

