From Our Readers
Asthma  Heartfelt gratitude for the article on asthma. (March 22, 1990) You really succeeded in describing this complicated illness in simple, understandable terms. I am presently staying with my son in a clinic where he is undergoing tests for his asthma. His case seems to be related to allergies to food, dust, and mites. Everything that we are learning agrees with the article.
M. S., Federal Republic of Germany
Baptism  Thank you very much for the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Get Baptized?” (March 22, 1990) Just the night before I received that issue, I prayed for help to know if I was ready to be baptized. The article expressed just what I was feeling. I’m looking forward to my baptism.
A. S., United States
In your article “Young People Ask . . . Am I Ready to Get Baptized?” (April 8, 1990), you said that ‘perhaps the most critical question involves your relationship with God.’ Nothing could be more true! When I was baptized at age 14, I did not have a close personal relationship with Jehovah. I now know what it means to have a close relationship with God. That truly is the key.
J. R., United States
The article was a big help to me; so much so that I am going to get baptized at the next circuit assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It is really super how you show youth’s side of things.
K. M., Federal Republic of Germany
Lupus  I am not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, but I must congratulate you on your May 8, 1990, issue with its articles on pollution and the magnificent story on lupus. I have been a lupus sufferer for 14 years. Reading Robin’s story was like reliving my life. She took a very positive approach, something all lupus sufferers should try to do.
Y. M. B., England
I am very encouraged reading about the many Christian brothers and sisters who, day in and day out, rely upon Jehovah to endure their illnesses. Fairly recently, I developed leg pains (osteoarthritis of the hip) and am unable to stay on my feet for more than one hour. But thanks to Jehovah’s mercy, I am able to continue serving as a full-time minister. Robin’s story showed how Jehovah cares for the needs of each one of us.
H. A., Japan
Fighting Parents  In your article “Young People Ask . . . What Should I Do if My Parents Fight?” (December 8, 1989), you suggested that a youth simply excuse himself and go to his room when parents fight. I find this to be risky and dangerous. If I should vacate the scene of the fight, my aggressive father could kill my mother! I therefore find it invaluable always to be present to separate them when they fight.
P. M. E., Nigeria
A footnote in the article stated: “We are not referring to situations where an abusive father threatens family members with violence.” Circumstances vary, and a youth might have legitimate concern for the safety of one of his parents. The footnote thus added: “In such cases, family members may be forced to obtain outside help in order to protect themselves from physical harm.”​—ED.

