Announcements
● Literature offer for November: New World Translation and Peace and Security or any other older 192-page book for a contribution of $4.50. December: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $2.50. Kingdom News No. 33 will also be distributed. It may be used to introduce the book offer, left where no one is at home, or given free of charge to any who wish to read it. January and February: Watchtower subscription for a contribution of $4.00. Where subscription is not obtained, two magazines and a copy of the brochure The Government That Will Bring Paradise will be offered for a contribution of 70¢.
● Selective Service regulations require that all men register for the draft when reaching 18 years of age. All of those required to do so should take care of the matter promptly, viewing it as a Christian’s obligation to the superior authorities. Elders will want to have this in mind when young brothers are nearing the age of 18 and give them appropriate reminders. Questions as to the young Christian’s responsibilities in this regard may be answered by the elders.
● The book “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial” is now available, for purchase only, in grade-two English Braille. It is in seven volumes, each bound in a durable vinyl cover, at $45.00 for the set. You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth is available in grade-one French Braille. It is available on loan or may be purchased for $5.00. To order these Braille publications, please send a separate order to the Society’s BRAILLE DESK, giving the name and address of the person who will use the publications. Include remittance for purchase. Do not include with congregation orders for printed literature.
As a reminder to those who have received Braille publications on a loan basis: If the publications are no longer being used, we would appreciate having them returned to the Society’s Braille Desk so that others may use them. For further information regarding matter for the blind, please see the Cost List, pages 14, 19, and 20.
● The large-print edition of The Watchtower is now available in Japanese. For directions on how to order, see Announcements in September Our Kingdom Ministry.
● New Publications Available:
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?​—Danish, Finnish, German
Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry​—Arabic
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Small size)​—Korean
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Welsh
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever​—Hungarian, Portuguese
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Danish, Dutch, Finnish, Iloko, Portuguese
The Path of Divine Truth Leading to Liberation​—Urdu
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Judges, Ruth (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Japanese
Album of Hebrew Scriptures​—Volume 1, Genesis to Ruth (set of 20 cassettes in album; congregation and public: $32.00; pioneers: $21.00)​—Japanese
● 1986 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses: Publishers and pioneers, please order your Yearbooks through your congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these Yearbooks now. Then on November 1, 1985, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). The Yearbooks will be available in Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish. Until the Yearbooks are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Congregations should order only the number of Yearbooks for which there are requests. Payment should not accompany the congregation order. The Yearbooks are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at $1.00 each, which is the rate for publishers and the public. (See the Cost List, paragraphs 22-24.) Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1985, may receive a free copy for which the congregation may request credit on the Remittance and Credit Request form (S-20). Pioneers may obtain additional copies at 50¢ each. (Note to secretary: Please have announcement made to the congregation when the Yearbooks are received so that all who ordered can obtain their copies.)
● Congregations may now begin ordering the publication True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? for the special campaign in April and May of 1986, as announced at the “Integrity Keepers” Convention this past summer. Until this item is ready for shipment, it will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices.

