Maintaining Our Zeal in the Ministry
1 How long have you maintained your zeal in preaching the good news? Five years, ten, or even longer? Some brothers have preached twenty, thirty, or more years and are still going strong. What is it that has kept them from tiring out? How can we keep pace with Jehovah’s organization and the work that he is ‘speeding up in its own time’?​—Isa. 60:22.
REFLECT JEHOVAH’S ZEAL
2 Those who engage in Kingdom service properly view themselves as God’s fellow workers. (1 Cor. 3:9) They see his zeal for righteousness and imitate it. Jehovah first announced the good news thousands of years ago, and he has zealously followed through to see that it is declared by his people. (Gal. 3:8) Even at this late date in human history, Jehovah has not lost interest in his Kingdom purpose. Rather, “the very zeal of Jehovah” is bringing about all that he has promised, including the foretold international Kingdom witness.​—Isa. 9:7; Matt. 24:14.
3 No matter how long we have been preaching, we can maintain godlike zeal by keeping Kingdom truths fresh in our mind. By studying the Bible, we absorb its spirit, which is Jehovah’s spirit. This will keep us aglow with zeal for preaching his message.​—Rom. 12:11, 12; Eph. 5:1.
CLOSELY CONSIDER JESUS
4 Jehovah provided in his Son, Jesus Christ, the perfect example of a zealous minister. Jesus maintained his zeal right to the painful but triumphant end of his earthly life. Hebrews 12:2, 3 points out one thing that helped Jesus to remain firm. It was the reward that was set before him. Is not your zeal renewed when you consider the bright hope that Jehovah has set before you? Remember, it is not how long we have been zealous but our enduring to the end that will bring us the happy reward of eternal life.​—Matt. 24:13.
5 The doing of Jehovah’s work can in itself intensify our zeal. Consider Jesus’ example as related in John chapter 4. He got tired out. He needed rest, food, and drink. The disciples went into the village for food, but when they returned, their master no longer appeared to be hungry or tired. What had refreshed him and renewed his energy? It was the fine experience he was enjoying in God’s service.
CURRENT OFFER
6 During November we will feature the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and an older book, such as Peace and Security. Though we often meet people who are opposed, slow to respond, or just indifferent toward God and the Bible, we must not let this discourage us. Our lively and zealous presentation may help some of these to see the effect God’s Word has on those who take it to heart. (Heb. 4:12) Let them know that we will be pleased to study God’s energizing Word with them so that they, too, can “keep living” and “declare the works of Jah.”​—Ps. 118:15-17.
7 We are confident that as we maintain our zeal in the ministry, Jehovah, the source of godly zeal, will richly bless our united effort in the ministry during the month of November.

