Make Good Use of Reasoning From the Scriptures
1 “Do you wish that you personally could reason more effectively from the Scriptures? Are there questions that you encounter in your ministry and that you find difficult to handle effectively? Would you appreciate some help with these in order to assist honest-hearted ones in your area to recognize the truth?” If your answer was yes to these questions posed by the speaker at the “Integrity Keepers” Convention, we are sure that you were thrilled at the announcement that the Society has produced a new handbook for the field ministry, Reasoning From the Scriptures. Since its release, have you been making full use of this fine instrument to ‘reason, explain, and prove’ from the Scriptures what you teach?​—Acts 17:2, 3.
WHEN TO USE REASONING BOOK
2 When preparing for the house-to-house ministry, it is especially appropriate to consider some of the excellent introductions in the opening section. Can you use one of these or adapt one to fit your local circumstances? No doubt giving some thought to the suggestions will help you take a fresh approach. Also, while actually engaged in house-to-house work, you may realize that your introduction is not arousing interest. Between calls, why not refer to the Reasoning book for ideas? Or a number of householders may have stopped the conversation with the same reply. Referring to the section starting on page 15 may help you turn a seemingly insurmountable wall into an open door for further discussion.
3 When making a return visit or conducting a Bible study, you may find that the person has difficulty understanding or appreciating a point. He may still have questions. The Reasoning book contains hundreds of specific questions and many word illustrations that may assist you in reaching the heart of the inquirer. For example, note the illustration on page 429 showing why Jehovah has permitted wickedness.
4 The Reasoning book can also help you explain what changes a Bible student may need to make in his life in order to please Jehovah. For example, a couple may be living together, though not legally married. Scriptural reasoning on this is provided on pages 248 and 249. Or a Bible student may have difficulty in stopping the use of tobacco or the use of drugs. Under the main heading “Drugs,” our new handbook reviews many facts about these harmful habits and points out strong Scriptural reasons why Christians avoid such.
5 In our spiritual warfare, the Reasoning book can help us wield “the sword of the spirit” in a powerful way to free captive ones from deeply entrenched Babylonish doctrines and reasonings. (Eph. 6:17; 2 Cor. 10:4, 5) But even the most powerful weapon is useless if the soldier does not know how to use it or does not carry it. Thus, as it was in the days of Moses, we soldiers of Christ must ‘equip ourselves before Jehovah for the war.’ (Num. 32:20, 21; 2 Tim. 2:3) May all of us make full use of Reasoning From the Scriptures and thus be always equipped to defend and advance the good news.

