Making Our Advancement Manifest
1 How do you feel when you hear someone comment for the first time at the Watchtower Study or when he delivers his first talk in the Theocratic Ministry School? Are you not encouraged by seeing his advancement? What about your own spiritual advancement? Has it been evident to you and to others? Are you keeping pace with the growth of Jehovah’s organization today? We do not want to be like those of whom Paul said: “You again need someone to teach you from the beginning the elementary things of the sacred pronouncements of God.” (Heb. 5:12) How can we ‘make our advancement manifest to all persons’?​—1 Tim. 4:15.
PROGRESS IN TEACHING AND CONDUCT
2 Paul told Timothy, “Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.” (1 Tim. 4:16) The Service Meeting has been instructing us in improving our teaching abilities. It has featured articles from Our Kingdom Ministry on how to teach at home Bible studies, when making return visits, and in the house-to-house ministry. Are we applying this counsel, developing our skill in all features of service?​—Prov. 22:29.
3 The Theocratic Ministry School offers excellent pointers to help us present the good news to others. Do you view it as Jehovah’s provision for your spiritual advancement? By participating in the Theocratic Ministry School, you will improve your effectiveness in the preaching work and set a good example for others.​—See School Guidebook, pages 8, 9.
4 Advancement is also manifested by conforming our conduct, speech, and attitude to God’s Word. To this end, we are studying the United in Worship book again in the Congregation Book Study. This publication was prepared especially to help us “press on to maturity.” (Heb. 6:1) Are you preparing thoroughly, looking up the scriptures and meditating on the information presented? Why not make it a goal to comment regularly at the Congregation Book Study, including commenting on the cited scriptures. Try to make personal application of the counsel discussed each week. Make it apparent to all that Jehovah’s Word is at work in you.​—1 Thess. 2:13.
REACHING OUT
5 Spiritual progress is also shown by reaching out for privileges of service. Can you auxiliary pioneer in the months to come? Can you join the growing ranks of regular pioneers? Can you serve where the need is greater, or can you reach out for missionary work or Bethel service? (See Our Ministry, chapter 9.) Brothers in the congregation can demonstrate advancement by reaching out for the “fine work” of a ministerial servant or an elder.​—1 Tim. 3:1, 13.
6 What are some of the things we can do to reach out and make our advancement manifest? Everyone can strive to manifest the fruitage of the spirit to a greater degree. (Gal. 5:22, 23) Also, it is important to attend meetings regularly, be zealous proclaimers of the good news, and seek to be of aid and encouragement to other members of the congregation. Are you exerting yourself in these areas?
7 A steady flow of new ones to the mountain of Jehovah’s house necessitates spiritual growth on the part of all of us. (Isa. 2:2, 3; 60:22) The end of this system draws near! The need for mature ones to take hold of responsibility has never been greater! Therefore, “ponder over these things; be absorbed in them, that your advancement may be manifest to all persons.”​—1 Tim. 4:13-15.

