Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 3
Song 31
12 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Consider “What Cause for Rejoicing!” and comment on local August report. Encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday.
18 min: “Maintaining Our Zeal in the Ministry.” Questions and answers. Interview one or two who have set a fine example in maintaining zeal over the years. What has encouraged them to remain zealous in Kingdom service?
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With a Positive Attitude.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate how a positive attitude in the face of difficulties can produce positive results. Use local situation. What negative attitudes should be avoided, and why? Highlight importance of working all the congregation’s assigned territory, even though some sections may not seem to be as fruitful as others or perhaps involve traveling greater distances or present other inconveniences.
Song 66 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 10
Song 126
 8 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
20 min: “Meeting the Challenge of Apartment Witnessing.” Questions and answers on paragraphs 1 through 24 of insert.
17 min: “Making Our Advancement Manifest.” Enthusiastic talk with some audience participation. Following paragraph 4, briefly interview publisher who has made good spiritual progress. Highlight individual responsibility to make advancement.
Song 191 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 17
Song 115
 8 min: Local announcements. Inform congregation of arrangements for holiday witnessing on November 28. Review talking points from magazines to be featured on that day.
20 min: “Meeting the Challenge of Apartment Witnessing.” Talk by service overseer covering paragraphs 25 through 43. Comment on charts. Make local application.
17 min: “Make Good Use of Reasoning From the Scriptures.” Questions and answers. Discuss how this new publication will be helpful in local territory.
Song 173 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 24
Song 84
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Encourage support for field service on first Sunday of the month.
20 min: Presentation of December Literature Offer. Call attention to information in “Use New Creation Book and New Tract During December” and in first two paragraphs of July 24, 1985, letter to all congregations. Suggest and demonstrate several brief presentations that would be appropriate for local territory. Encourage all to pick up ample supply of Creation books and Kingdom News No. 33 for use in field service on Sunday.
15 min: “Do You Show Godlike Kindness?” Talk based on article in September 15, 1985, Watchtower, pages 10-12.
Song 156 and concluding prayer.

