Presenting the Good News​—With a Positive Attitude
1 As bearers of the Kingdom good news, we need to develop and maintain a positive attitude toward our ministry. Why? Because this world, under Satan’s influence, is intent on making it difficult for us to do God’s will. That is why Paul encouraged Christians to have “the same mental attitude that Christ Jesus had.” (Rom. 15:5) Although faced with much opposition, he always maintained a positive attitude. He spoke with confidence, basing his expressions on the authority of God’s Word. (Matt. 7:28, 29) He did not hesitate to seize every opportunity to share the Kingdom hope with others. He spiritually strengthened those around him, encouraging them to follow his steps closely. Can we display the same positive attitude toward our preaching work today?
2 At times we may develop negative feelings about our assigned territory because it appears to be unfruitful. To hold back from preaching would show an uncaring attitude. Even though Jesus knew that very few would respond favorably to the good news, he still “felt pity” for those to whom he preached. As he boldly persisted in preaching, he instructed his disciples to petition the Father to send out more “workers into his harvest.” (Matt. 9:36-38) Jesus’ outlook was always optimistic. He was determined to help those around him.
3 In more and more homes, both husband and wife work full time to maintain their preferred standard of living or simply to make ends meet. Often no one is at home when we call. A positive attitude may prompt us to consider making adjustments in our schedule to allow for better results. Have you considered scheduling some time for evening witnessing? Some have had excellent results by calling shortly after the evening meal when householders are usually relaxed and in a more receptive frame of mind.
BEING POSITIVE WITH OTHERS
4 Much joy can be obtained by working with others in the ministry. This is especially true when our conversation reflects a positive attitude. Voicing negative feelings invariably causes discouragement. For example, in the time of ancient Israel, ten faithless spies gave “a bad report” that caused the hearts of the entire nation to melt in fearfulness. (Num. 13:32–14:3) In contrast, Solomon wrote: “A report that is good makes the bones fat.” (Prov. 15:30) Relating experiences that highlight good things serves to strengthen others, motivating them toward continued zealous service.
5 Are we at times prone to minimize the extent of a person’s interest, even when we have had a good Scriptural conversation? Some may feel pessimistic about going back, thinking that the interest was not sufficient or genuine. Never forget that “the word of God is alive and exerts power.” (Heb. 4:12) Our brothers have related countless experiences in which sincere individuals have been profoundly impressed by some simple statement or by reading only one article in a magazine. With that possibility in view, we should be determined to follow up properly any interest we find.
6 Jesus maintained a positive attitude because he was totally convinced that he had the truth that could set men free. (John 8:32) He fully accomplished his ministry despite all obstacles, including the disbelief of others, apathy, and even persecution. The marvelous results he achieved, along with his assurance to be with us always, should give us the determination we need to press forward with a positive attitude, knowing that with Jehovah’s help we, too, can fully accomplish our ministry.​—Matt. 28:20; 2 Tim. 4:5.

