Insight on the News
Economic Disaster Ahead
● Quoting the “Macaskill Letter,” printed in Johannesburg, South Africa, “Barron’s” of December 6, 1976, stated: “The governments, cities, businesses and individuals of the world are bankrupt. It is now a race against time before the entire system collapses. There is no way out of this unholy mess. Inevitably economic disaster lies ahead. There are no measures that can be taken to save the situation.”
Just how soon the feared “economic disaster” may occur is open to question. But the Bible points to a time near at hand when these words of God through the prophet Ezekiel will prove true: “Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to deliver them in the day of Jehovah’s fury.” (Ezek. 7:19) Wisely, then, godly persons possessing riches should not put their trust in them, nor use them for selfish purposes. Rather, they should follow the advice of Jesus Christ, who said: “Make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous riches, so that, when such fail, they may receive you into the everlasting dwelling places.”​—Luke 16:9.
The possessors of “the everlasting dwelling places” are Jehovah God and Jesus Christ. (John 6:37-40, 44) Persons who use their riches in a proper way, as in assisting individuals in need and in furthering the preaching of the “good news,” will have Jehovah God and his Son Jesus Christ as their friends.​—Gal. 2:10; Phil. 4:15.
Escaping Rape
● After analyzing thirty-six attempted rapes and thirty-six rapes that were completed, Frank J. Javorek of the Denver General Hospital reported the most significant factors that differentiated between completed and attempted rapes. According to “Science News,” in the order of importance, these “were whether the victim screamed or cried out for help, and whether the victim tried to escape by running away. Next most important were the victim’s neighborhood of residence and whether the victim was awake and alert at the time of the attack.”
In some situations, of course, screams are not heard and running away is impossible. However, 86 percent of those who both screamed and ran avoided being raped.
Interestingly, God’s law to ancient Israel specified that if an engaged girl committed fornication both parties were to be put to death. However, if the girl screamed for help, but was not rescued, this was accepted as proof of her innocence. In this case the man alone was put to death, whereas the girl was exonerated.​—Deut. 22:23-27.
Polygamy Acceptable?
● By a vote of forty to six, the Eighth Provincial Synod of the Anglican Church of Central Africa has held that a man having more than one wife may be received into that religious organization along with his believing wives and children. This is allowed “in exceptional and merited cases.” According to “The Christian Century,” the synod delegates “agreed that ‘although polygamy . . . does clash with the full ideal of Christian marriage,’ it is sometimes impossible to withdraw from situations where there is such a clash.”
On the surface, it may appear to some persons that this is a considerate arrangement. However, human reasoning and standards are not of paramount concern in such matters. Monogamy (the having of only one living marriage mate) was the original standard that Jehovah God set up for the family. He later tolerated polygamy until his due time to restore that original standard. This he did in the Christian congregation. Consequently, congregational elders and ministerial servants were required to be ‘husbands of just one wife.’ (1 Tim. 3:2, 12) Moreover, the apostle Paul stated: “A married woman is bound by law to her husband while he is alive . . . while her husband is living, she would be styled an adulteress if she became another man’s.”​—Rom. 7:2, 3.
In harmony with divine requirements, persons who have desired to dedicate their lives to Jehovah God but have been involved in polygamous unions have brought those arrangements to an end. Such men have made proper provision for the children born to them as a result of polygamous marriages. But only after bringing their lives into harmony with God’s righteous requirements could they make a dedication to God and be baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.

