The Sure Promise of a New Order
“But the meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”​—Ps. 37:11.
WHEN GOD created man and woman, he purposed for them to live in a paradise home. He prepared “a garden in Eden” for them, in which, the Bible says, “Jehovah God made to grow out of the ground every tree desirable to one’s sight and good for food.” (Gen. 2:8, 9) In addition, “God blessed them and God said to them: ‘Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving upon the earth.’” (Gen. 1:28) The living conditions of our first parents were included in these words: “It was very good.”​—Gen. 1:31.
Without a doubt, then, when God created man and woman he gave them a wonderfully secure way of life. They had a beautiful home to live in, perfect health, delicious food, pleasant work to do, and the privilege of caring for other forms of life. They would also have the privilege of bearing children who would be trained to assist them in spreading the boundaries of that Edenic paradise, so that eventually paradise would be earth wide. Thus, it is obvious that when Jehovah created humans, he purposed for the entire human family to enjoy abundant material blessings. And they were to enjoy these things in true security​—security in the fullest sense. In return, God rightly required obedience to his laws, which would result in the greatest good to the entire human family.​—Gen. 2:17; Ps. 19:7-11.
However, due to their rebellion, our first parents, Adam and Eve, lost those benefits. They broke God’s law, wanting to decide for themselves what was good and bad. (Gen. 3:1-6) They chose the course of independence as regards God. But by so doing, they left the guidance and blessing that can come only from the Creator. And since humans were not created to be successful independent of God, such a course inevitably led to trouble. (Jer. 10:23) The centuries of grief that the human family has experienced since that time is ample evidence of this fact. Included in the sad consequences was the loss of genuine security. Thus, in the thousands of years since man’s rebellion, billions of people have come into conditions of poverty, hunger, inadequate housing and fear. Hundreds of millions have had their lives cut short by wars or other acts of violence. Added to all of this has been the exploitation of the common people by unscrupulous political, commercial and religious leaders. (Eccl. 8:9) And the human family is also plagued by the unpleasant prospect of death from old age or sickness.​—Rom. 5:12.
WHERE TRUE SECURITY WILL BE FOUND
However, has this changed God’s purpose for the earth and the human family? No, his declared purpose still is to have the entire earth transformed into a paradise in his appointed time. This globe will yet become a beautiful, gardenlike home for the eternal enjoyment of those inhabiting it. Under the rule of God’s heavenly kingdom in the hands of Christ, that grand future is a certainty. (Matt. 6:10) Even dead persons will be brought back to life. (Acts 24:15) That is why Jesus could promise the sympathetic evildoer who was executed with him: “You will be with me in Paradise.”​—Luke 23:43.
In that new order, under the rule of God’s kingdom, people will once again experience true security. They will feel safe in the knowledge that they have the very best government of all time at work in their behalf. (Isa. 9:6, 7) And, as demonstrated by the miracles that Jesus performed while on earth, grand material benefits will flow to mankind. For instance, poor health, disease epidemics, old age and death will be removed, making way for vibrant health and eternal life. (Matt. 15:30, 31; John 11:43, 44; 1 Cor. 15:25, 26) Thus, in that new order God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”​—Rev. 21:4.
Not even wild beasts will disrupt the security of people in Jehovah’s new order. For we can expect that the spiritual paradisaic conditions foretold in the following prophecies, and even now apparent among God’s people, will be reflected in the literal paradise of the new order: “I will conclude with them a covenant of peace, and I shall certainly cause the injurious wild beast to cease out of the land, and they will actually dwell in the wilderness in security and sleep in the forests.” (Ezek. 34:25) “The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, and the calf and the maned young lion and the well-fed animal all together; and a mere little boy will be leader over them. And the cow and the bear themselves will feed; together their young ones will lie down. And even the lion will eat straw just like the bull.”​—Isa. 11:6, 7.
While the Bible does not give details of just how these conditions will be worked out, we can have faith that they will come to pass without fail, since it is Jehovah’s purpose to “reside” with mankind and bless them. He “cannot lie” as to his purposes. (Rev. 21:3; Titus 1:2) In addition, many of his prophecies already have had fulfillments, either on ancient Israel, or in a literal or spiritual way on Jehovah’s modern-day people. This gives assurance that fulfillment of prophecies concerning God’s new order is just as certain. (Isa. 55:11) That secure new order is at hand!

