Announcements
HELP OTHERS TO ONENESS UNDER THEIR CREATOR—1 Cor. 1:10.
In the midst of world strife and disunity there is oneness among those of the theocratic organization. Servants of Jehovah God are at oneness because they all recognize the sovereignty of their Creator and the one leadership of his anointed One, Christ Jesus. Hence they carry out the inspired instructions: “Now I exhort you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that you should all speak in agreement, and that there should not be divisions among you, but that you may be fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.” (1 Cor. 1:10, NW) Following this counsel results in unity and harmony in the ranks of God’s servants. They in turn seek to assist others to enjoy this unity and oneness under their Creator by bringing them the truth concerning Jehovah’s purposes made so plain in the Bible. In July this will be done by presenting to people a bound Bible-study aid book on a contribution of 50 cents. Return calls will later be made on those who accept this offer to aid them to oneness under their Creator.
A WORLD IS ENDING. CHOOSE LIFE!
A whole world is about to end; a new one is near. Such a world upheaval has only happened once before in universal history. During the days of Noah the great Deluge wiped out every vestige of the world that then existed. A like fate awaits this present evil world. The question, then, is: How is survival possible? In the Flood it was only through God’s protective provision, the ark of safety. It is only true worshipers of Jehovah today, those who learn of God’s gracious provision for safety and act on it, who will receive his protection at the war of Armageddon. To be under that protection means life; to be outside it means death. Choose life; obtain and read the inspiring bound book You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World. Send only 50c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
August 4: Recognizing the Power of Wrong Desire. Page 397.
August 11: Cultivating Right Desires. Page 404.

