Help Others to Oneness Under Their Creator
TRULY it must be apparent to all thinking persons that mankind today is far from enjoying any oneness. Though actually all from one parental root and so one family, mankind does not act like one family. Wherever we look we see differences dividing mankind, national differences, racial differences and language differences, as well as cultural and economic differences. And especially as regards political ideologies is mankind so divided that it might well destroy itself were it not for the fact that the Creator will not let matters get that far. Why not?
Because the Creator Jehovah God has purposed an earth full of human creatures all at one with one another under him. That this is possible he is demonstrating by his New World society. It is a society of more than 640,000 ministers, all of whom are at one with one another, though among them are found many different nationalities, races, languages and economic and cultural levels. What accounts for their being able to overcome all these barriers? Their recognizing Jehovah as the one true God; the Bible as his Word of truth; his kingdom as mankind’s only hope, and their dedicating themselves to do God’s will. As a result these have become “fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.”—1 Cor. 1:10, NW.a
However, those of us who enjoy the happy, peaceful and harmonious condition of the New World society may not do so selfishly. No, there are many others of honest heart who long for oneness with lovers of righteousness under their Creator, and it is our obligation to help them to attain this oneness. To do that we must first of all locate them. That means we must preach from house to house and on the streets.
Having found such desirable or precious things of the nations, what shall we do? Plant seeds of Kingdom truth and then forget them? No, for by themselves it is not likely that they will find this oneness.
So we must call back, awaken further interest and help them to grow in knowledge, understanding and appreciation of Jehovah’s purposes and his will for man at the present time. To do this effectively our hearts must be full of love for such ones. Love will show itself by such works as teaching them with patience, kindness, gentleness, mildness and humility.
And our minds must be equipped with accurate knowledge. We must be able to give a reason for the hope within us; we must be able to wield the sword of the spirit, God’s Word, aright. We must be able to show how Scriptural, reasonable and factual the “pure language” is and how unscriptural, unreasonable and baseless all other worship is. This means calling back regularly each week for months and it may even involve years.
To help these to come to oneness under their Creator we must also be careful regarding our conduct. At all times it should reflect the beautiful message we bring.
And especially must we draw these into the New World society if they are to come to oneness under their Creator. That means telling them about Jehovah’s visible organization, having them meet others of the New World society and to keep inviting them to the various congregation meetings, where they can see this oneness under their Creator demonstrated.
Are you doing all you can to help others to oneness under their Creator?
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, April 1, 1956.

