VOL. XXXII MAY 15 No. 10 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

The Good Tidings Abroad-No. 3 147 

The Tabernacle and the Gown 149 

Strength and Peace 150 

The Ransom and Its Application to All 

Mankind 151 

The Fall of Samaria 152 

Overthrow of Israel a Judgment of 
the Lord 153 

Israel's Promised Restitution 153 

Your Reasonable Service 154 

Bible Study Class-Extension 155 

Loosing the Four Winds of Heaven 156 

"The Church of the First-Borns" 157 

"All Things to All Men" 158 

"Suffer Little Children to Come" 158 

Thus May He Bless and Keep Thee (Poem) 158 

The Memorial Celebrants 159 

The Colporteur Work Prospering 159 

Western Itinerary Services 159 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 



the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, NY., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



FIVE-DAYS BIBLE STUDENTS CONVENTION 

Oakland, San Rafael and San Francisco brethren extend a 
most cordial invitation to all outside friends to attend the 
5-day joint-local Convention in San Francisco— June 22, 23, 
24, 25 and Oakland June 26. Brother Russell will speak 
twice in San Francisco— June 25— and in Oakland June 26. 
Pilgrim service will be arranged for all days. Opportunity 
for water baptism will be arranged in Oakland June 26. 

Arrangements will be made for visiting friends. Rooms 
may be engaged in advance at 50 cents, 75 cents, $1 and up 
per day. Send full data and money as soon as possible to 
"Sec'y Hotel Committee, I.B.S.A.," 2018 Green street, San 
Francisco. Data should show sex, color, those that wish to 
room together or are willing to share room and bed to save 
expense, also rate desired, exact dates, etc., and hour and 
route of expected arrival, if known. Free sleeping accommodations 



will be furnished by local brethren to those that can 
come, but cannot afford room rent; these should also advise 
promptly in advance. Visitors' mail may be sent in care of 
above address. 

Meetings and headquarters for four days in San Francisco 
will be at Lyric Hall, 513 Larkin street, with public lectures 
afternoon and evening of Sunday, June 25, at Dreamland 
Rink. 

Meetings and headquarters in Oakland, June 26, will be at 
corner of Jones street and Telegraph avenue. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 4 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10.30 in the 
Brooklyn Tabernacle. Discourse for the Public at 3 p.m. 
in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. 
Felix St. Evening service in Brooklyn Tabernacle, 7 p.m. 

Those desiring water baptism or to present their children 
in consecration should notify in advance. 



R4815 :page 147 

THE GOOD TIDINGS ABROAD--NO 3 

TWO of our Sunday evenings in London were 

announced as Christian mass meetings at 

Royal Albert Hall; the first evening we discussed, 

"Which is the True Gospel?" the 

second, "Which is the True Church?" We 

had good attention on both occasions, and 

large audiences. No doubt the audiences 

would have been still larger had the subjects 

and announcements not limited the invitation 

to Christians. While we did not 

shun to declare the whole counsel of God on these subjects, 

we did, as usual, endeavor to present the Truth as 

sympathetically and inoffensively as possible. We trust 

that some seed was sown and found lodgment in earnest 

hearts. Other services on the same days were held in 

the London Tabernacle. They were not specially advertised, 

but the attendance was good. The edifice is rated 

as accommodating twelve hundred, and on some occasions 

the place was crowded. 

At one of the public sessions our election to the pastorate 
of the congregation of the London Tabernacle was 
duly and publicly acknowledged and accepted; but of 
this, reports have already reached you through the public 
press. We promised to give Great Britain (and London 
particularly) as large a share of our time as possible, 
but reminded the dear friends of the breadths and 
interests of the Truth, and that much as we appreciate 
the openings and progress of the Harvest Message in 
Great Britain, the work in America must not be forgotten 
nor neglected. 



EDINBURGH--GLASGOW--BELFAST--DUBLIN 

These four cities were visited in the order named, 
and two meetings were held in each, one specially for 
the interested, the other particularly for the public. We 
are glad to report that the Truth has been making good 
progress in all of these cities and countries. Not only in 
numbers, but also, we believe, in spiritual development 
the Lord has richly blessed them all. 

At Belfast the public audience numbered nearly two 
thousand. We had excellent attention for about two 
hours, and about one-half of the audience remained to a 
question opportunity, which served to set forth the Truth 
in stronger contrast with error. Although not all 
questioners were polite, we endeavored to give a soft 
answer, but a clear one; we trust with good results. 

It will be remembered that on two previous occasions 
at Dublin, the Y.M.C.A. secretary was present as an 
objector and questioner— the last time accompanied by a 
prominent theologian and college professor. The same 
secretary was present this time with another minister as 
a mouthpiece and assistant. 

Questions were unkindly put, but we trust kindly and 
thoroughly answered. The majority of the large audience 
perceived the unfairness of the attack and the Scriptural 
strength of the replies. Approval was frequently 
manifested by applause, and in conclusion an elderly 
gentleman of about sixty-five years moved and carried a 
resolution of thanks to Pastor Russell for the pleasure 
and profit of the evening. 

BRISTOL-LONDON AND THE CONTINENT 

Monday of the following week was spent at Bristol. 
The Truth had spread some here also, and the dear 
friends seemed cheered by our talk to them in the afternoon 
respecting the covenant of sacrifice which the 
Church shares with her Lord, and the difference between 
this and the Law Covenant made with Israel at Mt. Sinai, 
and the New Law Covenant shortly to be inaugurated 
with Israel also, and through which ultimately all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed. The number present, 
about eighty, included some from nearby places. The 
evening meeting for the public had a splendid audience, 
especially for a week night— nearly twelve hundred. Our 
topic was "The Great White Throne of Judgment." We 
had excellent attention. The audience included evidently 
many of the most intelligent people of the city. 

Tuesday evening (April 11) we spent at London. We 
had a season of very special blessing and refreshment in 
commemorating the Memorial of our dear Redeemer's 
death on its anniversary, with the London congregation. 
The number present at the Tabernacle was about three 
hundred and thirty, of whom about three hundred and 
seventeen partook of the Memorial. About one hundred 



and fifty friends who reside in the outskirts of the city, 
and were unable to be present on account of business duties, 
distance, etc., kept separate celebrations; thus the 
London Church in its different meetings, and the Brooklyn 
congregation in its different meetings, represented 
practically the same number. 

The next day we traveled to Barmen, Germany, where, 
on Thursday, we had three very interesting sessions. The 
interest of the German friends continues to grow, and 
the numbers also— even though, as already stated, we are 
disappointed in the total numbers of interested ones in 
the Truth in Germany— considering the large population 
and the considerable effort and money expenditure made. 
The returns seem less than in Great Britain and Sweden. 

R4815 :page 148 

Friday and Saturday were devoted to meetings with 
the friends in the northern part of France, whom we had 
never before met. Our first stop was at Charleroi. We 
had dinner with the friends, addressed about twenty of 
them for about an hour, and then resumed our journey, 
arriving at Denain in time for supper and a two hours' 
talk to more than a hundred of the dear friends there. 
Next morning, accompanied by eight, we proceeded to 
Lens. There our congregation numbered about seventy 
interested. We had a splendid season of refreshment; 
then a question meeting, following which we proceeded 
on our journey toward London, which, by train and boat, 

R4816 :page 148 

we reached at 7 a.m. Sunday, ready for the services which 
have already been reported. 

NOTTINGHAM-SHEFFIELD-BRADFORD-MIDDLESBOROUGH 

The days of the next week were spent in addressing 
the dear friends in the four places above mentioned. The 
narrative of one is practically the story of all— keen interest 
amongst the friends and a general appreciation of 
the Truth. This was our first visit to Nottingham, and 
a very enjoyable one. The number of interested is not 
large, but they are very earnest. We addressed them in 
the afternoon along the lines of consecration and faithful 
obedience, both to the letter of the Divine law, the 
Golden Rule, and to the spirit of sacrifice. They had a 
large hall for the evening with a capacity of twenty-five 
hundred. It was comfortably filled, though not crowded. 
The audience was intelligent and attentive, and we trust 
that some good was accomplished and the Lord's name to 
some extent glorified. 

We addressed a Sheffield audience for the first time. 
We were agreeably surprised to find so large a company 
of friends— about eighty. Like the others they had 
worked hard with the volunteer matter, and the public 



service was well received, as was also the address to the 
interested. 

Bradford was our next stop. There also the Truth 
has been progressing, and there likewise, as indeed in 
every place, the friends had worked very hard to make 
the meeting well known— at the same time putting into 
the hands of the public two or three sermons to read. We 
were reminded that nearly all the cities of Great Britain 
had a very large distribution of PEOPLES PULPIT— forty 
thousand to sixty thousand in each place, or about one 
PEOPLES PULPIT to every six of the population. Surely 
all the friends got a blessing through this service, and 
eternity only will tell how much good seed of Truth was 
implanted, and how much error and superstition were at 
least partially broken down. 

The meeting with the Bradford friends was interesting, 
and the one for the public both interesting and exciting. 
A few objectors were anxious to put questions and to 
entrap us in our words, and to make the Good Tidings 
appear false. But God was with us, and we believe that 
their efforts did not succeed in accomplishing much injury. 
We trust that they were overruled by Divine 
providence for good to some at least. The audience numbered 
about fifteen hundred. 

Next came Middlesborough— another place we had 
never previously visited. About one hundred and twenty 
were present at the afternoon session for the interested, 
and about fifteen hundred at the public address in the 
evening. 

Considerable interest had been aroused at this point 
by reason of some local preachers of the Methodist 
church having received the Truth. We had excellent attention 
during the discourse, and a very lively time at its 
conclusion, when questions were asked and answered. 
These question opportunities, to some extent, confuse the 
beautiful outlines of the Divine Plan of the Ages in the 
minds of the hearers, but possibly there are compensations 
also. When criticisms and objections are answered 
readily, freely, Scripturally, a confidence in the entire 
Plan is, we trust, engendered, fully off-setting the disturbing 
influence. From Middlesborough we proceeded 
to London for the next Sunday— already reported. 

CARDIFF-LIVERPOOL-BIRMINGHAM-LONDON 

The next week we disposed of as foregoing. Our 
first appointment was Cardiff, Wales— the first time we 
had delivered an address in Wales. Cardiff has largely an 
English population. The proportion of Welsh faces, 
both at the public address and the address to the friends, 
was comparatively small. The hall was crowded beyond 
its capacity, two thousand, and hundreds failed to gain 
entrance. Many ministers were present. 

The so-called "Plymouth Brethren" helped to advertise 
the meeting by getting out a little leaflet which set 
forth ten points in which it was claimed that quotations 



from "The Plan of the Ages" contradicted the Bible. We 
set the audience at rest by promising to read and to answer 
those questions (which most of them had in their 
hands) at the close of the address. Our topic required 
nearly two hours, and then we had an interesting after-hour, 
in which we answered the ten questions and some 
other objections which were orally put to us. The friends 
of Cardiff rejoiced greatly with the results of their 
mutual efforts to glorify the Lord and his Word, and to 
assist the household of faith. 

The Liverpool meetings were enjoyed by the friends, 
and we trust were profitable to all in attendance. The 
friends of the Truth in the afternoon numbered about 
one hundred and fifty, and the crowd in the evening was 
estimated at fifteen hundred. How much good was done, 
only the Lord, of course, knows. The friends of the 
Truth were greatly encouraged, anyway. 

Birmingham was our next stop and a very enjoyable 
one. We noted a considerable increase, both in numbers 
and in interest, as compared with our previous meetings 
in this city. We had Priory Hall for the meeting 
of the friends, and an attendance of about one hundred 
and twenty-five. At night we had the Town Hall with 
an attendance of about two thousand. The chariot of the 
Truth is rolling on grandly in Birmingham, so far as 
outward indications guide our judgment. 

Friday night we had a farewell meeting at the London 
Tabernacle. First we met with the Elders and Deacons 
—about thirty-eight of us in an ante-room. We discussed 
the interests of the work and helpful methods of 
service. Then we joined the congregation in the Tabernacle 
proper. About four hundred were present. 

We outlined a little the work we hoped the congregation 
would feel encouraged to engage in with still greater 
vigor and zeal than ever before. We noted the great 
possibilities of the largest city in the world, and the 
responsibilities of the Truth upon all the dear friends 
there. We exhorted them to remember the great prize 
of our high calling— and the great privilege of serving 
the Lord's cause, even at the expense of weariness and 
self-denial in the present time. We noted the great reward 
sure to come to all the faithful— the Lord's love and 
favor, and glory, honor, and immortality; and the privilege 
of engaging still more fully in his service on the 
other side of the veil, as associates with our Redeemer, 
members of the great Prophet, Priest, King and Mediator, 
who shall bless the world of mankind and bring 
them Restitution privileges and finally restore the 

R4816 :page 149 

worthy and obedient to full fellowship with God and 
to eternal life. The service ended with a goodby handshake 
with the Elders and the congregation, the Elders 
standing with us as the congregation filed past. 
Next day we took train for our boat at Liverpool, 



homeward bound. About sixty of the dear Liverpool 
friends greeted us on the wharf, and sang to us, as the 
boat receded from the shore, "Blest be the tie that binds," 
and "God be with you till we meet again." 

BROOKLYN TABERNACLE AND BETHEL 

Our homeward journey on the Cunard steamer "Lusitania" 
was a pleasant one, and we were able to keep our 
stenographer busy. The only item out of the ordinary 
was a conversation with the widely-known Evangelist, 
Rev. Wilbur Chapman, and his assistant, Mr. Norton. 
They were returning from a campaign in Wales. We 
were agreeably surprised to find both gentlemen evidently 
interested in the doctrine of the second coming of the 
Lord, and both of them professed full consecration to 
walk in the Master's footsteps, even unto death. We 
were glad of this. Our wish for them, as for all of God's 
true people, is a still greater study of God's Word, wholly 
without sectarian spectacles, with a consuming desire to 
know and to do God's will. 

As our vessel docked we saw on the pier about a 
dozen of the brethren— chiefly the Elders of the Church. 
We received a very hearty welcome and at noon we had 
the pleasure of meeting the entire family at Bethel, and 
on the next Sunday the entire New York Ecclesia. 



R4816 :page 149 

THE TABERNACLE AND THE GOWN 

LONDON TABERNACLE has a large gallery, 

seating nearly as many as the first 

floor— in all nearly 1,200. To suit this the 

pulpit is a high one, boxed in, so that only 

the head and shoulders of the speaker are 

in view. A plain black robe or gown, provided 

by the kindness of some of the 

friends, was worn by the Pastor (Brother 

Russell) in the pulpit, but not at other 

times. This raised from a few the query, 

Is Brother Russell becoming a Babylonian— preaching in 

a church edifice and wearing a robe? 

It was thought well to explain, for the benefit of all, 
that the use of Church buildings was never condemned 
in the Bible, nor in the DAWN-STUDIES. St. Paul preached 
in a Synagogue whenever he had opportunity; so did the 
other Apostles, and so did Jesus. We do not favor the 
general striving for church edifices because of the expense, 
because the friends of the Truth are generally 
poor, and because what money we all can devote to the 
service of the Lord can be used more wisely as a rule- 
to accomplish a wider spread of the glad tidings of great 

joy. 



R4817 :page 149 

We still view the matter thus. But at London, as in 
New York City (Brooklyn), it is our judgment that the 
cause is best served by having a plain Tabernacle for 
general worship and also for the Society's warehouse 
and office of publication. We have sought to do the Master's 
will, and believe we have done it in both cases. 

As New York City is the American center, so is London 
the British center, or, indeed, the European center. 
It is to the advantage of the entire work everywhere 
that Brooklyn Tabernacle and London Tabernacle, even 
as names alone, should lend their dignity to the cause we 
love to serve. Both buildings are heavily mortgaged. 
The Society has other uses for its income, and is making 
no endeavor nor appeals for money to clear these off. 

As for the gown of plain black: It is simplicity itself, 
and very much more like what the Savior and the Apostles 
wore than is a frock-coat. And as for wearing an 
ordinary, every -day business suit of blue or gray or tan 
in the pulpit— surely it is a bit irreverent, unless as 
emergency might make it necessary. 

Respect for the Lord and for his Truth seems to call 
for respect even in the dress of the one who, for the 
hour, represents the Lord as his mouthpiece, "ambassador," 
or "able minister of the New Covenant," calling 
for the joint-sacrifices necessary to be found before the 
New Covenant can go into effect. We should not be 
understood as laying down a law respecting meats or 
drinks or wearing of apparel. We are merely suggesting 
that a fancy vest, colored tie and business suit do 
not appeal to us as specially to be commended. Rather, 
we would commend to the preaching brethren, so far as 
possible and convenient, a preference for black and 
white apparel— whatever the cut. 

Prejudice is a weed which may flourish in comparatively 
well-kept heart-gardens. But it should always be 
plucked up as soon as discovered, or it will do damage- 
no one can tell how much— to the owner of the garden 
and to his neighbors. 

THE GOLDEN RULE 

The Golden Rule seems not to be fully understood nor 
appreciated by some of God's children who have gone 
beyond the Law which it represents and are seeking to 
sacrifice. The Golden Rule means— be just toward fellowmen, 
giving them the same liberty which you desire and 
claim as your right. Do not attempt to fetter them in 
ways you would not wish them to fetter you. All saints 
should remember that this is simply justice, not sacrifice. 
It is God's command— the very foundation of his throne, 
of his Government. Perhaps no other lesson is more 
needed to be learned by the Church than this. It is violated 
continually in the home and in the Church. Justice, 



before generosity; the Golden Rule, before sacrifice, 
is surely God's order, and all who would be obedient 
to him and well pleasing will surely take heed to watch 
themselves in this respect. 

FALSE DOCTRINE IS BABYLON'S FAULT 

As for the churches nominal being Babylon because 
they meet in fine or poor buildings, with or without 
steeples, this is foolishness, well to be gotten rid of, and 
which none of us ever should have had. Similarly the 
dress of the minister has nothing to do with Babylonishness 
—although we do confess to prejudice against the 
changing of gowns during service and the wearing of 
colored gowns, etc., in Catholic and High Church ceremonials, 
as contrary to the simplicity of Christ. 

Babylon's fault is her false doctrines— the mingled 
wine in her cup— the "Golden Cup" of the Divine Word 
—wherewith she and the world are so intoxicated that 
they cannot understand the Truth, but persecute it. 

To come out of Babylon, therefore, does not mean 
nevermore to worship God in a specially constructed building; 
nor does it mean to do nothing that Babylon does and 
to wear nothing which Babylon approves. This application 
would mean that we might neither sing nor pray nor 
use an organ, etc., because others use these, whom we 
believe have departed from the faith. 

It is difficult, of course, for us to keep our poor heads 
well balanced by the spirit of a sound mind; but the 

R4817 :page 150 

Golden Rule will surely assist. One dear friend claimed 
that he was afraid that others would be "stumbled" by 
these matters— especially that those who have gone out 
from us would use it as a club. Our answer is that those 
who have gone out need not be considered for one moment; 
they will twist and turn everything, for evil anyway. 
If we stopped to heed and please them we would do 
nothing that would please and serve God. 

On the contrary, we believe that the general sentiment 
of thinking and pious people is turning from the 
rough-and-ready preaching, once so approved, to something 
more refined and reverential. There are still good 
people who consider it a sin to wear a collar or a necktie 
even at Divine service, but they are becoming fewer. 

But the Golden Rule leaves these children of God free 
to dress as they please, without others busybodying in 
their affairs. Let experience teach them. Let them learn 
in the School of Christ that the advantages and liberties 
of the Kingdom of God (the Church) consist not in 
meats and drinks and clothing, but in righteousness and 
true holiness, represented by the Wedding Garment, 
"without spot or wrinkle or any such thing." 



R4817 :page 150 

STRENGTH AND PEACE 

"The Lord will give strength unto his people; the 
Lord will bless his people with peace."— Psa. 29:11 

AS WE look back over the years that have 

passed since first we learned to "know the 

joyful sound" of the true Gospel and consecrated 

ourselves fully to the Lord, we 

view with sorrow the imperfections of even 

our best efforts; and as looking forward 

we see the difficulties that seem to obstruct 

our onward course, we shall greatly need 

to reinforce our waning courage with the 

special promises of Divine grace to help in 

every time of need. Among others, we have the blessed 

assurance that "The Lord will give strength unto his 

people"; "Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will 

deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me."— Psa. 50:15. 

As soldiers under our great Captain, we have enlisted 
in no uncertain struggle, unless our own faint-heartedness 
or unfaithfulness should make it so. We are fully 
supplied with the whole armor of God, which will amply 
protect us against the fiery darts of the Adversary, if 
only we accept it and carefully buckle it on. We have 
with us the constant presence of our Captain, so long as 
we are closely following his leading. Above the din of 
battle his inspiring voice may be heard saying, "Fear not, 
little flock; for it is the Father's good pleasure to give 
you the Kingdom"; "Be of good cheer; I have overcome!" 
(Luke 12:32; John 16:33.) If we are weak and 
incline to faint-heartedness, we have only to remember 
the blessed promise, "The Lord will give strength unto 
his people"; and by our faithfulness we shall glorify God, 
who will deliver us from all our foes, both seen and 
unseen. 

Like all others, the Lord's people need fortitude and 
patience, else they might soon become discouraged in the 
conflict with the world, the flesh, and the Adversary. 
They need strength; they need encouragement. In the 
text under consideration, the word strength means, in 
large measure, courage. The Lord will give courage to 
his people. He encourages us in a variety of ways; he 
encourages us through each other, as we build one another 
up in the most holy faith. 

MILK FOR BABES-STRONG MEAT FOR THOSE MORE 
DEVELOPED 

We, nevertheless, look to the individual, innate strength 
and to its importance. "Be of good courage, and he will 
strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord." 
(Psa. 31:24.) We are assured that we shall be strengthened 



in the "inner man" through the Spirit of the Lord. 

None have this particular kind of strength, that of the 

"inner man," except those who have become New Creatures 

in Christ, to whom "old things have passed away, 

and all things have become new." (2 Cor. 5:17.) With 

this particular Spirit-begotten class all of the Lord's dealings 

are intended to develop character. 

"Desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may 
grow thereby," and become strong. (I Pet. 2:2.) This 
milk of the Word the Lord gives at first to his children, 
that the new nature may grow thereby and become able 
to digest stronger food and thus develop in character-likeness 
to our Lord. To all his own he has provided 
nourishment— milk for babes, strong meat for those more 
developed. (Heb. 5:12-14.) And any who would be 
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might (courageous) 
will avail himself of the Divine provision. 

Our faith, however, is the basis of both our strength 
and our peace. No matter how fiercely the storms of life 
may assail us, we must never let go of our anchor and 

R4818 :page 150 

allow ourselves to drift; but always remember that "The 

foundation of God standeth sure"; that "His truth is our 

shield and buckler"; that "What he has promised he is 

able also to perform," notwithstanding our human imperfections 

and frailties; that, covering these, we have the 

imputed righteousness of Christ, our Surety and Advocate; 

that "The Father himself loveth us," and that "He 

knoweth our frame and remembereth that we are dust," 

and so has compassion for the sons of his love and is 

very pitiful and of tender mercy. (2 Tim. 2:19; Psa. 91:4; 

Rom. 4:21; John 16:27; Psa. 103:14.) Indeed, 

"What more could he say than to us he hath said" to 

assure our faith and to steady and strengthen our hearts 

to patient endurance in the midst of the trials and conflicts 

in the narrow way of sacrifice? 

With abounding compassion and tenderness our Lord, 
on the last night of his earthly life, bestowed upon his 
beloved disciples his parting blessing, his legacy of peace. 
It was the richest legacy he had to bequeath, and was of 
priceless value. It was the promise of that tranquility of 
soul, that rest and ease of mind which he himself 
possessed— the peace of God. It was the same peace 
which the Father has always enjoyed, even in the midst 
of all the commotion which the permission of evil has 
brought about; but it was not derived from the same 
source. In Jehovah, this peace is self-centered, because 
he realizes in himself omnipotence and Infinite wisdom; 
while the peace of Christ was centered, not in himself, 
but in God, through faith in his wisdom, power and 
grace. So also, if we would have the peace of God, the 
peace of Christ ("my peace"), it must, like his, be 
centered in God, by faith. 

The peace promised is not the short-lived peace of the 



world, which is sometimes enjoyed for a little season; 
but "my peace," the peace of God which Christ himself 
by faith enjoyed, who, "Though he was rich, yet for our 
sakes became poor" (2 Cor. 8:9); who lost friend after 
friend, and in his last hour was forsaken by all of the 
few that remained— the peace that endured through loss, 
persecution, scorn and contempt, and even amidst the 
agonies of the cross. This peace is something which none 

R4818 :page 151 

of the vicissitudes of this life can destroy and which no 
enemy can wrest from us. 

"MARVEL NOT IF THE WORLD HATE YOU" 

"There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked." 
(Isa. 48:22.) "The wicked are like the troubled sea, 
continually casting up mire and dirt." Their hearts are 
not in accord with peace and righteousness, but are filled 
with selfishness. The wicked are self-seeking and grasping; 
filled with anger if they cannot always get what they 
want; with malice if they see some one enjoying what 
they cannot have. All of these things indicate a lack of 
peace. 

To the extent that any of the Lord's people have any 
of these evil propensities they cannot have the "peace of 
God, which passeth all understanding"— which passeth all 
description. It is a rest of heart by faith. In this peace 
lies a satisfaction for all the various qualities of the mind; 
in proportion as the mind develops the ambition of pleasing 
the Lord, of communicating to others the knowledge 
of the Truth and the blessed opportunity of salvation, 
it becomes our ambition to do good, instead of evil. So 
ambition, being turned into a right line, the peace of God, 
which none can comprehend save those who possess it, 
comes to the mind and heart. 

It is not an outward peace, however, for the Lord's 
people, individually and collectively, have most distressing 
experiences. The Church has always been persecuted, 
as Jesus forewarned us: "Marvel not, my brethren, if the 
world hate you"; "If ye were of the world, the world 
would love his own; but because ye are not of the world, 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you."— I John 3:13; John 15:19. 

"IN THE WORLD YE SHALL HAVE TRIBULATION" 

The peace promised is not such as the world can always 
recognize and appreciate, for the possessor of it, 
like the Lord and the Apostles and Prophets, may have 
a stormy pathway. They did not have peace outwardly. 
They were beset, harassed on every hand; they were 
persecuted and obliged to flee from place to place; some 
of the saints of old were stoned to death; some were 
sawn asunder. Yet the peace of God, abounding in their 



hearts, enabled them to endure all these trials joyfully. 

Indeed, that it must be so with all the faithful until all 

the purposes of God in the permission of evil are accomplished, 

we are distinctly forewarned, but with the assurance 

that through all the storms of life this peace 

shall abide— "In the world ye shall have tribulation," but 

"in me ye shall have peace."— John 16:33. 

This promise, that God will give peace to his people, 
seems to apply only to a peace of heart. Our Lord and 
the Apostles possessed it to such an extent that they enjoyed 
themselves much more than did their enemies. 
While Paul and Silas were in prison they sang praises to 
God, instead of berating the governments and threatening 
what would be done to them; instead of butting their 
heads against the bars and saying, "God does not care 
for us; we will go about our own business, hereafter." 
So with us. In proportion as we see matters from the 
Divine viewpoint and appreciate the precious promises 
and let them inspire our hearts, we shall rejoice in those 
promises, and our hearts will be blessed. Even if we 
have trials and difficulties that we are not able to surmount, 
if these are working out for us the fruits and 
graces of the Spirit, we may rejoice and give thanks for 
these evidences of God's love. 

"MY PEACE I GIVE UNTO YOU" 

We see that the peace of God is compatible with great 
commotion and with sorrow and pain of various kinds; 
for it is not dependent upon outward circumstances, but 
upon a proper balancing of the mind and the condition of 
a perfect heart. Such peace— the peace of God— was 
enjoyed by our Lord Jesus in the midst of all the turmoil 
and confusion of his eventful earthly life. And this 
brings us to the consideration of our Lord's last legacy 
to his disciples, when he was about to leave the world, as 
expressed in his own words: "Peace I leave with you, 
my peace I give unto you; not as the world giveth [in 
stinted measure or in perishable quality], give I unto you. 
Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." 
-John 14:27. 

The promise in our text— "The Lord will bless his 
people with peace"— evidently belongs to this Age, when 
all creation groans and travails in pain. (Rom. 8:22.) 
When the Millennial Age shall have been ushered in, 
there will be prevailing conditions of peace and thus he 
will give peace to all people. 

Let us, then, have for our watchword, "LOYALTY" 
to God and to the principles of righteousness; and let 
each of us write upon his heart the gracious promise— 
"The Lord will give strength unto his people." Let us be 
faithfully "his people," and let us earnestly desire and 
faithfully use the strength promised. "Faithful is he that 
calleth you, who also will do it"; "He is faithful that 
promised."-IThess. 5:24; Heb. 10:23. 

So then, if you lack the strength or the peace 



promised, the fault is yours, not God's. Either you have 
not the interests of his service closely enough at heart, 
or else you do not make use of the strength he provides. 
"The Lord will give strength unto his people (his trusting, 
faithful servants, those who are using to his praise 
the talents consecrated to their Master, however many or 
few those talents may be); the Lord will bless his people 
with peace." 



R4818 :page 151 

THE RANSOM AND ITS APPLICATION TO ALL MANKIND 

THE word "Ransom" is used in respect to the 
purchase-price of humanity and also in 
connection with the deliverance of mankind 
after having been purchased by that 
price. As an illustration of the two uses 
of the word, we give two texts of Scripture: 

(1) "Who gave himself a Ransom 

for all, to be testified in due time." (I Tim. 2:6.) 

(2) "I will Ransom them from the 
power of the grave." (Hos. 13:14.) In 

these texts we see the two uses of the word "Ransom." 
The word Ransom in the Scriptures is often used in a 
similar manner to the word "redeem." The two words, 
indeed, have the thought of purchase connected with 
them. To redeem is to buy back; to ransom, as used in 
I Tim. 2:6, is to buy back, by giving a price to correspond. 

The Bible sometimes speaks of the death of our Lord 
Jesus Christ as the giving of the price. The Scripture says 
that our Lord Jesus gave himself to be a Ransom-price. 
(Matt. 20:28; Mark 10:45.) He gave himself at Jordan; 
he completed the giving of himself at Calvary. In 
his death he laid down the ransom-price, the price necessary 
for redeeming Adam and all of his race from the 
sentence of death. 

But there is a difference to be observed between the 
laying down of the Ransom-price and the application of 
that Ransom-price. The price was in our Lord Jesus 
himself, but he must lay it down sacrificially before the 

R4819 :page 152 

benefits of it could be given to others. The Scriptures 

show us that, after he had laid down that price, God empowered 

him to make use of it, permitting him to enter 

into the Most Holy, even heaven itself, to do so. He 

makes use of that price, as outlined in the Scriptures, in 

a two-fold offering to God:— 

First, he appropriated of that life which he had laid 
down— the merits of that Ransom-price— to those who 
would constitute his Body, the Church. He himself had 
no sins to cleanse, but those who, according to God's arrangement, 



were to be the members of his Body, had sins; 

and for these he applies his blood as a redemption price 

or merit on their behalf, securing for them, not only release 

from condemnation, but also the opportunity of becoming 

sharers with him in the Ransom work. He has 

not applied the merit of that sacrifice as yet to Adam 

or his children, but merely to those who, in the type, were 

represented by the under-priests, and to the Levites, the 

brethren and servants of the priestly family. 

Secondarily, Christ will make use of his sacrifice on 
behalf of all the people. As was shown in the type, the 
sprinkling of the blood on the mercy-seat at the close of 
the Day of Atonement, which was the second sprinkling, 
was for all the people. The antitype of this act will 
constitute a full offset to the Adamic condemnation. Another 
Scripture, however, shows us that while all the 
people are to come under the direct control of the great 
Messiah, they are not to be turned over perfect, but as 
they are found— in a dying condition, the wrath of God, 
because of imperfection, still being upon them. Then, 
under the New Covenant, of which our Lord is made the 
responsible Mediator, the Great Messiah will take charge 
of "all the people," even while they are still subject 
to the weaknesses resulting from the sentence of death. 
Under this New Covenant, as many of them as will become 
obedient to the laws of Messiah's Kingdom, will 
come into relationship to the Life-Giver, in harmony 
with the text which says, "He that hath the Son hath 
life, and he that hath not the Son shall not see life." 
(I John 5:12; John 3:36.) All of Adam's posterity will 
have an opportunity to accept Jesus, either as his brethren 
at the present time, or as his children in the next 
Age. 

Coming back, then, to the words Ransom and Ransomed: 
They are used in respect to our Lord, to indicate, 
not that he completed the Ransom work when he died, 
but that he there provided the Ransom-price. During his 
Mediatorial reign the whole work of Christ will be that 
of delivering those for whom he gave the Ransom-price. 
In this last use of the word, it would be right to say that 
the Church shares with Christ in this Ransom work of 
delivering the world. This is the thought everywhere 
set before us in the Scriptures. But it would be wrong 
to say that the Church participates in the Ransom-price. 
The Ransom-price was the perfect Man, Jesus, who gave 
himself to be a Ransom-price for all. In that sacrifice 
there is a sufficiency of merit for all of Adam's posterity. 
The Church, therefore, has no participation in the work 
of giving the Ransom-price, though it is to participate 
in the work of Ransoming or recovering those for whom 
the Ransom-price is to be applied. 

The sentence of death, passed upon Father Adam, was 
transmitted in a natural way to all of his children. At 
the end of this Gospel Age, the Great High Priest will 
have finished his atoning work. Then, by applying the 
Ransom-price on behalf of the world, he will become invested 



with all the rights and titles to humanity and to 
the earth. The full price having been paid over in behalf 
of mankind and their home, and having been accepted by 
the Almighty, the "world and the fulness thereof" will 
all be turned over to Christ, who will then be King of 
kings and Lord of lords. Justice will then have no further 
claim upon mankind, all of whom will have been 
turned over to Christ. But he will not recognize those 
who are in a rebellious attitude toward God's 
arrangements. 

Such, however, will be held in restraint and will 
still be under Divine Justice, for the Great Mediator will 
be a representative of Divine Justice, as well as of Divine 
Mercy. During his reign it will be his duty and privilege 
to teach mankind a great lesson. In one of the prophecies 
we read, "Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain 
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and 
he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his 
paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the 
Word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3; Mic. 4:2.) 
And it shall come to pass that the nation that will 
not go up to Jerusalem will have no blessing.— 
Zech. 14:17-19. 

In other words, while the Millennial Kingdom will be 
fully established, its blessings will be operative only 
toward those who will seek to keep the Divine Law. But 
as the nations perceive that there is no blessing apart 
from the keeping of the Divine Law, they will doubtless 
be influenced to do so. In due time, the light of the 
knowledge of the Lord will fill the whole earth, and ignorance 
and superstition will be supplanted by Divine enlightenment. 
The Scriptures assure us that this New Covenant 
will be made with Israel, and with all mankind, who 
will become Israelites; for God will also give the heathen 
to Messiah, who will be Ruler of all the earth, not merely 
of those who accept his Government. "Ask of me and 
I will give thee the heathen for an inheritance." He will 
rule with the iron rod, to the intent that all mankind may 
learn the Divine Law and have the Divine blessing.— 
Psa. 2:6-12. 



R4819 :page 152 

THE FALL OF SAMARIA 

-JUNE 18.— II KINGS 17:1-18.- 

"He that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly 
be destroyed, and that without remedy."— Proverbs 29:1. 

HOSHEA, King of Israel, the central personage 
of this study, is paid the rather doubtful 
compliment of being less evil in the 
Lord's sight than some of his predecessors. 



Gradually the Assyrian kingdom had extended 

its control to Israel, and Hoshea 

maintained his throne by paying tribute. 

This continued for several years until the 

King of Israel thought himself sufficiently 

in league with the Egyptians on the south 

to refuse further tribute money. In consequence, the 

Assyrian army advanced and laid siege to the capital 

city, Samaria. It seems astounding, indeed, to learn 

that the city withstood the siege for three years. The 

end came in the ninth year of Hoshea, and signified the 

end of the ten-tribe kingdom, the people being transported 

by their captors several hundred miles to another portion 

of the Assyrian empire. 

The decline of Israel as a nation, from the time of 
Solomon, had been a gradual one. The most religiously 
inclined had been attracted to the southern division called 
Judah. The latter, with the smaller tribe of Benjamin, 
not only had the Holy City and the temple, but gradually 
gained all the holy people of Israel, attracted by the worship 

R4819 :page 153 

of Jehovah and repelled from their own tribal homes 
by the prevalent idolatry. 

The ten tribes must have wasted away considerably 
before this final removal of Hoshea and the remnant left 
in Samaria— in all less than twenty -eight thousand, 
whereas the nation had previously numbered millions. 

The fact is that in previous wars captives were taken, 
who, having lost their religion, were Israelites in name 
only; and having no Father in God, nor interest in the 
Abrahamic promise, nor in the land of Israel, were just 
as much at home and just as much in fellowship with 
surrounding conditions and as well suited in religion 
in their new homes as they had been in the old. In a 
word, only twenty -eight thousand remained in the northern 
kingdom who even took pride in the name of Israel; 
and they, as we have seen, were in great part idolaters 
and out of relationship with God. When thinking of the 
ten tribes of Israel "scattered abroad," we should remember 
how few there were of them when the ten-tribe kingdom 
finally died. Whoever of them maintained his 
religious faith in God and observed circumcision in his 
family, thus maintained his membership as an Israelite. 
Others ceased entirely to be Israelites. 

THE OVERTHROW OF ISRAEL A JUDGMENT OF THE 
LORD 

Later on, when the two-tribe kingdom of Judah was 
also carried captive into Babylonia, the division lines 
were lost and the name Jews became dominant and 
synonymous with Israelites. Thus in our Lord's day he 
declared that his mission was to "the lost sheep of the 
House of Israel." So also the Apostle James later wrote 



respecting "the twelve tribes scattered abroad." Some of 

all the tribes were to be found loyal to God, in the surrounding 

nations and in the land of Israel. Those in 

foreign lands, we remember, came up to Jerusalem yearly 

to keep the feast of the Passover, and again to keep the 

Atonement Day celebration. These were not in any 

sense of the word lost, but merely scattered, as the Jews 

of today are scattered, in all parts of the world. 

The overthrow of Israel, recounted in this study, we 
are directly told, was a judgment from the Lord. "Therefore 

R4820 : page 153 

the Lord was very angry with Israel and removed 
them out of his sight; there were none left but the tribe 
of Judah only.— 2 Kings 17:18. 

Sin tends to national destruction in a very natural 
way— by sapping the vitals of the people of the nation. 
But in Israel's case there was something more than this. 
God entered into a special Covenant with that nation by 
which he bound himself and they bound themselves. 
Israel agreed to be God's people, to serve and obey him 
faithfully; and God agreed that, if they would do so, he 
would specially favor them and look out for their interests, 
their flocks, their herds, their health, their prosperity; 
all were to be blessed so long as they were loyal 
and true. On the contrary, God specially pledged himself 
that if they as a people proved unfaithful to the 
Covenant, he would specially chastise them, punish them, 
deliver them to their enemies, etc. Thus Israel's prosperity 
or defeat indicated surely the Lord's favor or disfavor, 
in a manner not applicable to other nations. 

Our lesson recounts the Lord's testimony against his 
people in which he points out wherein they had failed in 
their part of the Covenant. They had done things which 
they should not have done and had left undone things 
which they should have done. Nevertheless, the Lord 
testifies unto Israel and unto Judah through the prophets 
sent to them, "Turn ye from your evil way and keep my 
commandments and my statutes, according to the Law 
which I commanded your fathers and which I sent to you 
by my servants, the Prophets." God did his part, and 
more. Then we read, "Notwithstanding, they would not 
hear, but hardened their necks like the neck of their 
fathers, who believed not in the Lord their God." "A 
stiff neck" is used symbolically to represent a self-willed 
and rebellious attitude of heart. 

DESTROYED WITHOUT REMEDY 

Our text, taken from Proverbs, tells what will be the 
final outcome of any conflict between God and the sinner. 
If reproofs are not rightly received, if they do not have 
a corrective influence, they will have the opposite effect 
—the sinner will be the more obstinate and self-willed 
and opposed to God. The result of such a contest with 



the Almighty must mean their overthrow, their destruction 
—a destruction from which there is no recovery— no 
remedy. Whoever shall be remanded to the Second 
Death, there will be no hope for him. 

But, thank God, this irremediable destruction of the 
Second Death will come only upon wilful evil-doers of 
the class mentioned in this text— often reproved and yet 
stiff-necked. Some of the Church might be classed 
in this category because of previous enlightenment, etc., 
enjoyed, but surely the world in general has not had 
such reproofs and such an intelligent understanding of 
the Lord as would make them properly amenable to the 
Second Death. And God purposes that every member of 
Adam's race must have this one full, complete privilege 
and opportunity for eternal life before he can be sentenced 
to the Second Death. 

The philosophy of this is plain: Adamic death, which 
comes to all men as a result of Adam's sin and his condemnation 
as a sinner, is to be entirely wiped out, and 
Adam and all of his race are to be fully released from 
it. The right to set men free from that sentence was 
secured by the great Redeemer, Jesus, who offered up 
himself a corresponding price for all, to be testified in 
due time. This great fact has been testified to a comparatively 
small number during this Gospel Age— to 
such only as have an ear to hear and the seeing eye of 
faith. These only are set free from Adamic death now 
—and that not actually, but by faith, in order to permit 
them to become sanctified followers of Jesus. 

An important fact, heretofore very generally overlooked, 
is that God's provision through the death of Jesus 
embraces every member of Adam's family as well as himself, 
and is the guarantee, to each and every member, 
of another chance or opportunity for harmony with God, 
aside from the one which Adam had and lost. Those of 
us who, as the Spirit-begotten Church, enjoy this favor 
in the present time, must not expect any further favor 
along this line in the future, for Christ dieth no more; 
and only one share in his redemptive work is provided 
for every member of the race. But so many as do not 
now hear and see and understand the grace of God, must 
be brought to a knowledge of this great truth. This includes 
the heathen as well as many residing in civilized 
lands, the eyes and ears of whose hearts have not seen 
nor heard the true message of Divine grace in Christ 
Jesus, and who, therefore, could not refuse him nor be 
refused by him thus far. 

ISRAEL'S PROMISED RESTITUTION 

When in the future all these people are brought to a 
knowledge of the Truth, the grace of God will be 
to them "a savor of life unto life, or of death unto 
death," as it is now to the Church. 

The Israelites suffered the penalty for their failure 
as a nation; they were destroyed, but not without remedy. 



R4820 : page 154 

Indeed, the Bible tells us that in the end of this Age, as 
soon as the election of the Church shall have been completed 
and the First Resurrection accomplished, God's 
favor will return to Israel, the twelve tribes, and their 
regathering will be the first blessing to humanity under 
Messiah's glorious reign. The Lord's special promise is 
that he will gather them from the North Country, and 
from all the lands whithersoever he has scattered them, 
and that he will bring them into their own land. 

St. Paul brings this matter to our attention very explicitly 
in his letter to the Romans. (1 1:25-32.) The 
logic of his argument should be carefully noted, including 
the fact that Natural Israel will receive mercy at the 
hands of Spiritual Israel— in the Kingdom.— Vs. 32. 

The nation of Israel transgressed Divine commands, 
and was therefore worthy of punishment— but this did 
not signify that that nation would become alienated from 
the Divine mercy which God had already intended and 
had already promised through Abraham. The time for 
the beginning of that mercy did not arrive until seven centuries 
after the narrative of this lesson— not until Jesus 
came to die, the Just for the unjust, to bring us back to 
God as a race— to open up "a new and living way." Thus 
we read, "Christ brought life and immortality to light 
through the Gospel." 

Neither Israel, in the days of Hoshea nor at any other 
time, nor any other nation, knew anything about the life 
and immortality which God purposed to proffer to mankind 
through the Redeemer in due time. As the Apostle again 
says, "This great salvation began to be spoken by our 
Lord and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him." 
-Heb. 2:3. 

It is well for us to keep in memory that God's punishment 
for sin is death; that this punishment came upon 
Father Adam and his entire family because of sin; and 
that thus far all mankind have died because of Adam's 
sin. It is well for us to remember that it is because we 
were all thus dead in trespasses and in sins through 
Adam's disobedience that God provided the Savior and 
his redemptive work. It is well for us to remember that 
this work must be efficacious for every member of our 
race; and that only by having enjoyed his share in the 
Redeemer's sacrificial merit could anybody be consigned 
to the Second Death; and then it will be only on account 
of wilful, deliberate, intentional wrong doing. It 
is well for us to remember that the Second Death is the 
extreme penalty of the Divine Law, and not eternal torment, 
as many of us were mistaught to believe. "The 
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life 
through Jesus Christ our Lord."— Rom. 6:23. 



R4820 : page 154 

YOUR REASONABLE SERVICE 

--JUNE 25.- 

"What doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly and to 
love mercy and to walk humbly with thy God?"— Micah 6:8. 

WHO could find fault with these requirements? 

Who could say that in setting such a standard 

for his creatures the Almighty required 

too much? On the other hand, how could 

we imagine a just and loving Heavenly 

Father requiring less than is here stipulated. 

God's law, variously stated, always amounts 

to the same thing. The statement of it, 

as given to the Jews at Mt. Sinai, embodied 

in the Decalogue, corresponds with 

this statement, as does also the presentation of it set 

forth by the great Teacher, saying, "Thou shalt love the 

Lord thy God with all thy mind, soul and strength; and 

thy neighbor as thyself." 

Many of us, after confessing with St. Paul that the 
Divine Law is holy and just and good, have been surprised 
to find that that which our minds heartily approve, 
we are unable to obey— to the full. For thirty-five hundred 
years the Jews have sought to keep that Divine Law, 
under the promise of eternal life for so doing, but none 

R4821 : page 154 

of them have been able to gain the prize. When as a 
nation they realize their inability, and not sooner, they 
will be ready to receive at God's hands, as a free gift 
through the Redeemer, the forgiveness of their violations 
of the Divine Law. And then, under their New Covenant 
(Jer. 31:31; Heb. 8:8-13), they will have Messiah's 
assistance in regaining that perfection of mind 
and body and a "new heart," which will enable them to 
obey in every particular the Divine Law, which all our 
minds recognize as just and true, but which, because of 
heredity, we are unable to perfectly obey in the flesh. 

That blessing, which is soon to come to natural Israel, 
under Messiah's Kingdom and the New Covenant, 
will be extended through them, as the natural seed of 
Abraham, to every nation, kindred and tongue, in harmony 
with the Divine promise made to Abraham. 

A different, although a corresponding favor, is now, in 
advance, bestowed upon a small class gathered from Jews 
and Gentiles, and Scripturally known as the "Church of 
the First-Borns, whose names are written in Heaven." 
These, in advance, realize their inability to keep the 
Divine Law, and by faith lay hold upon the Redeemer's 
merit and consecrate their all to God through him. In 
the Redeemer they are accepted of the Father; their heart 



endeavors for righteousness are recognized, and the 
flesh and its imperfections are renounced and counted 
as dead and are offset by the merit of the Redeemer. 
These are Scripturally classed as members of 
the Great Prophet, Priest, King and Mediator between 
God and men. The thought of our text will be completed 
when all the faithful, as members of the Messiah, 
"the little flock," shall be made joint-heirs with him, as 
"the Bride, the Lamb's Wife." 

ANALYZING OUR SUBJECT 

We may demonstrate to ourselves the truthfulness of 
the foregoing: What is it to do justly? It means much more 
than not to overcharge our neighbor for the goods he 
may purchase of us. It means much more than not to 
defraud him in the making of change. To deal justly 
means justice between servant and master, mistress and 
maid, buyer and seller— that we should do to others as 
we would that they should do to us; it means the strict 
following of the Golden Rule enjoined by the Great 
Teacher. 

Applying this principle of justice to our words, it 
means that we should not speak evil of either friend or 
foe; that we should not even insinuate evil. It means 
that we should not tell unnecessarily what we know to 
be the truth, if it would harm our neighbor, disparage 
him and discredit him in the eyes of others. It means 
that we should love our neighbor and his interests as we 
love our own, and should defend his interests and guard 
them as carefully as we would our own. 

Justice, in order to thus operate in our words and 
deeds, must operate in our hearts— in our minds. "As 

R4821 : page 155 

a man thinketh, so is he." If he thinks unkindly, ungenerously, 

unjustly, he will find it impossible always to 

avoid unkind, unjust, unloving words or actions. "Out 

of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." It 

follows, then, that to do justly signifies absolute righteousness 

in thought, in word, in conduct. Of this none 

of us is capable. The nearest approach to this is 

the perfect or just intention of the heart, covenanted by 

all those who become followers of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

The intentions and good endeavors of these are accepted 

of the Father. As for the world, it will require long years 

of assistance and uplifting out of weaknesses and imperfections 

of the flesh to bring them to where their 

thoughts, words and deeds will be absolutely just and in 

full accordance with the Golden Rule. Their attainment 

of this will mean their getting rid of all the imperfections 

of the flesh and, by full restitution, returning to 

the image and likeness of God lost in Adam. 

TO LOVE MERCY 



All recognize mercy as a very proper, a very desirable 
quality. All realize their need of Divine mercy. All 
should know that the Divine purpose is that only those 
who show mercy to others will themselves receive mercy 
at the Lord's hands. Many, however, while admitting all 
this and while seeking to practice mercy, do not love it. 
Rather, they love vengeance, and are merely constrained 
to mercy by the laws of the land, public sentiment and the 
Word of God. Time and again this has been shown in 
the case of lynchings. Mobs have gathered for the infliction 
of punishment, glad of an opportunity for setting 
aside mercy and letting loose justice, as they might express 
it. And in those mobs have been many guilty of 
perhaps as great crimes as the one who was mobbed. 
"O, consistency, thou art ajewel!" 

WALK HUMBLY WITH THY GOD 

By a strange perversity of our fallen nature, those 
most able and willing to follow the first two requirements 
are apt to be the most delinquent in this third requirement. 
In a word, the just and merciful are very apt to 
find themselves possessed of a spirit of pride, a feeling of 
superiority to their fellows, a hindrance to their having a 
humble walk with God. Those most humble toward the 
Almighty are frequently those who have had great sins 
and great weaknesses, which have helped to humble them. 
Thus the great Apostle, St. Paul, was allowed to retain a 
measure of visual weakness as a reminder of the time 
when he was a persecutor of Christ— of the "Church 
which is his Body"— as a reminder of how the grace of 
God apprehended him on the way to Damascus, and that 
without the Divine interposition he might have continued 
hopelessly blind. 

The Apostle refers to his weakness of eyes as a thorn 
in the flesh, a messenger of Satan permitted to buffet 
him. The Lord declined to remove the affliction, doubtless 
because it would keep the Apostle humble enough to 
attend properly to the great work God had for him to 
do without being puffed up to his own injury. The 
Divine message was, "My grace is sufficient for thee; my 
strength is made perfect in weakness." Realizing the 
import of this the Apostle cried out, "Rather, therefore, 
will I glory in mine infirmities that the power of Christ 
may rest upon me." 

And so may all God's people, while realizing their inability 
to live up to these Divine requirements, rejoice in 
the Divine provision on their behalf that God's grace is 
sufficient for them, where their weakness is recognized 
and confessed and abhorred, and his mercy appreciated, 
sought and accepted. 



R4821 : page 155 



BIBLE STUDY CLASS-EXTENSION 

AS WE have recognized the growth of grace 

and knowledge amongst the Brethren in 

the various Bible Study Classes we have 

thought and prayed over the matter of their 

usefulness as laborers in the Vineyard. At 

first the Society encouraged and assisted 

several of the Brethren in outside work. 

However, as others made application for 

similar recognition we soon saw that the 

Society would be in danger of getting into 

trouble, either by endorsing and assisting some not 

worthy, or in failing to assist some who were worthy. 

And anyway, the attempt of the Society has always been 

to follow the Apostolic injunction, "Without partiality 

and without hypocrisy."— James 3:17. 

We therefore withdrew all special co-operation 
outside the regular Pilgrim force, whose names appear 
on the last page of THE WATCH TOWER or are 
specially announced. We cannot shirk responsibility 
for these, and, without wishing to cultivate a captious 
or critical or fault-finding spirit, we now say that 
we earnestly request that the dear members of the 
Society everywhere shall report anything in the conduct 
or teachings of the Pilgrims which to them may 
appear contrary to the instructions of the Word— at variance 
with the "faith once delivered to the saints." Do 
not discuss such matters slanderously, but report them 
kindly and lovingly to the Head Office at Brooklyn— 
"Pilgrim Department." It does not follow that we will 
agree with you and censure the Pilgrim. But as the Pilgrims 
represent the Society it is proper that we should 
know the influence of their lives and any peculiarity of 
their teachings. This would not be in the nature of 
slander unless the narrator attempted to color the facts 
and to make out a case of condemnation. 

THE NEW EXTENSION PLAN 

About six months ago a plan developed by which we 
believe the Society will be able to co-operate with hundreds 
of dear Brethren in the exercise of their talents in 
the spread of the Truth. This plan, so far as we can 
see, is as free from objection of every kind as any human 
plan could be. It will make the different classes responsible 
for the Extension Work, and the Society will thus 
be working through and in conjunction with the classes. 
It is not a plan by which one class will undertake to 
shepherd another or several classes indefinitely. It is 
our thought that we expect Divine Providence gradually 
to raise up in each class Elder Brothers who would be 
thoroughly competent to care for the local interests, and 
before long be able also to engage in the Extension Work. 
The plan we suggest relates only to Extension, as follows: 



(1) Any class is invited to join in this Extension 
movement provided it has amongst its regularly chosen 

R4822 : page 155 

Elders a sufficient amount of talent available for outside 
work, without jeopardizing the welfare and prosperity of 
the class. 

(2) If a class have a superfluity of ability amongst 

its Elders, more than is necessary for its own proper prosperity, 

it should consider its own surrounding territory 

in which there are no classes, and should select several 

fields for active service. The class should designate 

which of its Elders it believes to be well qualified for the 

giving of three Chart Talks, and which of its Elders 

R4822 : page 156 

would be qualified to give three Talks afterward on the 

Day of Judgment, Ransom and Restitution, and the Manner 

of the Lord's Coming. The Society is prepared to 

supply Charts for such use, and also a little pamphlet 

for such speakers, giving outlines for three Chart Discourses 

—the same to be filled out by the speaker. The three 

succeeding Talks could be given very much along the 

lines of the presentation in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 

or those Chapters might be read after thorough study and 

practice, if that prove the most advantageous method. 

At the conclusion of each discourse the following one 
should be announced and the hearers and their friends 
cordially invited. At the closing of the third Chart Talk, 
the speaker should announce the name and topic of the 
Brother who would speak on the following Sunday, making 
such interesting and voluntary comments as the situation 
would permit. At the close of the second speaker's 
three meetings it would be well to inquire how many of 
the audience felt sufficient interest in Bible Study along 
dispensational lines to come together regularly as a class 
of Bible Students. The speaker should explain the Berean 
Study Classes and should counsel as respects the most 
suitable time and place for such classes, and should promise 
that, if desired, the class sending him would send 
some one of their number to assist them until they should 
get started in these Berean Studies and be able to make 
progress by themselves, etc. 

(3) The getting up of these Extension Classes would 
involve labor and expense. Sometimes court-houses, 
sometimes the school-room, sometimes the Church lecture-room, 
sometimes an unused chapel, sometimes a picture 

theatre, sometimes a conservatory of music— as the 
case may be— is obtainable. Quite frequently those in 
charge— learning that the meetings are for Bible Study, 
and that no admission fee is charged, and that no collection 
is lifted— are willing to give the premises free, or 
with a nominal charge for the janitor's service or light 
or heat, etc. Sometimes a small price must be paid. But 



in any event it should be thoroughly understood that from 
three to six meetings are purposed and are to be advertised 
for successive Sundays. And payment should be 
made in advance and a receipt secured, so that there 
might be no misunderstanding before the advertising 
matter would be prepared for circulation. 

(4) In connection with all such meetings the Society 

is glad to co-operate. It will furnish free copies of Everybody's 
Paper, on the back of which will be an announcement 
of the Chart Talks for each of the first three Sundays. 
Everything will be complete except the name of the 
meeting-place and the dates. These could be printed in 
by a local printer at a very small cost, or could be 
stamped on with a rubber stamp. The circulation of these 
papers will mean the distribution of many sermons, which 
may do good work, aside from those who will be drawn to 
the public gathering. We will supply these in proportion 
of one to every six of the English-speaking population of 
any town, district or city, upon application. The population 
figures include children, and one in six would generally 
represent the number of families. 

The expenses for the meetings the classes are usually 
able to bear, and the traveling expenses for close-by towns 
is small. However, the Society will be pleased to co-operate 
with any classes not prepared to bear the full 
expenses of these meetings, provided the report sent in 
seems to justify the expenditure. In making such a report 
the class, through its Secretary, should give us particulars 
and say what proportion of expense the class is 
prepared to bear and how much money it would be necessary 
for the Society to contribute, in order to carry out 
the programme. 

(5) The Society does not wish to deal with the speakers 
directly, but prefers that they should be responsible 

to the Ecclesia which sends them forth, even as Paul and 
Barnabas were sent forth, first by the Church at Corinth, 
and made their reports directly thereto. The Society prefers 
to have reports monthly, on the printed blank which 
we supply, through the duly elected Secretary of the Class. 

(6) All correspondence (except such as is strictly personal 
and could be attended to only by Brother Russell) 

should be addressed International Bible Students Association, 

care of Extension Dep't. All correspondence on 

this subject should be addressed in America to the Brooklyn 

Tabernacle; in Great Britain to the London Tabernacle; 

in Australia to Melbourne, and in the Scandinavian 

and German countries to their respective offices. 

(7) What we have said foregoing in respect to English 
meetings may be applied equally in respect to services 
in other languages in proportion as opportunities permit. 

THIS WORK ALREADY COMMENCED 

We have already made a trial along the above lines. 
Some seem not to have gotten our thought fully on some 
points. Nevertheless the good work has already commenced. 



We have already reports from 145 classes. And 

already 512 meetings have been held, with 16,392 in attendance, 

as shown by reports up to April 1 . Let the good 

work go on wisely, moderately, lovingly, zealously! The 

harvest is great; the laborers are few in comparison to 

the great field to be reaped. 

Let us emphasize again in respect to all communications 
on every subject— that the Society, and not individuals, 
should be addressed, and, if convenient, the Department 
should be indicated on the envelope. Letters otherwise 
addressed will be more or less likely to fail of prompt 
attention; individuals may be sick or absent, but the Departments 
remain, and always give prompt attention. 



R4822 : page 156 

LOOSING THE FOUR WINDS OF HEAVEN 

OUR recent visit to Europe revealed no more 
unrest amongst the people than our previous 
one. Indeed, we were surprised to find 
so many evidences of prosperity everywhere 
and so few manifestations of violent 
discontent. Some residents confirmed this 
view, while others thought that there is a 
deep undercurrent of discontent not manifest 
on the surface. Our readers know that 
for some years we have been expecting 
this Age to close with an awful time of trouble, and we 
expect it to break out with suddenness and force not long 
after October, 1914, which, so far as we can understand 
the Scriptures, is the date at which the Times of the Gentiles 
—the lease of earth's dominions to the Gentiles— will 
expire; the time, therefore, when Messiah's Kingdom will 
be due to begin its exercise of power, which the Scriptures 
declare will dash the nations in pieces as a 
potter's vessel. By that time we think the Scriptures 
indicate that the Church will be complete and will have 
passed beyond the second veil into the "most holy" and to 
perfection of spirit nature by a share in the First Resurrection. 
Nevertheless, how this is all to come about, as 
we have heretofore declared, is not plain to us— how it 
will be that all of the Church class will die before that 
date, changed in the moment of their dying, "in the 
twinkling of an eye." 
But while considering these perplexities, and considering 

R4822 : page 157 

also the fact that we have no fault to find 

with the chronological features of the Bible, our 

mind is directed to an old Scripture which suddenly 

seems to have a new importance. We refer 

to the statement, "I saw four angels standing 



on the four corners of the earth, holding the four 
winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on 
the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.... Hurt not 
the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed 
the servants of our God in their foreheads."— Rev. 7:1-3. 

We have long seen that these symbolic winds represent 
strife, anarchy, the great time of trouble which is 
held in check by Divine power until the completion of the 
harvest work— the sealing of the living members of the 
elect class with Present Truth. We long ago pointed out 
that these four winds, let loose, coming together, will constitute 
a whirlwind, which is the symbolical figure used in 
the Bible to represent the great time of trouble approaching. 
And this whirlwind corresponds to the typical one 
by which Elijah, the prototype of the Church, was taken 
away. Winds also represent false doctrines.— 
Ephesians 4:14. 

"THE PRINCE OF THE POWER OF THE AIR" 

Nothing that we see further contradicts any of the 
foregoing, but rather, corroborating it, throws a light 
upon it. The additional thought is that these winds or 
powers of the air, held in restraint, represent the fallen 
angels, whose Prince is Satan, "the Prince of the power 
of the air." Our thought is that the evil angels would 
long ago have done injury to the symbolical earth, sea 
and trees, had it not been for the restraint of Divine power. 
Symbolically, the earth represents organized society; 
the sea represents the disorganized masses, and the trees 

R4823 : page 157 

represent the household of faith. The letting loose suddenly 
of the fallen angels will account well for the suddenness 
of the coming trouble, which everywhere in the 
Scriptures is one of its particular features— "in one 
hour"; "suddenly as travail upon a woman"; "as it was in 
the days of Noah," and "as it was in the days of Lot." 

Again there is a resemblance between the days of 
Noah and the days of Lot, not merely in respect 
to the suddenness of the calamity which came, but 
also in regard to the violence and licentiousness of those 
periods. Already human prejudice and passions are 
manifesting a heat such as never before was known— and 
this, notwithstanding the much greater provision of army 
and police regulations for the control of society. If discontent, 
selfishness, passion, frenzy, can sway mankind 
under present conditions, what may we expect when the 
"powers of the air" shall be allowed to gain a temporary 
liberty for the very purpose of manifesting the evil tendencies 
of the unregenerate heart; for the very purpose of 
demonstrating that no liberty can bring true happiness, 
except that which is in full accord with the Divine 
requirement? 



R4823 : page 157 

"THE CHURCH OF THE FIRST-BORNS" 

"The General Assembly of the Church 
of the First-borns. "--Heb. 12:22,23. 

THE Church of the First-borns" is not to be 

confounded with the Church of the First 

Resurrection. The word first, in the phrase 

First Resurrection, signifies better, superior. 

The First Resurrection includes only the 

Lord and "the Church, which is his Body"; 

in other words, the Bride Class. But in 

this glorified Church of the First-borns are 

included all those who are born of the 

Spirit. Those who are to be of the spirit 

nature will be those who have been developed throughout 

the Gospel Age— before God's favor goes to the world. 

This Church of the First-borns includes all who come 

into covenant relationship with God before the New 

Covenant is put into force. Some will have part (an inferior 

part, however, to that of the Church) with the 

great "High Priest of our Profession" in instituting the 

New Covenant. They will all have some share with him 

in dispensing the blessings of the New Covenant to all 

the families of the earth— to Israel first, and then to all 

nations. 

"YE ARE COME UNTO MT. ZION, THE HEAVENLY 
JERUSALEM" 

This Church of the First-borns is prophetically pictured 
in the Old Testament in connection with the Passover. 
In that night when all the first-born of Egypt were 
slain, all of the first-born of Israel were passed over. 
These escaped because of the blood on the lintels of their 
houses and because of their partaking of the lamb within. 
We know that afterward all of the first-born of Israel 
were exchanged for the one tribe of Levi; and that this 
tribe was separated or divided into two parts— one a 
priestly class and the other a servant class. The former 
were called Priests; the latter Levites; though, of course, 
all were Levites. These two classes were types of the 
Church of the Gospel Age. 

"But ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the City 
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; to the General 
Assembly of the Church of the First-borns." (Heb. 12:22,23.) 
More properly we understand this to signify 
that we have approached— this is that to which we are 
coming— it is in sight. Some have already reached it. 
Our Lord has reached the goal. And some others of 
the First-borns have also reached the goal; and some of 
us have not yet reached it. But this is what we are 



approaching. We shall all have come into power and into 
our place in the Divine Plan, at the close of this Gospel 
Age. Thereupon will follow the "time of trouble" with 
which this Age will end, typified by the trembling of the 
mountain of Sinai. Then, in the same connection, we 
read that we are approaching an innumerable company 
of angels. 

The Apostle seems to be here setting before us 
the glories of the future. Not only shall we see our 
Heavenly Father and our Heavenly Lord, and be ushered 
into the Assembly of the Church of the First-borns, but 
we shall be ushered into the presence of an innumerable 
company of angels. These are the angels who encamp 
around about those that fear the Lord and deliver them. 
(Psa. 34:7.) They are sent to be ministers for those who 
shall be heirs of salvation. (Heb. 1:14.) They have 
been with us here overseeing our interests; and it will 
be part of our joy on the spirit plane to make their acquaintance. 
If the Apostle had neglected to mention 
these, we would think it strange; for he is enumerating 
the things to which we are approaching. 

Thus we see that the Church of the First-borns includes 
the "Great Company" of the Levites as thoroughly 
as it includes the smaller company of the Priests. As the 
Levites had no inheritance in the land, so not only the 
"Little Flock" but also the "Great Company," the servant 
class, the companions of the Bride, have no share in the 
earthly inheritance, but will have a share in the heavenly 
inheritance. 



R4824 : page 158 

ALL THINGS TO ALL MEN-WINNING SOME 

WE ARE well aware how our foes seek to 
put an evil construction upon everything 
the Editor says and does. The Adversary 
is continually on the alert to take advantage 
of human weaknesses, prejudices, 
etc., and to slander, malign and suggest 
evil in respect to everything. Our Lord 
called attention to this in his own case. 
He says that when John the Baptist came 
living an abstemious life the people said, 
"He hath a devil and is mad." And when the Son of 
Man came eating and drinking, they said, "Behold a gluttonous 
person, a wine-bibber." In a word, there is nothing 
that either God or his people can do that the Adversary, 
"the accuser of the Brethren," and those who 
have his fault-finding spirit, cannot use as an occasion for 
fault-finding. "As he was, so are we in the world." 
Those out of harmony with the Gospel we preach, 
and those of a jealous spirit are grieved to note the 
blessing of the Lord connected with the Harvest work. The 



very blessing for which we have been striving for forty 
years, and the very blessing which we know from the Scriptures 
can last but a brief time, excites our foes to envy, 
anger, hatred, slander. They convince themselves that 
everything we may do to co-operate with the Lord in the 
attainment of the wide publicity of the Truth must be 
evil. Thus we are charged with pride and ambition, etc., 
because we are making use of business methods to promulgate 
the "good tidings." 

We quote St. Paul's words, "It is a light thing that I 
should be judged of you or of any man; yea, I judge 
not mine own self. There is one that judgeth me, even 
God." We think it not worth while to give explanations 
to our foes respecting our reasons for permitting 
our portrait in the newspapers, on the bill-boards, etc.; 
nor need we explain to them why we wear a silk hat. 
It is none of their business. And if they were as decent 
as worldly people in the matter of minding their own 
business, it would be to their advantage, both for the 
present and for the future life. They should remember 
St. Paul's advice, "Study to be quiet and to mind your 
own business."— I Thess. 4:11. 

To our friends we say, We have changed in no particular. 
Our decided preference would be for a very 
quiet life. It is painfully annoying to us to be so prominently 
in the public eye. We could easily end it all and 
drop back again into obscurity. Why do we not do so? 
Because, to our understanding, that would not be God's 
arrangement. We believe that it is of him that the Truth 
has a flare-up of popularity at this time— to be followed 
very shortly, we believe, with an apparently disastrous 
climax, which will be all the more hard to bear because 
of the wide-spread publicity. As it was only five days 
between the time when the people cried, "Hosanna," before 
our Lord, until they crucified him, so we expect no 
real popularity from the world, nor from the chief priests, 
scribes and Pharisees of our day, without its reaction. 

Although thus expecting we are using the present opportunity 
for all that it is worth and are not shunning 
to declare the whole counsel of God as wisely and as 
lovingly, yet as faithfully, as we know how. We leave 
our case and that of our traducers in the hands of the 
Lord and will be satisfied with his decision. 

When God's time shall come to say, "It is enough!" 
we will be glad to experience the promised "change." 
But meantime we will count our afflictions as light as possible 
and rejoice in them and in all of our experiences. 
Neither the slander nor other oppositions of our enemies 
shall swerve us from the path which we believe is marked 
out for us by our Lord.-Matthew 5:11,12; 11:18,19. 



R4823 : page 158 

"SUFFER LITTLE CHILDREN TO COME" 



PARENTS HAVE INQUIRED on several 

occasions respecting their children and how 

they should in some manner indicate that 

they had dedicated them to the Lord. We, of 

course, declined to baptize the infants, because 

such a course would have been contrary 

to the Word of God— because baptism 

is therein stated to be for believers— 

an outward expression or symbolization of 

their consecration to the service of the 

Lord, even unto death, and of their faith that, so doing, 

they would be sharers with the Lord in the likeness of 

his resurrection. 

However, we remembered how Samuel in childhood 
had been presented to the Lord in consecration, and of 
how our own parents had told us that they had devoted 
us to the Lord and his service in infancy, and of how all 
Jewish boys were, in a sense, set apart to holiness, in 
harmony with the Lord's will. We remembered also how 
children were brought to Jesus by their parents, that he 
should bless them or pray a blessing upon them. We remember 
that the disciples thought this too insignificant a 
work for the Master and were sending them away, when 
Jesus called to them, saying, "Suffer (permit) the little 
children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of 
such is the Kingdom of God." (Mark 10:14.) We gave 
notice that hereafter we will have a Child-Blessing Service 
in the evening of each Sunday we are in Brooklyn. 
And we see no reason why we may not extend this opportunity 
to any who desire it on the occasion of our visit 
to any of the classes— in conjunction with the less public 
meeting. 

It is our opinion that the influence of this service upon 
the parents and upon the children will be favorable, impressing 
upon the former their responsibilities. The fact 
that the children have been formally devoted to God in 
public may assist the parents in fulfilling their obligations 
and later assist the children as they shall come to a 
knowledge of the fact that they were thus committed to 
Divine care by their parents. 

Nothing in this, however, should be understood as signifying 
a law, or even an obligation or custom. It is arranged 
merely for the convenience of those who desire 
it. Nor need such a service be performed merely by one 
person. Anyone serving as a minister of the Truth 
would, at the request of the parents of an infant, be fully 
justified in thus publicly stating the matter and asking 
the Divine blessing. 



THUS MAY HE BLESS AND KEEP THEE 
NUMBERS 6:24. 



The Lord bless thee! 

How shall he bless thee? 

With the gladness that knoweth no decay; 

With the riches that cannot pass away; 

With the sunshine that makes an endless day— 

Thus may he bless thee! 

And keep thee ! 

How shall he keep thee? 

With the all-covering shadow of his wings; 

With the strong love that guards from evil things; 

With the sure power that safe to glory brings— 

Thus may he keep thee! 



R4824 : page 159 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRANTS 

THE reports of the celebration of the Memorial 
Supper this year have come in much 
more satisfactorily than on any previous 
occasion. The total number celebrating the 
Memorial reported up to this writing is 
ten thousand five hundred and seventy. We 
will probably hear later from a sufficient 
number to run this total to twelve thousand. 
Many will be interested to know how the 
different Ecclesias stand numerically. For 
their satisfaction we append the numbers from fifty upward. 
These numbers, as a whole, of course, are very 
small, as compared with the large organizations of Christendom, 
but we believe that they represent such as have 
really made quite full and intelligent consecration of their 
lives to God, such as are able to give a reason for the hope 
that is in them, in meekness and reverence. We must assume 
that of our thirty to fifty thousand WATCH TOWER 
readers more than the aforementioned number partook 
of the Memorial Bread and Cup, but why they failed to 
report we cannot understand. So far as we have knowledge 
the Lord's people have never had, in late years at 
least, a celebration of deeper spiritual significance, nor one 
more thoroughly appreciated, both as respects the merit 
of our Lord's death and our pledge to partake of his cup. 

PARTICIPANTS IN LARGER ECCLESIAS 

Brooklyn, N.Y., 461; Chicago, 111., 390; Pittsburg, 
Pa., 330; Boston, Mass., 280; Philadelphia, Pa., 175; Los 
Angeles, Cal., 175; Cleveland, Ohio, 145; Washington, 
D.C., 133; St. Paul, Minn., 120; St. Louis, Mo., 114; 
Seattle, Wash., 110; Toronto, Ont., 110; Providence, R.I., 
105; Dayton, Ohio, 97; Indianapolis, Ind., 96; Buffalo, 
N.Y., 85; Detroit, Mich., 83; Bristol, Eng., 80; Cincinnati, 
Ohio, 77; Oakland, Cal, 76; Sheffield, Eng., 73; Orebro, 



Sweden, 72; Stockholm, Sweden, 72; Lancaster, Pa., 
71; Columbus, Ohio, 70; Lynn, Mass., 68; Toledo, Ohio, 
65; Kingston, Jamaica, 63; Portland, Ore., 62; San Antonio, 
Tex., 61; Baltimore, Md., 60; Springfield, Mass., 
58; Kansas City, Mo., 58; Pasadena, Cal., 56; Binghamton, 
N.Y., 55; Houston, Texas, 55; Richmond, Va., 55; 
Camberwell, Jamaica, 53; Spokane, Wash., 53; Atlanta, 
Ga., 51; Birmingham, Ala., 50. 

Additional reports from England have just been 
received and are as follows: London Tabernacle 
and suburban districts, 515; Manchester, Eng., 140; 
Liverpool, Eng., 67. The report from Glasgow, 
Scotland, is delayed. It should be in the neighborhood 
of 300. If matters progress as we hope, 
there will probably be over 500 next year reporting from 
Travancore District, India. We will hope also for some 
reports from Africa. Meantime we remark that two of 
the above reports are from Jamaica, the classes being 
composed almost exclusively of negroes. The Lord be 
praised for the encouragement of numbers, but specially 
for the evidences of spiritual prosperity! 



R4824 : page 159 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK PROSPERING 

GLAD ARE WE to report that the Colporteur 

Work is showing a considerable 

improvement this year in America. The 

dear laborers in this part of the Harvest 

field are taking fresh courage, as we hoped 

they would. The Swedish field is also 

yielding good results. We are hoping for 

fresh enthusiasm in Norway, Denmark, 

Germany and Great Britain, where there 

seems to have been a slacking of the hands 

and a weariness in well-doing and a fainting by the way. 

We have every reason to believe that the present year 
may be one of the best ever known in the harvest work. 
The religious public are becoming more and more awake 
to the necessity for some clearer light upon God's Word, 
and prejudice seems to be giving way to reason, except 
with a bigoted few, with whom the Lord will have, doubtless, 
some other way of dealing in his own due time. 

The field in Great Britain appears to us as most fertile. 
We find that the printing and binding there can be 
done more cheaply still than here. And this means that 
the British, where times appear to be stringent, can be 
supplied with cloth-bound Volumes at One Shilling per 
copy, and the Colporteurs can have them at one-half of 
this, plus carriage. This extremely low price should 
greatly augment the circulation of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES in Great Britain. And the financial stringency 
there should make the people the more anxious for the 



reading matter, which will explain to them why creation 
groans at present and also of the glorious arrangement of 
the Divine Plan for its relief. 

We know of no more important part of the harvest 
work than that served by the dear Colporteurs. A very 
large proportion of those now enjoying "Present Truth" 
have had it thus brought to their notice. In this way many 
can be reached who could never be reached through the 
public platform; many who never attend religious services, 
and yet are hungering for the Truth, have it thus brought 
to their attention. The wide publication of the sermons 
seems to be helping to pave the way for the Colporteurs. 
Many of the unprejudiced purchase at once upon learning 
that Pastor Russell is the Author of the Books. 



R4825 : page 159 

WESTERN ITINERARY SERVICES 

Date. City. 

Friday, June 9, Cleveland, O 

Saturday, " 10, Indianapolis, Ind 

Sunday, " 1 1, St. Louis, Mo 

Tuesday, " 13, Kansas City, Mo 

Thursday, " 15, Wichita, Kans 

Friday, " 16, Pueblo, Colo 

Saturday, " 17, Colorado Springs, Colo 

Sunday, " 18, Denver, Colo 

Wednesday, " 21, Salt Lake City, Utah 

Friday, " 23, Los Angeles, Cal 

Saturday, " 24, Santa Cruz, Cal 

Sunday, " 25, San Francisco, Cal 

Monday, " 26, Oakland, Cal 

Tuesday, " 27, Sacramento, Cal 

Thursday, " 29, Portland, Ore 

Saturday, July 1, Tacoma, Wash 

Sunday, " 2, Seattle, Wash 

Tuesday, " 4, Victoria, B.C 

Wednesday, " 5, Vancouver, B.C 

Friday, " 7, Calgary, Alta 

Sunday, " 9, Winnipeg, Man 

Tuesday, " 11, Duluth, Minn 

Sunday, " 16, Toronto, Ont 

--FOR THE INTERESTED- 

Time. Place. 

2:30 p.m., K. of P. Auditorium 

9:30 a.m., The Odeon, Grand & Finney Aves 

2:30 p.m., Evanston Hall, 1013 Holmes St 

10:00 a.m., Crawford Theater, Topeka & William. 

3:00 p.m., Grand Opera House, 47 Main 

2:30 p.m., Temple Theatre, Nevada & Kiowa 



10:00 a.m., Woodman Hall, 1715 Cal. St 

10:30 a.m., Knights Columbus Hall, E. 1st So. St 

10:30 a.m., Elks' Old Hall, 231 Spring St 

10:00 a.m., Hackley Hall 

10:00 a.m., Lyric Hall, 513 Larkin St 

10:00 a.m. & 2:00 p.m., First Baptist Church, Telegraph Ave. 

2:00 p.m., Redman's Hall., 10th St., bet. I & J 

10:30 a.m., & 2:30 p.m., I.O.O.F. Hall, E. 6th & E. Alder... 
10:00 a.m., & 3:00 p.m., Masonic Temple, 736 St. Helens Ave. 

10:00 a.m., Faurot's Assembly Hall, East Pine 

10:00 a.m., Broad St. Hall 

9:30 a.m., I.O.O.F. Hall, Pender & Hamilton 

10:00 a.m. & 2:00 p.m., Eagle Hall, 1st St. W 

10:30 a.m., Odd Fellows' Temple, Kennedy St 

9:30 a.m., The Auditorium, 3d Ave. E. & 1st St 

10:00 a.m., Broadway Hall, 450 Spadina Ave 

--FOR THE PUBLIC - 



Time. 



Place. 



7:30 p.m. 
8:00 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:45 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
8:00 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
8:00 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 
7:30 p.m. 
3:00 p.m. 



B. of L. E. Audit'm, St. Clair & Ont. 

K. of P. Auditorium. 

The Odeon, Grand & Finney. 

Convention Hall, 13th & Central Sts. 

Crawford Theatre, Topeka & William. 

Grand Opera House, 4th & Main Sts. 

Temple Theatre, Nevada & Kiowa. 

Auditorium Theatre, 14th & Curtis Sts. 

Salt Lake Theatre, State & 1st So. Sts. 

Auditorium, 5th & Olive Sts. 

Casino Theatre. 

Dreamland Rink, Steiner St. 

First Baptist Church, Telegraph Av. 

Clunie Theatre, K St., bet. 8th & 9th. 

Armory, 10th, 11th, Couch & Davis. 

Tacoma Theatre, 9th & C Sts. 

Dreamland Pavilion, 7th Ave. & Union. 

A.O.U.W. Hall, Blanchard & Yates. 

Vancouver Horse Show Bldg. 

Al Azhar Temple, 506 17th Ave. West. 

Walker Theatre. 

The Auditorium. 

Massey Hall, Shuter & Victoria Sts. 



page 161 



SEMI-MONTHLY 