Are You Handling God’s Word Aright?
1 Jesus Christ was the greatest teacher who ever lived on earth. He spoke in a way that touched people’s hearts, stirred their emotions, and motivated them to practice good works. (Matt. 7:28, 29) He always used God’s Word as the basis for his teaching. (Luke 24:44, 45) He gave Jehovah God the credit for all that he knew and was able to teach. (John 7:16) Jesus set a splendid example for his followers by handling God’s Word aright.—2 Tim. 2:15.
2 The apostle Paul also served as an outstanding example by effectively handling the Word of God. He did more than just read the Scriptures to others; he explained and reasoned on what he read, presenting proof from God’s Word that Jesus was the Christ. (Acts 17:2-4) Likewise, the eloquent disciple Apollos was “well versed in the Scriptures,” and he handled them aright in making a powerful presentation of the truth.—Acts 18:24, 28.
3 Be a Teacher of God’s Word: Modern-day Kingdom proclaimers have enjoyed excellent success in teaching honesthearted people by referring to and reasoning from the Bible. In one case, a brother was able to use Ezekiel 18:4 along with related texts to reason with a pastor and three of his parishioners on the destiny of the wicked and the righteous. As a result, some members of the church began to study, and one of them eventually accepted the truth. In another case, a sister was asked to explain to the opposed husband of an interested person why Jehovah’s Witnesses do not celebrate Christmas and birthdays. As she read the Scriptural answers directly from the Reasoning book, the man expressed his agreement. His wife was so delighted at his acceptance that she said: “We will be coming to your meetings.” And the husband agreed!
4 Use the Help That Is Available: Our Kingdom Ministry and the Service Meeting program offer fine direction to assist us in the handling of God’s Word. Many publishers have expressed appreciation for the variety of suggested presentations that are published and demonstrated for our benefit and that have proved to be very timely and effective. Reasoning From the Scriptures contains a wealth of ideas on how to expound aright on more than 70 principal subjects that are addressed in God’s Word. Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life provides a concise summary of all the fundamental Bible teachings that new ones need to understand. Studies 24 and 25 in the Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook show us how skilled teachers properly introduce, read, and apply scriptures. We should make good use of all this help that is readily available to us.
5 When we handle the Word of God aright, we will find that it “is alive and exerts power . . . and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart” of those to whom we preach. (Heb. 4:12) The success we enjoy with it will move us to speak the truth with ever greater boldness!—Acts 4:31.

