Service Meetings for November
Week Starting November 4
Song 29
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Comment on August field service report for the country and for the local congregation.
15 min: “Are You Handling God’s Word Aright?” Questions and answers. Include comments on “Reasons for considering the Bible,” from the Reasoning book, pages 58-60.
20 min: “This Means Everlasting Life.” (Paragraphs 1-5) After brief opening comments on paragraph 1, have two capable publishers demonstrate the presentations in paragraphs 2-5. Include a reminder to mention the donation arrangement when placing literature. Emphasize the goal of starting a Bible study.
Song 128 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 11
Song 40
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
20 min: Why Give to Jehovah? Discussion between two elders, highlighting main points in article on pages 28-31 of The Watchtower of November 1, 1996. Or information may be presented in a talk by an elder.
15 min: “This Means Everlasting Life.” (Paragraphs 6-8) Discuss the advantages of using a direct approach to start studies. Have experienced publishers demonstrate the presentations in paragraphs 6-7. Invite audience to relate instances of where a study was started on the initial call. When directly offered a study, one man replied: “Yes. Come inside. I would love to have a study.” The study was started with him, his whole family sat in the next week, and soon all were attending meetings and sharing in the witness work. Encourage all to bring their copy of the June 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry insert to next week’s Service Meeting.
Song 129 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 18
Song 140
10 min: Local announcements. Review field service arrangements during worldly holiday on November 28.
15 min: “We Have a Commission.” Questions and answers. Comment briefly on paragraphs 13-16 in the January 1, 1988, Watchtower, pages 28-9.
20 min: Conducting Progressive Bible Studies. Talk by the service overseer. We have been using the Knowledge book in the Bible study work for over a year. Likely some students have already finished it, while others are well along in the book. We were encouraged to concentrate on conducting studies designed to help new ones learn the truth quickly, apply it in their lives, and become part of the congregation. The June 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry insert provided fine suggestions to help us to be effective as teachers. Briefly review some of the things we can do to teach students skillfully, as covered in paragraphs 3-13 of that insert. Next, concentrate on what needs to be done to help them take a positive stand, as outlined in paragraphs 14-22. Read paragraphs 15, 17, 20-1. Review some positive reports showing how good results have been achieved by local publishers. Encourage more to share in the Bible study work.
Song 85 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 25
Song 46
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Share With Others According to Their Needs.” Talk by an elder.
10 min: Question Box. Discuss with audience.
15 min: Review Literature Offer for December. Offer the New World Translation with the book The Bible—God’s Word or Man’s? Using pages 327-31 in the “All Scripture” book, show the superiority of the New World Translation: It upholds and magnifies the divine name (paragraphs 1-2); its improved renderings make the text more understandable (paragraph 6); it is a powerful instrument for use in the ministry (paragraphs 22-3). Outline and demonstrate a brief presentation, using thoughts on page 189 of The Bible—God’s Word or Man’s? Wherever interest is shown, definite arrangements should be made for a return visit.
Song 180 and concluding prayer.

