Do You Remember?
Have you found the recent issues of The Watchtower of practical value to you? Then why not test your memory with the following questions:
□ What lesson can we learn from the downfall of the Ammonites? (Zephaniah 2:9, 10)
Jehovah does not take lightly repaying his kindness with hostility, and in his due time, he will again take action, just as he did in ancient times. (Compare Psalm 2:6-12.)—12/15, page 10.
□ In what ways do Christians have peace?
First, they have “peace with God through [their] Lord Jesus Christ.” (Romans 5:1) Second, they have peace among themselves by cultivating “the wisdom from above,” which is “first of all chaste, then peaceable.” (James 3:17)—1/1, page 11.
□ What are some things to which God’s Word is likened, and how is this helpful to us?
God’s Word is likened to nourishing milk, solid food, refreshing and cleansing water, a mirror, and a sharp sword. Understanding what these terms imply helps a minister to use the Bible skillfully.—1/1, page 29.
□ What should a balanced secular education help us to do?
To read well, to write clearly, to develop mentally and morally, and to acquire the practical training needed for day-to-day living and effective sacred service.—2/1, page 10.
□ What valuable lesson regarding education can we learn from Jesus?
Education should be used, not to glorify ourselves, but to bring praise to the greatest Educator, Jehovah God. (John 7:18)—2/1, page 10.
□ What is the Kingdom of God?
The Kingdom is a divinely instituted heavenly government that brings about God’s will to eliminate the effects of sin and death and to restore righteous conditions on earth. (Daniel 2:44; Revelation 11:15; 12:10)—2/1, page 16.
□ How does the Bible provide the education needed for bringing violence to a permanent end?
Through his Word, the Bible, Jehovah teaches people to be peace-loving and righteous. (Isaiah 48:17, 18) God’s Word has the power to reach in and touch a person’s heart, changing his thinking and behavior. (Hebrews 4:12)—2/15, page 6.
□ In what way can the prophecy of Isaiah chapter 35 be said to have three fulfillments?
Isaiah’s prophecy had a first fulfillment when the Jews returned from Babylonian captivity in 537 B.C.E. It has an ongoing spiritual fulfillment today since the release of spiritual Israel from captivity to Babylon the Great. And it will have a third fulfillment in connection with the Biblical assurance of literal paradise conditions on earth. (Psalm 37:10, 11; Revelation 21:4, 5)—2/15, page 17.
□ How was God’s personal interest in humans demonstrated in the miracles performed by his Son, Jesus?
Since Jesus “cannot do a single thing of his own initiative, but only what he beholds the Father doing,” his compassion paints a touching portrait of Jehovah’s concern for each one of his servants. (John 5:19)—3/1, page 5.
□ What is implied by Jesus’ expression “memorial tombs” used at John 5:28, 29?
The Greek word mne·mei’on (memorial tomb) here used suggests that Jehovah remembers the record of the person who has died, including his or her inherited traits and complete memory. This gives strong proof that God cares about humans on an individual basis!—3/1, page 6.
□ What warning message in the prophecy of Zephaniah is of practical help to us?
Today is no time to allow doubts to take root in our hearts and to put off in our minds the coming of Jehovah’s day. Also, we should be on guard against the debilitating effects of indifference. (Zephaniah 1:12, 13; 3:8)—3/1, page 17.
□ Why does loyalty to God present a challenge?
Because loyalty clashes with selfish tendencies that we have inherited from our parents. (Genesis 8:21; Romans 7:19) More important, Satan and his demons are determined to make us disloyal to God. (Ephesians 6:12; 1 Peter 5:8)—3/15, page 10.
□ In what four areas must we meet the challenge of loyalty, and what will help us to do so?
Four areas are loyalty to Jehovah, to his organization, to the congregation, and to our marriage mates. One aid in meeting these challenges is appreciating that the challenge of loyalty is bound up with the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty.—3/15, page 20.
□ What lesson can we learn from David’s experience in trying to bring the ark of the covenant to Jerusalem? (2 Samuel 6:2-7)
David ignored the instructions that Jehovah had given regarding the carrying of the Ark, and this brought calamity. The lesson is that we should never blame Jehovah for problems that result when we ignore his clear instructions. (Proverbs 19:3)—4/1, pages 28, 29.

