Why True Worship Receives God’s Blessing
“Praise Jah, you people! The salvation and the glory and the power belong to our God, because his judgments are true and righteous.”—REVELATION 19:1, 2.
 1. How will Babylon the Great come to her end?
“BABYLON THE GREAT” has fallen in God’s sight and now faces extinction. Bible prophecy indicates that this worldwide religious harlot will soon meet execution at the hands of her political paramours; her end will be sudden and swift. Jesus’ revelation to John contained these prophetic words: “A strong angel lifted up a stone like a great millstone and hurled it into the sea, saying: ‘Thus with a swift pitch will Babylon the great city be hurled down, and she will never be found again.’”—Revelation 18:2, 21.
 2. How will Jehovah’s servants react to Babylon’s destruction?
2 The destruction of Babylon the Great will be lamented by some elements of Satan’s world but certainly not by God’s servants, heavenly or earthly. Their joyful shout to God will be: “Praise Jah, you people! The salvation and the glory and the power belong to our God, because his judgments are true and righteous. For he has executed judgment upon the great harlot who corrupted the earth with her fornication, and he has avenged the blood of his slaves at her hand.”—Revelation 18:9, 10; 19:1, 2.
What Fruitage Must True Religion Produce?
 3. What questions require an answer?
3 Since the earth is to be wiped clean of false religion, what kind of worship will remain? How can we determine today which religious group will survive the destruction of Satan’s world empire of false religion? What is the righteous fruitage that this group must produce? There are at least ten criteria for distinguishing Jehovah’s true worship.—Malachi 3:18; Matthew 13:43.
 4. What is a first requirement for true worship, and how did Jesus set the example in this regard?
4 First and foremost, true Christians must uphold the sovereignty for which Jesus died—his Father’s sovereignty. Jesus did not give up his life for any political, tribal, ethnic, or social cause. He put his Father’s Kingdom ahead of all Jewish political or revolutionary aspirations. He answered Satan’s offer of worldly power with the words: “Go away, Satan! For it is written, ‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’” He knew from the Hebrew Scriptures that Jehovah is the true Sovereign over all the earth. Which religious group unequivocally supports Jehovah’s rulership rather than this world’s political systems?—Matthew 4:10; Psalm 83:18.
 5. (a) How should true worshipers view God’s name? (b) What shows that Jehovah’s Witnesses do honor that name?
5 A second requirement is that true worship must magnify and sanctify God’s name. The Almighty revealed his name, Jehovah (rendered Yahweh in some Bible versions), to his people Israel, and it is used thousands of times in the Hebrew Scriptures. Even before that, Adam, Eve, and others knew the name, though they did not always respect it. (Genesis 4:1; 9:26; 22:14; Exodus 6:2) While Christendom’s and Jewry’s translators have usually omitted the divine name from their Bibles, Jehovah’s Witnesses have given that name its due position and respect in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. They honor that name, even as did the early Christians. James testified: “Symeon has related thoroughly how God for the first time turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name. And with this the words of the Prophets agree, . . . ‘in order that those who remain of the men may earnestly seek Jehovah, together with people of all the nations, people who are called by my name, says Jehovah, who is doing these things.’”—Acts 15:14-17; Amos 9:11, 12.
 6. (a) What is a third requirement for true worship? (b) How did Jesus and Daniel emphasize Kingdom rulership? (Luke 17:20, 21)
6 A third requirement for true worship is that it should exalt God’s Kingdom as the only legitimate and viable solution to mankind’s problems of rulership. Jesus clearly taught his followers to pray for that Kingdom to come, for God’s rule to take over control of the earth. Daniel was inspired to prophesy regarding the last days: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these [worldly, political] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” Who have shown by their course of action in this 20th century that they render undivided support to that Kingdom—the religions of Babylon the Great or Jehovah’s Witnesses?—Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:10; 24:14.
 7. How do true worshipers view the Bible?
7 A fourth requisite for God’s approval is that the true servants of God should uphold the Bible as God’s inspired Word. They would therefore not become victims of higher criticism, which attempts to reduce the Bible to a simple human literary work with all the failings that this would imply. Jehovah’s Witnesses believe the Bible to be God’s inspired Word, even as Paul wrote to Timothy: “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.”a Therefore, Jehovah’s Witnesses take the Bible as their guide, their manual for daily living, and their fountain of hope for the future.—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
The Religion of Love, Not Hatred
 8. What is a fifth requisite for true worship?
8 How did Jesus distinguish his true followers? His answer brings us to a vital fifth identifying mark of true worship. Jesus said: “I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, that you also love one another. By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.” (John 13:34, 35) How did Jesus show his love? By giving his life as a ransom sacrifice. (Matthew 20:28; John 3:16) Why is genuine love an essential quality for true Christians? John explained: “Beloved ones, let us continue loving one another, because love is from God . . . He that does not love has not come to know God, because God is love.”—1 John 4:7, 8.
 9. Who have shown true love, and how?
9 Who in our times have displayed this kind of love, even in the face of racial, national, or ethnic hatred? Who have passed the supreme test, even unto death, so that their love should prevail? Can we say that it is the Catholic priests and nuns who admittedly share some responsibility for the genocide that took place in Rwanda in 1994? Is it the Orthodox of Serbia or the Catholics of Croatia who have engaged in “ethnic cleansing” and other unchristian acts in that civil war in the Balkans? Or is it the Catholic or Protestant clergy who have fanned the flames of prejudice and hatred in Northern Ireland over the last few decades? Certainly Jehovah’s Witnesses cannot be accused of having participated in any such conflicts. They have suffered in prisons and concentration camps, even to the death, rather than betray their Christian love.—John 15:17.
10. Why do true Christians remain neutral?
10 A sixth requisite for worship acceptable to God is that of neutrality regarding the political affairs of this world. Why should Christians remain neutral in politics? Paul, James, and John give us solid reason for that stance. The apostle Paul wrote that Satan is “the god of this system of things,” who is blinding the minds of the unbelievers by every means possible, including divisive politics. The disciple James stated that “friendship with the world is enmity with God,” and the apostle John said that “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.” A true Christian, therefore, cannot compromise his devotion to God by being involved in Satan’s corrupt world of politics and power.—2 Corinthians 4:4; James 4:4; 1 John 5:19.
11. (a) How do Christians view war? (b) What Scriptural basis is there for this position? (2 Corinthians 10:3-5)
11 In view of the preceding two requirements, a seventh becomes obvious, namely, that true Christian worshipers should not take part in wars. Since the true religion is a worldwide brotherhood based on love, then nothing can divide or subvert that “entire association of . . . brothers in the world.” Jesus taught love, not hatred; peace, not war. (1 Peter 5:9; Matthew 26:51, 52) The same “wicked one,” Satan, who induced Cain to murder Abel continues to sow hatred among mankind and to provoke conflicts and bloodshed on the basis of political, religious, and ethnic divisions. True Christians ‘learn war no more,’ regardless of the price to be paid. Figuratively, they have already ‘beaten their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears.’ They produce the peaceful fruitage of God’s spirit.—1 John 3:10-12; Isaiah 2:2-4; Galatians 5:22, 23.
God Blesses Purity of Conduct and Teachings
12. (a) What is the eighth requirement, but what religious divisions can you cite? (b) How did Paul highlight this eighth requirement?
12 Christian unity is the eighth requirement of true worship. However, Christendom’s divisive religions have not helped to this end. Many so-called mainstream denominations have splintered into a variety of sects, and confusion is the result. Take, for example, the Baptist religion in the United States, which is split between Northern Baptists (American Baptist Churches in the U.S.A.) and Southern Baptists (Southern Baptist Convention), as well as dozens of other Baptist groups that have resulted from schisms. (World Christian Encyclopedia, page 714) Many divisions have sprung from differences of doctrine or church government (for example, Presbyterian, Episcopalian, Congregational). The divisions of Christendom are paralleled by those of religions outside Christendom—whether Buddhism, Islam, or Hinduism. What did the apostle Paul counsel the early Christians? “Now I exhort you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that you should all speak in agreement, and that there should not be divisions among you, but that you may be fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.”—1 Corinthians 1:10; 2 Corinthians 13:11.
13, 14. (a) What is meant by ‘being holy’? (b) How is true worship kept clean?
13 What is a ninth requirement for religion approved by God? A Bible principle is expressed at Leviticus 11:45: “You must prove yourselves holy, because I am holy.” The apostle Peter repeated this requirement when he wrote: “In accord with the Holy One who called you, do you also become holy yourselves in all your conduct.”—1 Peter 1:15.
14 What is implied in this need to be holy? That Jehovah’s worshipers should be spiritually and morally clean. (2 Peter 3:14) There is no room for unrepentant, deliberate sinners, who by their conduct show disdain for Christ’s ransom sacrifice. (Hebrews 6:4-6) Jehovah requires that the Christian congregation be kept clean and holy. How is that accomplished? In part by the judicial process of disfellowshipping those who would taint the congregation.—1 Corinthians 5:9-13.
15, 16. What changes have many Christians made in their lives?
15 Before knowing Christian truth, many lived dissolute, hedonistic, self-centered lives. But the word about the Christ changed them, and they have obtained forgiveness for their sins. Paul expressed it forcibly when he wrote: “What! Do you not know that unrighteous persons will not inherit God’s kingdom? Do not be misled. Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men kept for unnatural purposes, nor men who lie with men, nor thieves, nor greedy persons, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners will inherit God’s kingdom. And yet that is what some of you were. But you have been washed clean.”—1 Corinthians 6:9-11.
16 It is evident that Jehovah approves of those who repent of their unscriptural conduct, turn around, and become true followers of Christ and his teachings. They truly love their neighbors as themselves and show it in many ways, such as by persisting in a ministry that offers the message of life to all who would hear.—2 Timothy 4:5.
“The Truth Will Set You Free”
17. What is a tenth requirement for true worship? Give examples.
17 There is a tenth requirement that Jehovah has for those who worship him in spirit and in truth—pure teaching. (John 4:23, 24) Jesus said to his followers: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) The truth of the Bible frees us from God-dishonoring doctrines, such as the immortal soul, hellfire, and purgatory. (Ecclesiastes 9:5, 6, 10; Ezekiel 18:4, 20) It frees us from the Babylonish mystery of Christendom’s “Most Holy Trinity.” (Deuteronomy 4:35; 6:4; 1 Corinthians 15:27, 28) Obedience to Bible truth results in loving, concerned, kind, merciful people. True Christianity has never fostered vengeful, intolerant inquisitors, such as Tomás de Torquemada, or hateful warmongers, such as the papal promoters of the Crusades. Yet, Babylon the Great has produced this kind of fruitage down through history, from at least the time of Nimrod until now.—Genesis 10:8, 9.
A Name That Is Distinctive
18. (a) Who measure up to the ten requirements for true worship and how? (b) What must we individually do to inherit the blessing that lies before us?
18 Who today really fulfill these ten requirements of true worship? Who are known and recognized by others for their record of integrity and peaceableness? Around the globe Jehovah’s Witnesses are noted for their being “no part of the world.” (John 15:19; 17:14, 16; 18:36) Jehovah’s people are honored to bear his name and to be his Witnesses, even as Jesus Christ was a faithful witness to his Father. We bear that holy name, conscious of our responsibility to live up to what it represents. And, as his Witnesses, what a glorious prospect lies before us! That is to be part of an obedient, united human family, worshiping the Universal Sovereign in a restored paradise here on earth. To receive such a blessing, let us continue to identify ourselves clearly with true worship and to bear the name Jehovah’s Witnesses proudly “because his judgments are true and righteous”!—Revelation 19:2; Isaiah 43:10-12; Ezekiel 3:11.
[Footnote]
Bible translations themselves are not inspired by God. Translations, by their very nature, may reflect variations of the understanding of the original tongues in which the Bible was recorded.
How Would You Answer?
□ How do Jehovah’s servants regard Babylon the Great’s destruction?
□ What are key requirements for true worship?
□ How does the truth set you free?
□ What special honor do we have as Jehovah’s Witnesses?
[Pictures on page 17]
Jehovah’s Witnesses are preaching and teaching the good news of God’s Kingdom
[Picture on page 18]
True Christians have always remained neutral as to worldly politics and wars
[Credit Line]
Airplane: Courtesy of the Ministry of Defense, London

