“My Dream Has Come True”
Fifteen years ago, Emilia was serving as a regular pioneer. However, she had to discontinue her full-time service. In recent years, she has often reflected on that most joyful time of her life, and she again wanted to increase her share in the ministry.
Yet, Emilia’s secular job took too much time, and this obstacle was robbing her of joy. Once, in front of her fellow workers, she groaned: “I wish I could work fewer hours!” Her boss heard of this and approached her to ask if that was true. Emilia assured her that it was. However, making it possible required the approval of a director because company policy required a total commitment from all the employees. Our sister prepared for the meeting with the director and prayed for peace and courage.
During the meeting, Emilia tactfully but boldly requested a cut in her hours of work. She explained that she takes advantage of her time off to help others: “I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and I help people spiritually. Nowadays the moral character of many is weakened. They need clear values and standards, and the wisdom that I share from the Bible is invaluable to them. I do not want my after-hours activities to lessen the quality of my work here, but I would like to have more free time to help people. That is why I need my hours on the job reduced.”
The director listened carefully and said that he once considered undertaking charity work. Then he said: “For the reasons you presented, I feel I must agree with your request. But do you realize you will earn less money?” Emilia said that she did and that if necessary, she would simplify her life. She added: “My most important goal is to do something really fulfilling for people.” The director told her: “I admire those who unselfishly devote their time to others.”
No one employed by that company had ever had such favorable terms. Emilia is now allowed to work only four days a week. To her great surprise, she was given a pay raise, and she earns as much as previously! She says: “My dream has come true, and I can regular pioneer again!”
Have you thought of adjusting your circumstances to enter or reenter the pioneer service?
[Blurb on page 32]
The director told her: “I admire those who unselfishly devote their time to others”

