Do You Remember?
How carefully have you read recent issues of The Watchtower? Check yourself to see if you recall these significant points.
● What is the meaning of Isaiah’s prophecy that said: “Make the heart of this people unreceptive, and make their very ears unresponsive, and paste their very eyes together, that they may not see with their eyes and with their ears they may not hear”?
Just as Isaiah’s preaching proved to “this people” that they did not want healing or understanding, that they were too selfish to understand and learn from even a good teacher, so today Kingdom preaching proves that people have shut their own eyes and ears and that they will selfishly refuse to understand till calamity comes.​—Pp. 17-19.a
● How can a wife endear herself to her husband?
By cultivating the qualities that spring from a good heart​—a cheerful disposition, an even temper, modesty, friendliness, gentle kindness, sympathetic understanding.​—P. 35.
● What did Jesus mean when he said: “But many that are first will be last and the last first”?
Jesus’ disciples, who were the last ones that the self-righteous Jewish religious leaders thought would gain a throne in God’s kingdom, became first by gaining that foremost position; in the reversal of matters those who had been “first” among the Jews became the “last” ones to accept the “penny,” most rejecting it and thereby losing out on Kingdom privileges.​—Pp. 42, 43, 50.
● In Jesus’ illustration of the penny, what was symbolized by the penny?
The privilege and honor of being a member of spiritual Israel and of serving as spirit-anointed ambassadors of God’s Messianic kingdom.​—Pp. 49, 56.
● What is the spirit of the world?
It is the frame of mind, the persistent tendency that controls the world of mankind under the rule of Satan.​—P. 57.
● How does God speak to us today?
What God spoke through the angels, prophets and his Son he had recorded in the Bible. Through it and through his organization, he speaks to us today.​—Pp. 70, 72.
● How can it be said that all of Jehovah’s witnesses are full-time ministers?
Because every aspect of their lives is affected by their ministry.​—P. 80.
● What are the daughters of Babylon the Great?
The various religious sects, both in Christendom and in pagandom, that copy their mother in committing fornication with the kings of the earth. All being of the same Babylonish family, they make up the world empire of false religion.​—P. 91.
● What exists today that was typified by mighty Samson?
The “faithful and discreet slave” organization of true, devoted, anointed Christians.​—P. 106.
● Why did Samson pray for strength to bring vengeance upon the Philistines for the loss of only one of his two eyes?
Samson apparently charged the loss of one of his eyes to his own lack of wakefulness in the affair with Delilah, but the loss of the other eye he charged to the Philistines.​—P. 117.
● Why is “saving face” an unchristian practice?
Because it amounts to a lie by denying the need for correction or discipline. If we are to be honest with our God, with our Christian brothers and with ourselves, we will acknowledge our sins and shortcomings.​—Pp. 125, 126.
● What are safeguards against loneliness?
Purposeful work; taking an interest in others; giving to others in a spiritual way; prayer.​—Pp. 131, 132.
● Why can we be certain that God will put an end to wickedness?
He has made repeated promises to do just that, and his course of action in times past assures us that he will.​—Pp. 133, 134.
● At the time Jesus spoke the parable of the rich man and Lazarus, who was represented by the rich man and who by Lazarus?
The rich man represented the ones to whom Jesus had just been speaking, the money-loving Pharisees; hence the religious leaders as a class. The beggar Lazarus represented primarily the poor and spiritually impoverished among the Jews who were despised by the ruling class.​—Pp. 178, 179.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1967.

