Announcements
1957 DISTRICT ASSEMBLIES FOR UNITED STATES
The Society is pleased to make announcement concerning the location and time for each of the seven district assemblies planned this year. This will enable you to make necessary vacation arrangements to attend the convention of your choice. They are all for five days, and you will want to be present for the entire program so as not to miss any of the spiritual food Jehovah has for his people when assembled together. Additional information will be given later relative to rooming accommodations, but still in plenty of time to take care of your requirements. It will not be necessary to write for rooms until the proper time, when the address for each city is released. The assemblies scheduled are as follows: July 3-7, Miami, Fla., and Houston, Tex.; July 10-14, Denver, Colo.. and Seattle, Wash.; July 17-21, Milwaukee, Wis.; July 24-28, Los Angeles, Calif.; August 21-25, Baltimore, Md.
GIVING PRECEDENCE TO DIVINE INTERESTS
In the ordering of our lives along worthwhile lines it is essential that we give precedence not to personal interests, but to the divine interests, as these are set forth in the Scriptures. As in days of old there were those to whom certain divine interests were committed, so today there are many who highly esteem the privilege of being so used. (1 Chron. 26:30, Mo) To do God’s will and share in advancing divine interests today one must have a part in preaching “this good news of the kingdom.” During March, this Jehovah’s witnesses will do by going from house to house giving brief sermons and offering to all the excellent Bible study aid magazine The Watchtower. A year’s subscription will be offered for $1 and to each new subscriber will be given the 96-page booklet What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? Be sure to give precedence to divine interests during the month and share in Kingdom service.
FOR YOUR PROTECTION
In ancient times the faithful watchman from his point of vantage warned of approaching danger or announced good tidings. The security of the nation depended on his eyes. More serious today than an enemy attack with nuclear weapons is the deadly assault being made on true worship. As a faithful watchman the Watchtower magazine warns of the impending crisis and heralds the good news of God’s kingdom. With inspired prophetic vision the apostle Paul foresaw the dangers that now threaten our civilization. Knowing that we must be forearmed for protection, he said: “Now it is high time to awake out of sleep: . . . The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore . . . put on the armour of light.” (Rom. 13:11, 12) As a faithful companion to The Watchtower, Awake! magazine throws its light into the dark corners of the world and reveals what you need to know. Make each of these eye-opening magazines a regular semimonthly visitor to your home for a year for only $2. Send now and receive free the booklet What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? plus three other timely booklets.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
March 24: How Jehovah’s Witnesses View Their Ministry, ¶1-29. Page 113.
March 31: How Jehovah’s Witnesses View Their Ministry, ¶30-40, and Overseers of the Ministry. Page 119.

