How Jehovah’s Witnesses View Their Ministry
“You are ‘. . . a people for special possession, that you should declare abroad the excellencies’ of the one that called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.”—1 Pet. 2:9, NW
 1. How do Jehovah’s witnesses view their ministry? Why?
JEHOVAH’S witnesses take their ministerial activity very seriously. They are keenly interested in it, and rightfully so, for Jehovah is keenly interested in the ministerial activity of his people. He has commanded that the ministry be carried out in favorable season and in troublesome season in order that his name and purposes may be proclaimed and made known throughout all the earth. (2 Tim. 4:2; Ps. 83:18) And how is this to be done? Will the stones have to cry out declaring the glory and majesty of Jehovah? (Luke 19:40) No, never, for Jehovah’s witnesses world-wide have a proper view of their ministry and are ever eager to serve faithfully as his ministers.
 2. (a) What is the purpose of the ministry? (b) What cry rings loud and clear?
2 That we may understand how precious the ministerial activity is in the sight of Jehovah and properly view it from his exalted position he tells us at 1 Peter 2:9 (NW): “You are ‘ . . . a people for special possession, that you should declare abroad the excellencies’ of the one that called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.” The purpose of the ministry, then, is to reflect the light (Matt. 5:16, 17, NW); to declare the good news of God’s kingdom far and wide, so that whosoever will may call upon the name of Jehovah and be saved. (Rom. 10:13, NW) To faithful witnesses everywhere the call rings loud and clear: “Both young men and virgins; old men and children; let them praise the name of Jehovah; for his name alone is exalted; his glory is above the earth and the heavens.”—Ps. 148:12, 13, AS.
 3. How should one view his dedication vows?
3 Knowing it is a matter of life or death to serve actively as one of Jehovah’s witnesses, every Kingdom publisher wants to carry out his dedication vows faithfully. On symbolizing his dedication by water baptism he did not merely undergo a nice ceremony. He made a covenant to serve Jehovah as one of his ministers. It was within his heart to say, as did Jesus: “I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart.” (Ps. 40:8) Upon taking the step of dedication one becomes a witness for Jehovah, one of Jehovah’s witnesses. (Isa. 43:10-12, AS) He is privileged to bear the greatest name in all the world, a name he is proud of and wants to prove worthy of without fail. At Exodus 20:7 (NW) he is counseled: “You must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way.”
 4. If one does not witness, is he one of Jehovah’s witnesses? What is required?
4 Being one of Jehovah’s witnesses means more than saying, ‘I am one of Jehovah’s witnesses.’ Are you witnessing? Regularly? All physically able have the responsibility to preach publicly and from house to house, as did Jesus, and in addition take advantage of all opportunities to witness to friends, neighbors, etc., while the physically infirm are privileged to witness to visitors, write letters, make telephone calls, and in other ways share in giving the mighty witness. Without exception each witness of Jehovah is aware of his obligations in this regard, as set out in Ezekiel 3:17-21. If one does not witness, he is not one of Jehovah’s witnesses. To call ourselves witnesses of Jehovah and then to refrain from witnessing, which is ministering, would be taking Jehovah’s name in a vain or worthless way. Never may that happen, and it will not so long as a proper view of the ministry is maintained.
 5. What is a good question to ask yourself from time to time, and how did Paul have the proper perspective?
5 From time to time it is good for each one to ask himself: “Do I have a proper view of my ministry and am I faithfully ministering?” The importance of doing this was stressed by Paul when he said: “Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart, not grudgingly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.” (2 Cor. 9:7, NW) A proper view of the ministry enables one to serve cheerfully with a grateful heart, and to reflect, as did Paul, who further said: “I am grateful to Christ Jesus our Lord who delegated power to me, because he considered me trustworthy by assigning me to a ministry.” (1 Tim. 1:12, NW) Note, the ministry is assigned to us! Being grateful for this privilege, all who have a proper view of the ministry joyfully preach the good news of Jehovah’s kingdom at all opportunities.
 6. (a) By preaching does one do Jehovah a favor? (b) How can one please Jehovah and win his favor?
6 Never does one take the view: “Jehovah wants me to preach, that I know; so today I shall do him a favor and share in the ministry.” That would be a most improper view. By engaging in the ministry one does not do Jehovah a favor. How could one do Jehovah a favor by preaching? In fact, what favor can any person do for Jehovah? Give him everlasting life? No, for he is the great God of the universe. He has life within himself and the power to give life to whomsoever he pleases. Well, then, could one create a paradise of righteousness and bring into existence the desires of his heart? No, again, is the emphatic answer. What, then, can one do for Jehovah? Nothing at all to better him or his position. However, there is something one can do to please him. Loyally serve as his minister and thus be a source of delight to him, making glad his heart. (Prov. 23:15, 16, AS) In turn Jehovah, as a kind, loving Father, can and will favor his faithful witnesses with everlasting life in his righteous new world and more than fill every righteous desire of the heart.
ENGAGING IN THE MINISTRY
 7. Why is it important to “make public declaration,” and is it always easy to arrange?
7 All who have a proper view of the ministry arrange to “always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips which make public declaration to his name.” Realizing this is a part of true worship. (Heb. 13:15, NW) Arranging time to spend making public declaration is not always easy. As all other people do, we must provide our material needs, pay to Caesar the material things Caesar has coming to him, and in addition attend congregational meetings and do ministerial service.
 8. How does one properly view and use available time for ministerial service?
8 Sometimes circumstances require one to do secular work as many as five or six days a week to provide material needs. He wishes things were the other way, that he had five or six days each week for the all-important ministry and that he could get by with one or two days of secular work. But he has not; and when asked on his day off to share in the ministry, does he respond: “What, go out on my day off? Why, brother, don’t you know that I have been working hard all week and that I need this day to rest up?” No, that is not the reply of one who has a proper view of the ministry. Gladly he uses his free days, as well as evenings and holidays, to share as fully as he possibly can in the ministry. And that is the way that it should be, since his five or six days of secular work merely sustain and provide material needs. To care for spiritual needs and to ensure life itself requires having Jehovah’s blessing and favor, which results from being God’s fellow workers.—1 Cor. 3:9, NW.
 9. What must a minister avoid?
9 To share regularly in the ministry requires careful budgeting of time. If a person is not careful he may allow himself to become so busy and weighted down with worldly cares and anxieties that he has difficulty arranging time for the ministry. This must be the case with some, for congregational reports show there are those who do not share in ministerial service each month. That is a dangerous position to get in, brothers! It means failing to carry out your dedication vows made unto Jehovah. Ministers who have a proper view of the ministry do not allow themselves to become so busy or weighted down that they cannot regularly attend meetings and engage in the ministry—if it is really their desire—for the saying is true: “You can always find time to do the things that you really want to do.”
10. (a) Does a person manage and arrange to do the things he really wants to do? (b) Why should this be especially true of the ministry?
10 Yes, that is true! No matter how busy one is each day he arranges three or more times to eat physical food, which the body requires and he knows is essential to sustain life. And regardless of how busy one might be, when it gets to be late at night or the early hours of morning he stops whatever he is doing and goes to bed, knowing sleep is necessary to rest the body and mind to continue work the next day. And take an engaged couple, or people in love; regardless of how busy each might be, do they not always manage to arrange to spend some time together? Indeed! And so it is with the ministry. Publishers who have a proper view of the ministry arrange to share regularly in ministerial activity regardless of their circumstances or the demands this devilish old world might impose upon them, continually keeping in mind the fact that the ministry is an integral part of acceptable worship and that now, yes, now, is the opportune time to praise Jehovah and have a part in gathering the other sheep into the New World society for survival at Armageddon.
FULL-TIME MINISTERIAL WORK
11, 12. (a) Is the full-time service a desirable work? (b) What is required to be a full-time pioneer minister?
11 In fulfillment of their vows of dedication and mindful of the urgency of the witness work all have as their goal the full-time pioneer ministry. While it is not an easy service, it is the most enjoyable and heart-satisfying service to be in on this side of Armageddon. It is a grand service wherein regular pioneers spend at least 100 hours a month preaching and special pioneers a minimum of 150 hours. Let none underestimate the pioneer service. It is a real act of faith, a service for only mature men and women who are willing to seek Kingdom interests first in their lives and make sacrifices to be pleasing to Jehovah. One cannot keep up with the Joneses who want the latest and best of old-world attractions and at the same time pioneer. There is room for only one or the other—not both.
12 But how can one provide the necessities of life with prices so high and still pioneer? Good planning and arranging are required, plus the all-important thing—faith and complete confidence that Jehovah will provide actual needs. Jesus well expressed it: “So never be anxious and say: ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to put on?’ For all these are the things the nations are eagerly pursuing. For your heavenly Father knows you need all these things.” (Matt. 6:31, 32, NW) To be sure, Jehovah will do his part as we do ours.
13. (a) Can modern-day pioneers verify that ‘the Lord will provide’? (b) How are many able to pioneer?
13 That it can be and is being done, behold the thousands of splendid pioneer examples world-wide today! Any who wish to pioneer and are holding back lacking a bank account to sustain them years in the pioneer work would do well to note the following from happy pioneers: “Twenty years ago we (man and wife) began with very few dollars. During that time we have wanted for no necessary thing. We put forth the effort and the Lord will provide.” Wrote another: “Like David, I can say, ‘Once I was young [started 1907 in service] and now I am old’ but always the Lord has cared for my needs.” Yes, a way is provided for those who really wish to pioneer. Part-time work, careful use of finances on hand, families’ arranging for one or more to pioneer, pensions and many other avenues open the way for industrious, energetic ministers to pioneer.
14. Why should each publisher seriously consider pioneering?
14 Do not miss out on this privilege if you are Scripturally free to be a pioneer. There is an urgent need for more full-time workers now, as ‘the harvest is ripe but the workers are few.’ If you can arrange to pioneer and qualify, then pioneering is the service you should be in. Blessed indeed are the mature dedicated men and women who see the issue clearly and arrange their affairs to start and to stay in the pioneer work.
15. What provision has been made so that all can pioneer at least part time every year?
15 But what about those who have family obligations requiring time and attention to a point where it is not possible to pioneer? So that all these can enjoy at least limited pioneer privileges, as well as young ministers of school age, housewives, seasonal workers and others, the Society has provided vacation pioneering. One may engage in this service for a period of one, two or more months. And for those who have only a two-week vacation an arrangement exists for them to vacation pioneer that period. This means all dedicated witnesses have opportunity to enjoy the most blessed pioneer service at least part time every year. Are you doing so?
16. What should young ministers make their goal?
16 Many young ministers of school age vacation pioneer each summer vacation until graduating, at which time they enter the regular pioneer service. Some are now in Bethel service, graduates of Gilead serving as missionaries, circuit and district servants and in other responsible positions in the New World society.
USING TALENTS AND ABILITY
17. How have some felt about their ministerial ability?
17 Whether young or old in age or years in the truth all should desire to improve their ministerial abilities. Speaking of abilities, at times some have said: “I want to do the ministry, but my ability is so limited. Now if only I had the ability of brother or sister So-and-So. They can talk and talk, and how wonderful it is the way Scriptural truths and explanations flow out of their mouths.” And how did the brother or sister become so qualified? Was he born that way? No! He diligently studied, attended meetings regularly and applied the things learned in field service so as to become a well-qualified minister.
18, 19. Can ability be improved? Give examples.
18 No publisher should look at another and say: “If I had your ministerial ability, then I would do so-and-so.” Jehovah God will not judge any individual upon the ability of his brother or sister. He wants each one to use the ability he has—and to improve it. That abilities can be improved recalls the parable of the talents. (Matt. 25:14-28, NW) The servants who used their talents were given more, while the servant who did not use his talent lost it. It is the same with the ministry. Jehovah will give more and more talents to those who use them. Time and again this has been seen, for most new publishers start with very limited ministerial ability. Brothers have joined the ministry school and on giving their first student talks have had great difficulty. It was not easy, but they continued putting forth the required effort, striving always to improve, and before long they became capable speakers, able to stand before the congregation and give edifying hour discourses as well as handle other ministerial privileges.
19 Many of us, on seeing the need to minister, in no uncertain terms said: “I know it is right and that I should minister, but I do not think I will ever be able to go from house to house alone, or make backcalls and conduct home Bible studies.” Happy are we today to be capable house-to-house ministers able to witness effectively for Jehovah as a result of using the limited ability or talents we had and praying to Jehovah for more! So, young and old in age and years in the truth, wisely continue using the ability that you have and work for more. With Jehovah’s blessing upon your sincere efforts ‘your advancement will be manifest to all persons’ and it will be your good pleasure to enjoy ministerial privileges you once never thought possible.—1 Tim. 4:15, NW.
ATTENDING MEETINGS
20. Weekly congregation meetings serve what purpose?
20 To keep abreast of revealed Bible truths and to be well equipped for the ministry, it is necessary to attend congregational meetings regularly. Jehovah knows what his servants need to serve as his ministers and provides the essentials through his theocratic organization by means of the following weekly congregational meetings: The Watchtower study, service meeting, theocratic ministry school and congregation book study. When public meetings can be arranged they also serve as a rich source of information.
21. Do we have too many weekly meetings? Why not?
21 On first attending the Kingdom Hall and learning of our many weekly meetings some who formerly attended worldly churches once a week, or less, respond: “Do all of you regularly attend four or five meetings each week? Are all of them necessary?” For us to be and stay spiritually strong and healthy, the only correct answer is, Yes. Very pointedly Jesus said: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matt. 4:4, NW) Just as it is necessary to eat material food regularly to stay healthy and keep strong physically, so it is vitally important to feast regularly on Jehovah’s spiritual provisions.
22. What does Hebrews 10:25 admonish us to do? Why?
22 Attending meetings is of such great importance we are admonished at Hebrews 10:25 not to be ‘forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as some have the custom.’ On missing meetings one denies himself spiritual food Jehovah has arranged for his welfare. Therefore, when it is time for a meeting at Kingdom Hall or the congregation book study surely there could be nothing more important taking place anywhere on earth. Manifest your appreciation and proper view of the ministry by regularly attending all meetings.
23. What privilege and responsibility do regular meeting attenders have toward others?
23 In addition to attending all congregational meetings regularly, we are to encourage others to do likewise. What we need to keep in good spiritual health is needed by others. Thus, lovingly encourage one another to go to meetings and ‘all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.’ It is the privilege and responsibility of mature, regular meeting attenders to encourage and to assist fellow ministers to attend all congregational meetings regularly. Servants and publishers should always be alert to observe those missing meetings and show brotherly love and concern by calling on them to encourage and help them attend.
24. Name various benefits derived from attending meetings.
24 What one of us has not said or thought from time to time: “I know that I should attend the meeting, but I am so tired, busy, etc.”? Yet the effort was put forth, the meeting was attended and how happy we were! Refreshing New World information at the meeting relieved that tired, worn-out feeling and enabled us to put out of mind and heart old-world problems and troubles. Good fellowship was enjoyed with the brothers, which is always stimulating, and, above all, the satisfaction and joy that come from obeying God’s command. What grand refreshment and uplifting and upbuilding periods meetings are! Never miss a meeting if it is at all avoidable. They are a must to stay in good spiritual health and to become adequately qualified for the ministry.
25. How can good-will persons be helped to see the importance of attending?
25 Persons of good will should be invited and encouraged to attend any and all congregational meetings. Upon completion of each weekly home Bible study it is well to spend a few minutes relating high points of the past week’s meetings. This will help them to appreciate the variety of pertinent information available at meetings and to know what they are missing. The sooner they start attending Kingdom Hall meetings the more rapid will be their Christian growth. They should be made to feel welcome to attend all meetings, and, know too, that Jehovah’s witnesses are interested, not in their pocketbook, but to help them learn Bible truths and walk the way that leads to life in God’s new world.—John 17:3, NW.
MINISTERING TO OTHERS
26. Who only will survive Armageddon, and what must they now do?
26 The purpose of the ministry is to share in the vindication of Jehovah’s name, to find and feed the other sheep, and to prove faithful as a witness of Jehovah. It is not the aim or goal of Jehovah’s witnesses to convert this old world. That will never be done, for clearly it is stated at Matthew 24:38, 39 (NW) the most of this world’s inhabitants, as in Noah’s day, will be destroyed at the approaching battle of Armageddon. While the world as a whole is content to eat, drink and be merry, there are those who sigh and cry over existing conditions. These are the ones who must be found and assisted while time permits. All who hope to survive the great war of Armageddon, which rapidly draws near, must listen and respond to Jehovah’s invitation: ‘Seek ye Jehovah, all ye meek of the earth, that have kept his ordinances; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye will be hid in the day of Jehovah’s anger.”—Zeph. 2:3, AS.
27. How important is the ministry today, and why do you so answer?
27 Now is the acceptable season for gathering the meek sheeplike persons and aiding them to become steadfast, unmovable praisers of God. (2 Cor. 6:2; 1 Cor. 15:58, NW) With true neighborly love and complete unselfishness we must seek and make opportunities to minister. It is the most important work on earth between now and Armageddon, a matter of life or death for us and those whom we preach to.
28. What can we not do?
28 Come evenings and weekends, naturally we are tired from secular and other activities. It would be so easy to sit at home and pamper ourselves thinking how wonderful it is that others are out faithfully ministering and caring for the sheep. But that we will not and cannot let happen. “Woe is me if I preach not” is our Scriptural guide. Jesus was willing to lay down his life for the sheep. As his footstep followers we are willing and desirous to do all we can to help others and thus sacrifice personal desires and comforts evenings, weekends and other times to preach. For this reason whether the weather be fair or inclement, or a multitude of adverse things confront us, still we go from house to house ministering, conducting Bible studies and in other ways helping honest-hearted ones.
29. Why is territory assigned?
29 No hit-or-miss arrangement is employed to preach thoroughly to all. Far from it! The ministerial work of Jehovah’s witnesses is well organized. Each one of the 16,240 congregations throughout the world, as well as many missionaries and regular and special pioneers serving isolated territory, receives from the Society a definite territory to serve. They have the responsibility to preach to all people living in the assigned territory.
30. (a) Why do Jehovah’s witnesses preach from house to house? (b) Give reasons why territory is covered time and again.
30 The most effective means of ministering is the Scriptural way of visiting people at their homes. This was the way Jesus instructed his followers to preach; the way followed by Paul, who testifies: “I did not hold back from telling you any of the things that were profitable nor from teaching you publicly and from house to house.” (Acts 20:20; Matt. 10:5, 11-13, NW) As homes in a territory are revisited sometimes householders respond: “Are you back again? One of Jehovah’s witnesses was here not long ago.” No one knows that better than we who purposely endeavor to cover our territory repeatedly and systematically. But, why, some ask, do you not cover territory once and stop? Simply because from one call to another conditions or circumstances with an individual may change or something previously said to the householder changes his way of thinking to the point that ones formerly opposed, busy, or otherwise unresponsive are now ready, willing and desirous of hearing the Kingdom message. Almost all who are active ministers today were unresponsive when calls were first made on them. Most happy are they that territory was served time and again, and, in return, they are pleased to cover their territory assignment time and again searching for the other sheep.
31. What are the benefits of using Bible sermons and changing them from time to time?
31 Some not well acquainted with our ministry have asked: “Do you not tire of going back to the same homes saying the same thing?” Homes are revisited, yes, but the same words are not spoken. Before engaging in the ministry witnesses prepare pointed three to eight-minute sermons and new sermons are used by a witness at least each time a territory is revisited. Being thus well prepared, it is a pleasure for one to engage in the ministry. One walks to the door without thoughts racing through his mind as he hears the householders approaching: “What shall I say? How shall I start?” No, with confidence the prepared minister delivers the Bible message he came to deliver and upon completion of the sermon receptive householders do not wonder why one of Jehovah’s witnesses called. The coherent Bible sermon enabled the householder to understand, benefit from, and appreciate the purpose of the call. All properly prepared ministers are now using three to eight-minute Bible sermons in regular witnessing and well know their effectiveness.
32. Though presenting Bible literature on a small contribution basis, how can it undeniably be pointed out “we are not peddlers of the word of God”?
32 To assist interested householders to become acquainted with Bible truths, printed sermons in the form of Bible study aid books, the Watchtower and Awake! magazines and booklets are offered to householders on a small contribution basis. Contributions received do no more than help defray cost of printing and handling. If a person cannot afford to contribute and sincerely wishes printed sermons, they are given to him by the minister, who pays for it himself. All of these factors undeniably prove that Jehovah’s witnesses “are not peddlers of the word of God as many men are, but as out of sincerity, yes, as sent from God, . . . we are speaking.” (2 Cor. 2:17, NW) Printed sermons enable people to study at their own convenience.
33. Why make back-calls? How should publishers be prepared?
33 The purpose of the ministry is not limited to placing Bible study aids with interested people. To carry out Jesus’ instructions fully to find and then feed the other sheep more is required than this. In addition to our spending many hours locating interested persons, return calls must be made to really feed the sheep. All of Jehovah’s witnesses with a proper view of the ministry are happy to make return calls on persons who have manifested interest in the Bible’s message. Returning with well-prepared ten to fifteen-minute Bible sermons on subjects of interest to the householder enables them to see the need for a private home Bible study. Alert ministers start home Bible studies as soon as possible.
34. Of what value are home Bible studies, and why are not more conducting them?
34 Are you conducting at least one home Bible study each week as a congregation publisher and several as a pioneer or missionary? Each one should be, and yet reports show many qualified ministers are not. In fact, only about 15 to 20 percent of the publishers in most congregations conduct these all-important Bible studies. Why are not more doing so? Is it because many do not have the ability? No, not that, for all of Jehovah’s witnesses have the ability to conduct studies. Frankly it seems some shy away from home Bible studies, not wishing to be tied down with the responsibility. This is an improper view. Did not almost all of us come to a knowledge of the truth through someone’s conducting a home Bible study with us? Yes! Here, then, is their value. They are essential to really “feed my sheep.”
35, 36. What is the proper view to have? How is this Scriptural?
35 Therefore, let every dedicated witness conduct at least one home Bible study regularly, having toward prospective other sheep this Scriptural view: “Having a tender affection for you, we were well pleased to impart to you, not only the good news of God, but also our own souls, because you became beloved to us. Certainly you bear in mind, brothers, our labor and toil. It was with working night and day . . . that we preached the good news of God to you.”—1 Thess. 2:8, 9, NW.
36 With a proper view of the ministry a minister is not only willing but desirous of conducting home Bible studies any time they can be arranged. He remembers the purpose of his ministry is to bear fruit and that home Bible studies are the means of doing so. Let all of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses share in the back-call and home Bible study service as well as the house-to-house ministry, magazine work and other features of Kingdom service in order to ‘be well balanced, thoroughly accomplishing their ministry.’—2 Tim. 4:5, NW.
TRAINING NEW MINISTERS
37. As one learns of Jehovah and his purposes, what does he want to do?
37 As people of good will take advantage of the home Bible study arrangement and attend congregation meetings they come to an accurate knowledge of Jehovah’s grand and glorious purposes. They grow to love them and want to have a share in praising Jehovah’s name and aiding yet other people to learn the way of life. It becomes as a fire in their bones; they must and want to join the ranks of happy ministers.
38. In keeping with the way Jesus trained others, how does one become a minister today?
38 How does one become qualified for the ministry? Is it necessary to go to a seminary or special school for training? Jesus did not send his followers to theological schools of his day. Rather, he trained them by taking them with him in the field ministry, taught them what to do, and sent them out to teach and make disciples of others. (Matt. 28:19, 20, NW) This Scriptural way is followed by Jehovah’s witnesses today throughout all the world.
39. (a) What arrangements exist in each congregation to train new ministers? (b) How do those working together view their assignment?
39 In each congregation arrangements are made to train and aid new ones to become adequately qualified for the ministry. Mature, capable ministers are assigned by the circuit servant, and in between his visits by the congregation servant, to train and assist new ones and others in need of help to become well-qualified house-to-house ministers, to make return visits on interested persons, to start and conduct home Bible studies, prepare and give appropriate sermons and in other ways become qualified ministers. The two working together, called theocratic companions, work out a schedule that enables them to engage in all features of the ministry as often as possible. The more mature minister takes the lead and always gives kind, helpful counsel to the one learning. As the one being trained progresses, he does more and more until he is able to give sermons alone and effectively minister from house to house, make return calls and conduct Bible studies. Then he too is in position to assist another. Each theocratic companion takes his assignment seriously, realizing it is a theocratic appointment. The more qualified one considers it a privilege to aid the one he is assigned to help to become a capable witness for Jehovah, and the one being trained appreciates the training program as a loving provision on the part of Jehovah’s theocratic organization to assist him to become a well-qualified minister, able to declare abroad the excellencies of Jehovah, who called him forth to preach.—Eph. 4:11-14, NW.
40. From this study what conclusion is drawn, and what is next to be considered?
40 As can be seen from this article, Jehovah’s witnesses do take their ministry seriously. They are keenly interested in it, realizing it is a most vital part of true worship. (Matt. 7:21, NW) Having discussed how Jehovah’s witnesses organize their affairs to minister and their view of the ministry, in the next article we shall see how overseers qualify for congregation responsibilities and how they view their ministerial appointment.

