Announcements
◆ New Publications Available:
God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good​—Italian
God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached​—Portuguese
Is This Life All There Is?​—Italian, Portuguese
Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand!​—German
One World, One Government, Under God’s Sovereignty​—German
◆ When ordering the 1976 Yearbook publishers and pioneers are requested to do so through the congregation with which they are associated. Orders for the Yearbook in the following languages may be placed after the dates listed. December 1 — English. December 15 — French, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, Spanish. January 20 — Dutch, German, Korean. Copies of the Yearbook are 50 cents each for publishers. These are cash items and so payment must accompany all orders. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1975, may receive a free Yearbook by making request of the brother handling the literature. This will be included in the congregation’s order, and credit may be requested from the Society for the pioneers’ copies. Pioneers may obtain additional copies at 15 cents each.
◆ In the September Kingdom Ministry insert, page 6, talk No. 4, end of the first paragraph, the reference should be P. 288, not P. 228.
◆ Literature offer for November:
Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand!, with a booklet, for 50c. For December: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (bi12), with Great Teacher book, for $1.25. January through April: Watchtower subscription for one year, with three booklets, for $1.50.
◆ Please note following new prices in Cost List:
                                    Pio.    Pub.
Revised Standard Version (bi53)     $2.90   $2.90
New American Bible (Catholic)       $4.55   $7.25
Also, prices of foreign-language Bibles stocked, but not printed by the Society, listed in Cost List, are no longer current and these change frequently. We suggest that you strike out such prices therein. When someone inquires about the price it will be necessary to write us to find out, or if such is ordered, to wait until the invoice giving the price is received.

