Presenting the Good News​—With the New World Translation
1 During December we are going to be featuring in the field service the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, along with the book Listening to the Great Teacher, for $1.25.
2 But why offer people a Bible? Do they really need it? In days gone by, nearly every home had a Bible, but that is no longer true among the younger generation, and even among some older persons. So, frequently, the Bible that householders obtain from us is not “another” Bible for them; it is the only one they have. Even among those who may have a Bible, how many read it? Getting a modern-English translation may be the very thing that will get them started to read God’s Word, and their use of the New World Translation can aid them to get the sense of the Scriptures, with lasting benefit to themselves. Now, how can we help the householder to appreciate that he would benefit by obtaining the Bible?
3 Well, one way is by raising a common problem that deeply concerns many persons. Family life frequently is not happy. The wife may feel that her husband does not do his part, and vice versa. After introducing this subject (or another one that is suitable), if the householder shows interest, mention that the Bible gives helpful counsel. The concordance in the New World Translation makes it easy to find the desired reference. Turn to the concordance under the heading “Husband(s)”; point out the text at Ephesians 5:25 or Colossians 3:19. Now show the householder the alphabetical listing of Bible books on page 8. With this as a start, lead the householder step by step as he looks up the scripture himself, if he is willing to do so. Read with him both the cited verse and a few around it. Point out the difference that application of such counsel could make in one’s family life. Mention that, using the New World Translation, he now knows how to find scriptures on such vital subjects himself. Offer it to him, with the Great Teacher book, for $1.25.
4 If you are in an area where people have a Bible, perhaps an older translation such as the King James, you might use this approach: “Hello. My name is . . . And what is yours? [Response.] I would appreciate talking to you for just about five minutes, if I may, because I would like to ask you, ‘How do you feel about reading the Bible in modern English? Do you think it is a good idea?’ [Response.] Well, the English language has certainly changed since the 1600’s, when the King James translation was made, hasn’t it? We just don’t use a lot of the older words anymore. For example, I have typed out on this slip of paper how my copy of the King James Version reads at 1 John 2:20. It says: ‘But ye have an unction from the Holy One.’ Now, I’m sure you will agree that not many people would know what an unction is. I wouldn’t know either unless I looked it up in a modern-English Bible. Nor would most people know what kind of food pulse is. But the prophet Daniel asked to eat some, as stated in the King James Version at Daniel 1:12. [Read your typed-out copy of it.] Now, look at these two identical verses in this modern-English Bible. [Read and point out that “unction” is “anointing” and that “pulse” is “vegetables.”] So, you can benefit from reading a modern-language Bible. I am leaving this one, with the book Listening to the Great Teacher, for just $1.25.”
5 There are various ways that the presentation can be made. Use what fits your territory and the householder to whom you talk.

