Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 9
15 min: Song 3. Introduction, including discussion of the text from Yearbook, with comments from audience; emphasize what the text itself means, also how it affects our lives in a practical way. Discuss Branch Letter; encourage ordering the 1976 Yearbook.
15 min: “The Door Is Still Open!” Talk. Invite audience to read scriptures.
20 min: Will You Share in Preaching the Good News?
Mention that the majority present doubtless share in preaching the good news to others. Some got started with distribution of Kingdom News No. 21. Others have not yet participated; perhaps there are a few who used to share in field service regularly but who do so only rarely now. Some Scriptural thoughts will help all.
(As you discuss this material and as time permits, invite audience to read and comment on scriptures.) Attending meetings is commendable; can indicate a desire for spiritual things; but not enough in itself. Other people also need to learn about Jehovah and his purposes. (Rom. 10:13, 14) Jesus set the example for us; taught his followers to preach as he did. (1 Pet. 2:21: Luke 8:1) More required to please God than saying that we believe. (Jas. 2:18-26) Jesus is called the “faithful and true witness.” How does he feel about those who are indifferent about the work entrusted to his congregation? (Rev. 3:14-16) What is it that will motivate us to share in the preaching work that God has given his people to do? (Mark 6:34: Luke 10:25-28) What if we do not feel that we have the ability to do the work? 1 Cor. 1:26, 27; 2 Cor. 3:5.
Explain that training will be provided for any who desire it. Urge them to ask for personal training from the one who studies with them or from their congregation book study conductor. Encourage them to continue to make progress, appreciate full significance of being a dedicated servant of God, not merely an outsider looking in, but one of the people in whom Jehovah takes pleasure.​—Ps. 149:4.
10 min: Concluding comments. Accounts report. Include reminder of public talk on Sunday and what to do in preparation. (See September Kingdom Ministry insert under heading “What Will You Do?”) Song 116.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 16
15 min: Song 49. Introduction is to be a talk, with some audience participation, built around material in article “Who Really Is Irreprehensible?” Have some scriptures read. Be upbuilding.
20 min: Good Communication. (Prov. 15:22) Open discussion with audience analyzing importance and benefits of good communication among elders, ministerial servants and within Christian households. Chairman should use additional questions to be certain local needs highlighted. (w74, pp. 305-311, 313, 367 and 368; g 8/8/72, pp. 3 and 4) The elder handling this part will find it beneficial to get ideas as to needs of congregation from other elders in advance and should have in mind what he wants to develop. Communication among elders may be considered from viewpoint of those who may someday qualify, so that they appreciate before they become elders why it is important.
Within family circle, who needs to communicate? (Father, mother, children. Take each specifically and ask, Why? How? What can restrain? How to improve?)
How can communication between publishers and elders be improved? If some fearful of approaching elders, how can this be overcome? What things should publishers communicate to elders? (Things observed needing attention around Kingdom Hall or other matters that need to be cared for, such as matters regarding moral uncleanness, etc.) Why? What should elders tell congregation? (Not confidential matters, but progress of congregation, of the work locally, Kingdom Hall building or remodeling work, etc.) Why is communication necessary between elders; between elders and ministerial servants? (Prov. 13:10) What could result if communication is lacking between them, and what results where there is fine communication? Chairman concludes, briefly encouraging all to communicate freely so there may be free flow of Jehovah’s spirit.​—Matt. 18:20.
15 min: “Your Share in Field Service.” Start with discussion of what local congregation is doing in field service; warmly commend all for efforts put forth; if there are aspects that need attention, mention these. Then cover article, with audience participation. Take time to read the paragraphs. Announce any plans for field service on world’s Thanksgiving Day.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include Question Box. Build up appreciation for Sunday public talk; mention a few portions of the Bible itself that will be covered. Song 28.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 23
15 min: Song 29. Warm welcome. Comment briefly on why we have weekly service meeting (see Organization book, p. 97, par. 1). Then direct attention to newer ones, covering following thoughts: Majority at meeting are Jehovah’s witnesses. Quite a number are not yet Witnesses, but you come to meetings, and we are glad you are here. You know our schedule of meetings, but there might be other things that you would like to know about. (1) What if you would like to get extra copies of magazines for your family or to give to friends? Explain how. (2) May be interested in what is in our literature bookroom. Mention such things as songbook, Concordance, large-print Bible, Kingdom Interlinear, “Make Sure” (with a sentence or two about value of each of these publications). (3) Tell about Kingdom Hall library and arrangement for using books. (4) Comment on spiritual help available from mature publishers, including elders.
25 min: “Do You Appreciate Your Blessings?” Talk based on article in September 15, 1975, Watchtower. Emphasize aspects that will be most helpful locally. For final ten minutes, interview publishers as to blessings that they have enjoyed in recent months. (Include spiritual provisions, with specific comments on things learned; blessings enjoyed in field; etc.)
20 min: Concluding comments. Discuss prospects for finding Bible studies to conduct. Many would like to conduct a study but have not found one; others wonder whether they could do it. Get brief comments from those in congregation who are conducting studies to learn how they got them started. (Prepare in advance. Seek variety, to illustrate need for persistence in making return visits; to show good results from offering to study with friends, workmates, schoolmates; to show benefit of kindly offering to study with unbelieving family members or other relatives.) Ask audience why home Bible studies are important in our service. Stress joy that comes from conducting a study. (1 Thess. 2:19, 20) Include any needed Announcements. Song 82.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 30
15 min: Song 2. News of Theocratic Interest. By describing events that would mark the time of his invisible presence, Jesus encouraged us to be alert to what takes place around us. Cite a few recent items from “Watching the World” or from “Insight on the News” that illustrate fulfillment of Matthew 24 or 2 Timothy 3:1-5. Connect items from Theocratic News with Matthew 24:14.
Briefly mention that there is also very interesting information in December 1 Watchtower study articles. Do not discuss, but encourage all to read.
10 min: ‘Jehovah Remembers that We Are Dust.’ Talk based on article in September 1, 1975, Watchtower.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With the New World Translation.” Cover paragraphs 1, 2 with audience participation. Demonstrate the suggestions in paragraphs 3, 4, and after each demonstration discuss high points with audience to fix these in mind.
15 min: Concluding comments. For benefit of those newly associated and newer publishers, discuss reporting of field service. Ask audience: Who turn in reports? Where do they get report slips? What is reported as literature placed? What do we include in “hours”? “return visits”? How do we report studies? Why do we turn in reports? Song 32.

