From Our Readers
Radio  Thank you very much for the excellent article “Radio—An Invention That Changed the World.” (October 8, 1996) I am 18 years old, and I like listening to the radio a lot. I found the discussion of the development of radio very interesting. It was particularly interesting to learn that in the past Jehovah’s Witnesses used radio to spread the good news of the Kingdom.
F. B., Italy
Butterflies  I was preaching alone in a farming area and decided to highlight the article “A Fragile but Hardy Traveler.” (October 8, 1996) I met a farmer, a very big man—not the type of person I would normally talk to about butterflies! However, after he saw the dazzling pictures, he took the magazines and said that many rare species of butterflies can be found on his farm. When I left, his wife was absorbed in reading the magazine. So, like the butterfly, I will return—and show them more about God’s Kingdom!
B. B., England
This was one of the most enjoyable articles I have read. Just a few days after the magazine arrived, I noticed that our trees were covered with monarchs! I thanked God for his wonderful creation.
S. M., United States
Wickedness Permitted  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Does God Let Bad Things Happen?” (October 22, 1996) After suffering loneliness, humiliation, and deep sadness during 18 years of marriage to an unfaithful husband who does not respect women, reading that Jehovah is a loving God who cares about us was like a healing balm. It was as if Jehovah himself was comforting me.
H. T., United States
Cigarettes  I would like to comment on the article “Cigarettes—Do You Reject Them?” (October 22, 1996) What a pity that I didn’t have it years ago! My husband died of lung cancer this year. He had been a heavy smoker for 50 years. I myself did not know that cigarettes had such a disastrous effect.
H. G., Germany
Akee  Your article “Akee—Jamaica’s National Dish” (October 22, 1996) was very good. As a native of Jamaica, I have never served akee to anyone who said that he didn’t like it. I encourage anyone going to Jamaica to try akee!
E. B., United States
How pleasant to see another discussion of our Creator’s works! Akee trees abound here in Ghana and serve in some towns and villages as shade trees. In the wild forest, they become very tall. Bats, parrots, and other birds perch on their limbs. The akee tree is another wonderful gift from God.
P. A. E., Ghana
Horses  I just had to write to express my appreciation for the article “They Still Work the Land With Horses.” (October 22, 1996) I am an animal lover, and it stirred something within my heart. I liked the way you presented the relationship man can have with animals, especially the part about enjoying a “conversation” with one’s horses.
V. H., United States
I have lived my entire life in a metropolitan area, and my desire to be close to Jehovah’s creations has yet to be satisfied. By reading your article, I could work with horses in my imagination. Thank you so much for such pleasant articles.
L. A. D., United States

