From Our Readers
Home Schooling  I appreciated your article “Home Schooling​—Is It for You?” (April 8, 1993) I am being taught at home myself, and I was falling behind in my schoolwork. But when I read your article, it lifted up my spirits. Now I’m getting back on track.
N. S., United States
Family Planning  I was greatly offended by your February 22, 1993, feature articles “Family Planning​—A Global Issue.” It is absurd to suggest that responsible Christians need to limit their family sizes. On what basis do you suggest that God’s command in Genesis [to “fill the earth”] does not apply to Christians?
A. D., United States
God’s command to Adam and Eve to “fill the earth” was repeated to Noah and his family. However, nowhere does the Bible impose the procreation mandate upon Christians. (Genesis 1:28; 9:1-5; Acts 15:29) In fact, the Bible commends Christians who remain unmarried “on account of the kingdom.” (Matthew 19:12; 1 Corinthians 7:38) Individual couples must therefore make their own decisions when it comes to childbearing and birth control. Since Christians are commanded to care for the physical, emotional, and spiritual needs of their children, responsible parents may feel it prudent to limit the size of their family so that such care can be rendered. (1 Timothy 5:8) This in no way undermines the fact that children “are an inheritance from Jehovah.” (Psalm 127:3)​—ED.
Alcoholism  Thank you for the excellent “Young People Ask . . .” articles in the January 8 and 22, 1993, issues, namely, “Can Drinking Really Get Me Hooked?” and “How Can I Stop Drinking?” I am 48 years old and a [recovering] alcoholic. The devastating effects of this “disease” of the body, mind, and spirit are heartbreaking. When I began to realize that I was hooked on alcohol, I felt as if Jehovah would never be able to forgive me. But I went to the elders, and they gave me loving help. After a relapse, I entered an alcohol treatment program. Now if the urge to drink comes, I pray and meditate on God’s new world. I also read the many Watchtower and Awake! articles that deal with alcoholism or that tell encouraging life experiences. Thank you for your understanding of the problems Jehovah’s people undergo and for giving us fine articles.
C. D., United States
Young People Ask . . .  My sincere gratitude for the article “Should I Go to the Prom?” (March 8, 1993) I have had much pressure to attend “my” senior prom. But after reading this precious article, all my doubts were settled. I am not going to go, and I don’t think that I will be missing much.
J. L., United States
Thank you for the article “What Can I Do About So Much Homework?” (April 8, 1993) I put the suggestions it contained into practice immediately, and I have really benefited from them. Now I can save more time for spiritual things. Many thanks!
M. M., Italy
Thank you very much for publishing the article “How Can I Cope With a Failed Romance?” (May 8, 1993) I am going through a very difficult period. Often it seems that I have no chance of getting married. So while I was reading the magazine, I did not have the strength to hold back my tears. However, reading it made me feel understood and appreciated. It made me realize more fully that Jehovah loves us and understands what we are going through.
R. Z., Italy

