Announcements
● Literature offer for January and February: Any of the following 192-page books for a contribution of 50¢: Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution (old edition), Good News, Holy Spirit, Life Does Have a Purpose, Peace and Security (old edition), This Life, Truth, and World Government. Supplies of Choosing, Commentary on James, Holy Spirit, and Truth may be ordered from the Society. Congregations may request credit for all books placed over the counter during the campaign. March: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth for a contribution of $2.50. Small-size books are $1.25. April and May: Watchtower subscription for one year for a contribution of $4.00. If subscription is not taken, offer two magazines and a brochure for 70¢.
● Starting in February at circuit assemblies, district overseers will give the public talk “You Can Enjoy Life in Peace Now.” The new public talk for circuit overseers will be “What It Means to Be a Spiritual Man.”
● Presiding overseer should arrange to have Medical Alert cards distributed at beginning of the Service Meeting the week of January 11. Brother handling announcements can give brief reminders concerning use of card as expressed in letter dated July 20, 1980. Brothers are encouraged to fill out card promptly and see that it is properly signed and dated.
● The new brochure “Look! I Am Making All Things New” will be considered at the Congregation Book Study beginning the week of February 15.
● New Publications Available:
Reasoning From the Scriptures​—Chinese
Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace”​—Finnish, Japanese
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide—​Finnish, Japanese, Korean
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Chichewa, Finnish, Greenlandic, Icelandic, Japanese, Kalanga, Shona, Thai, Ukrainian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
To the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—Dutch
The First to the Thessalonians through To Philemon (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75) ​—Dutch
Deuteronomy (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—German

