Could More Start a Bible Study?
1 Are you presently conducting a home Bible study? If not, would you like to do so? Jesus emphasized that in addition to giving an initial witness, we must help interested persons grow spiritually. (John 4:39-42) Field service reports, however, show that many publishers have never had the privilege of conducting a home Bible study. Some who have done so previously are not conducting a study now.
2 If we prepare for and conduct a Bible study on a regular basis, Jehovah will bless our endeavors. Ask those in the congregation who conduct productive Bible studies, and they will be quick to tell you of the great joy it brings.
3 The “Look!” brochure that we received at last summer’s district convention is an excellent aid in starting Bible studies. While the Live Forever book is our primary study publication, we can first lay a fine foundation by studying through this brochure. Then we can interest the householder in a more detailed study in the book.
HOW TO START A BIBLE STUDY
4 If sufficient interest is shown, there is no need to leave right after making a placement. A Bible study may be started right then. This can be done by reading together selected paragraphs and looking up and discussing key scriptures.
5 In some cases, although the householder may not accept the literature offer, he may show respect and appreciation for the Bible. Wherever such interest is noted, it may be appropriate to continue the conversation. Perhaps arrangements can be made to return and discuss the initial subject further or take up another Bible topic. Specific chapters of the Society’s publications, as well as portions of the Reasoning book, provide a wealth of information for such Bible conversations. At a future date, it may be possible to introduce a publication and suggest a formal study arrangement.
6 In addition to opportunities in the field ministry, have we endeavored to start Bible studies with neighbors, associates, or family members? While we may have done this previously, have we done so recently? Questions and concerns of workmates, schoolmates, and teachers may be progressively developed into Bible discussions and studies. A clear, concise, and encouraging Scriptural answer can demonstrate the value of the Bible. The study could be conducted at lunchtime, after work, after school, or whenever convenient, so as to help the individual to progress spiritually.
7 Preparation is essential. When making a return visit, be sure to have clearly in mind the material you are going to discuss. In preparing for the call, it would be good to focus on how each discussion can contribute to your goal of starting a home Bible study.
8 Acts 20:35 helps us to appreciate that much joy and happiness come from sharing what we have with others. Conducting a home Bible study affords an excellent opportunity to experience that joy. Let us make it our goal to share in this service.

