Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 4
Song 181
 7 min: Local announcements. Encourage brothers to share in magazine work on second Saturday of the month. Read Society’s letter of December 15, 1986, regarding convention arrangements.
18 min: “1987 ‘Trust in Jehovah’ District Convention.” Question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 1-9 conducted by convention coordinator. Read paragraphs 2, 3, and 5-9, and make application of scriptures as time allows.
 8 min: “Tract Distribution to Be Intensified.” Discuss information in article. Encourage all to use tracts each time in service and suggest various appropriate ways to use them in local territory. Following part will demonstrate use of tract Is Planet Earth Near the Brink?
12 min: “Share Valuable Spiritual Food With Others.” Question-and-answer discussion with brief demonstration of one of the suggestions in paragraphs 4 and 5. Show how to use the tract being featured. Let brothers know what books are available for January and February offer.
Song 183 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 11
Song 192
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Include report of any contributions sent by congregation to Society for Kingdom work or for Society Kingdom Hall Fund as noted on December literature statement or other statements from Society. Distribute Medical Alert cards. These can be made available to all who desire one, except disassociated and disfellowshipped persons.
23 min: “Could More Start a Bible Study?” Questions and answers. Focus should be on practical application of suggestions in Our Kingdom Ministry. Include five-minute demonstration of making a return visit where the “Look!” brochure was placed. Lead into a study.
12 min: “1987 ‘Trust in Jehovah’ District Convention.” Encouraging and animated talk on paragraphs 10-15 of insert. Remind brothers to use convention information posted on information board.
Song 213 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 18
Song 144
10 min: Selected Announcements, local announcements, and Theocratic News. Encourage magazine activity on fourth Saturday. Two brief demonstrations of presenting current magazines.
 8 min: “Joyfully Enduring Trials Brings God’s Approval.” Talk. Build enthusiasm for new circuit assembly program and stress value of attending each session.
20 min: “Worldwide Service Report​—A Cause for Rejoicing.” Question-and-answer discussion conducted by service overseer or other qualified elder. Include encouraging comments on accomplishments of local congregation during 1986 service year. Commend brothers for work done.
 7 min: Local experiences in offering older books from house to house.
Song 115 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 25
Song 28
 7 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in field service on February 1.
23 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In a Tactful Way.” Question-and-answer coverage. Demonstrate points from paragraph 7 on encouraging a student to attend meetings more regularly.
15 min: Local needs or talk on “Is Your Child ‘Growing to Salvation’?” based on August 1, 1986, Watchtower, pages 27-31. Include some audience participation.
Song 66 and concluding prayer.

