Share Valuable Spiritual Food With Others
1 King David of Israel said in praise to Jehovah: “You are opening your hand and satisfying the desire of every living thing.” (Ps. 145:16) During this time of the end, Jehovah’s generous provision of spiritual food in due season makes us a well-fed and happy people. Like David, we are moved to praise Jehovah’s name because of his loving care for us.
2 Having spiritual provisions in such abundance, it is natural that we would want to share what we have with others. For that reason, during the months of January and February, we will feature several of the older publications in our house-to-house ministry.
3 Congregations having any of the following publications in stock may offer them in the field at the special rate of 50¢ each or two for $1.00: Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution (old edition), Good News, Holy Spirit, Life Does Have a Purpose, Peace and Security (old edition), This Life, Truth, and World Government.
WHAT WE CAN HIGHLIGHT
4 Make an effort to point out an interesting thought from the book you feature. For example, in making a brief presentation using the Holy Spirit book, you might say: “Just about everyone these days is concerned with the threat of nuclear war. However, the Bible tells us that God is going to cause wars to cease. [Read Psalm 46:8, 9.] That promise of abundant peace was written under inspiration of God’s holy spirit, the same holy spirit that is behind the worldwide peace that will be such a blessing to all mankind.” Then turn to page 163 and read paragraph 2. Refer to the title of the chapter to show that such peace has the backing of God’s holy spirit. Then offer the book on a contribution of 50¢.
5 If you plan to use the Choosing book, after discussing the two texts in our Topic for Conversation, you might say: “All of us enjoy having the right to make a choice when something is offered to us. There are many choices when it comes to deciding what is the best way of life. Note, please, the first chapter of this book entitled ‘Making the Right Choice.’ [Read paragraph 3 on page 5.] This publication can help you to make the right choice. It is offered on a contribution of only 50¢.”
6 January and February should see a large distribution of these older publications. Whichever publication you use, keep in mind that within its pages is found spiritual refreshment for those who are thirsting for truth. Placing one or more of these publications with an interested person opens the way for a return visit and perhaps a Bible study, for, indeed, these publications are what Jehovah has supplied through his organization to satisfy mankind.

