Tract Distribution to Be Intensified
1 It was in 1880 that Jehovah’s Witnesses in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, began to publish and distribute informative Bible tracts. Today, over one hundred years later, tract distribution continues to be a part of our public ministry. Its importance is emphasized in the corporate title Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania.​—Matt. 24:14
2 In recent years a number of Kingdom News tracts have been published. Some of these were designed to introduce newly released books. With others, special effort was made to reach everyone in our territory with a brief, timely message. Many publishers use tracts consistently, giving them to all friendly householders and usually leaving one at each door where no one is at home. All of this has been outstandingly successful, stimulating interest in the Kingdom message and alerting people to the Bible’s message for our times.​—Ezek. 3:18, 19; Rev. 22:17.
3 In view of their proved effectiveness, a special effort will be made to increase tract distribution during the next few months. Kingdom News No. 30 (Is Planet Earth Near the Brink?) will be used in January. In February we will concentrate on the tract Are We Nearing Armageddon? During March we will feature Kingdom News No. 32 and in April Kingdom News No. 33. The Society will make some consignments of tracts, free of charge, to congregations in most of the large metropolitan areas of the country. Congregations that have supplies of tracts already on hand should use these up. They may wish to absorb the cost for such tracts, or they may request credit from the Society if they so desire. Since these items will be out of stock in Brooklyn, congregations desiring a supply of tracts should check with other nearby congregations.
4 These tracts contain important messages for the people in our territory. They may be used in connection with our regular house-to-house work with the magazines and the monthly literature offer. All are encouraged to carry a supply of tracts at all times and endeavor to leave a copy with each householder as well as at each not-at-home, making sure that it is out of sight of passersby. If a back issue of The Watchtower or Awake! is left under the door, a tract should be put with it. Tracts left when people are not at home may open the way for a stimulating conversation later.
5 Be sure to keep some on hand and offer a copy to business associates, people with whom you work, or teachers and fellow students at school. Offer them to relatives and neighbors as well. The tracts are particularly helpful when witnessing informally. New and younger publishers will find tract distribution to be a fine way to increase their share in spreading the Kingdom message.
6 May Jehovah bless our united endeavors to share fully in this special effort to sound the warning concerning things to come and to make known the good news.​—Isa. 52:7.

