VOL. XXXIV JULY 15 No. 14 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

Evil-Doers and Busybodies 211 

Ensnared by the Adversary 211 

Busybodying an Evidence of Pride 212 

The Greatest Thing in the Universe— Part II 212 

The Basis of God's Love 213 

The Manifestation of God's Love 213 

How to Keep Ourselves in God's Love 214 

What Constitutes God's Love 214 

Watch and Pray! (Poem) 215 

Crossing the Red Sea 216 

Necessity of the Miracles 216 

The Angel of the Lord 216 

The Manna From Heaven 217 

Bitter Waters, then an Oasis 217 

The Bread from Heaven 218 

Convention-Train Report 218 

Words of Caution 220 

Some Interesting Letters 221 

Sister Seibert to Her Friends 221 

Luxurious Travel and Sacrifice 222 

page 210 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 



Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1913-GENERAL CONVENTIONS-1913 

For information concerning the remaining conventions we 
refer our readers to second page of last issue of THE WATCH 
TOWER, July 1st issue, merely here mentioning places and 
dates, as follows: 

Springfield, Mass July 13-20 

Asheville, N.C July 20-27 

Toronto, Canada July 20-27 



POST-CARDS 

We carry in stock an excellent assortment of Scripture 
post-cards of our own selection, both Birthday and for general 
use. The price for all of these cards has been reduced to 
15c. per dozen, in any quantities. 



BEREAN QUESTION BOOKLETS 

We remind our readers that Question Booklets are in 
stock for Volumes I., II., III., IV. and V. of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, and also for TABERNACLE SHADOWS. Price 5c. 
each— 50c. per dozen, postpaid, brings them within the reach 
of all. Order freely according to your needs. 

Many of the Classes find these questions very helpful. The 
difficulty with many Classes in the past has been that not 
every one has the teaching ability to draw the information 
of the lessons from the Class. 

Excellent as public preaching is we believe that the Lord's 
people learn more in Berean Classes than by listening to any 



sermon. Thought is stimulated, quickened. 



R5274: page 211 

EVIL-DOERS AND BUSYBODIES 

"But let none of you suffer as. ..an evil-doer, or 

as a busybody in other men's matters."— 1 Peter 4:15. 

ASSUREDLY none of the Lord's people could 
willingly be evil-doers. He who would wilfully 
do evil would not have the Lord's 
Spirit, but that of the Adversary. Such 
being the case, the worst that could be said 
against any of the truly consecrated surely 
would be that he had been overtaken in a 
fault, or that he had some weakness of the 
flesh, or that by the snare of the Adversary 
he had been led into doing something which 
his heart disapproved. But evil deeds, even though unintentional, 
are to be guarded against carefully. "Let none 
of you suffer as an evil-doer"— not one— at any time- 
under any circumstances. 

But now we come to the second part of the Apostle's 
warning— busybodying. The saints seem as liable as 
others to become busybodies and to suffer for so doing. 
We have sometimes thought that the Lord's consecrated 
people are more inclined to be busybodies than are others. 
They have higher standards than others. Their love of 
righteousness is greater than before, and their hatred of 
iniquity is greater. There is continually a temptation, 
therefore, not to be content with minding one's own business, 
but to advise and to seek to regulate everybody and 
everything. 

Of course there is a duty devolving upon every parent 
to inquire more or less into the affairs of his children, or 
of those in any manner under his direct care, for whom 
he is responsible. But even in this he should seek to 
recognize individual rights and privacies, and not allow 
his sense of duty and responsibility to impel him to probe 
into every little matter. A certain reasonable amount 
of responsibility should be thrown upon children, and they 
should have a general idea of what is expected of them. 
They should be required to measure up to that standard, 
unless something positively indicates to the contrary. The 
spirit of busybodying is condemned by the Apostle, and 
all of God's people should be on guard against it. 

Our experience is that busybodying is a fruitful source 
of difficulty in the Church— in all the ecclesias. A clear 
knowledge of Present Truth seems rather to increase this 
difficulty. As in families a wrong feeling often obtains, 
which impels each member to want to know all about the 
affairs of every other member, so in the Church there is 
also a tendency to meddle, to inquire about, to interfere 



in the matters of others— to busybody. In some cases 
there seems to be a disposition to try to hunt up everything 
connected with each other, and to sit in judgment upon 
each other. 

The difficulty is a lack of love. "Love worketh no ill 
to his neighbor." It rejoices not to find flaws; it seeks 
not for them. It surmises no evil— rather it surmises 
good. Let each of the Lord's people judge himself in this 
matter and see to what extent he has been a busybody in 
the affairs of others. Let each decide in his own case 
that the fault, in proportion as he has it, is a lack of the 
spirit of love, and let each in that proportion go to the 
Lord prayerfully, earnestly seeking to be built up in the 
quality of love. 

Well do we know that he who loves not a brother 
whom he has seen has no assurance that he really loves 
God whom he has not seen. We may safely conclude that 
there is some of the gall of bitterness in the heart, if we 
take pleasure in seeking flaws in the flesh of the members 
of the Body of Christ. Their flesh, justified by the Redeemer 
and consecrated, becomes His flesh. Whoever, 
therefore, is a faultfinder and busybody in the affairs of 
the brethren is doing this against the flesh of Jesus. "I 
am Jesus whom thou persecutest."— Acts 9:5; 22:8. 

ENSNARED BY THE ADVERSARY 

Our confidence in the brethren is such that we cannot 
believe that any of them would willingly and intentionally, 
or of preference, take the loveless course of injury. Our 
thought is that the Adversary is on the alert to ensnare 
God's people and to develop in them the spirit of busybodying 
and lovelessness, under the guise of duty, love of 
righteousness, justice, etc. They overlook the fact that 
God neither authorized us to judge one another, nor to 
exact justice from each other. He neither authorized His 
people to chastise each other, nor to punish each other 
in any manner. He has never authorized His people to 
become inquisitors, investigators, busybodies. 

On the contrary, He has told us to "judge nothing 
before the time," and that He will attend to this matter. 
Is it not written, "The Lord will judge His people"? Are 
we afraid that He is incompetent? Shall we attempt to 
be wiser than He? Shall we take into our own hands 
matters which He said that we should leave in His hands? 
If we do so, we shall be sure to get ourselves into difficulty, 
and perhaps get others into difficulty as well. 

Whoever busybodies will suffer. It may be that the 
victim also will suffer and that many will be defiled, but 
we may be sure that the busybodies themselves will not 
escape. The punishment of the busybody in part no doubt 

R5274: page 212 

will be the rupture of his own relationship with God— the 
loss of his own peace and joy and fellowship with the 



Holy Spirit. This will be his reward for busybodying. 

If a brother and a sister in the Church seem to have 
difficulty, mind your own business, and allow them to settle 
the matter between themselves. If they are related as 
parents and children, let them adjust the matter by themselves, 
and learn whatever lessons the Lord as their Judge 
and Teacher will give them. If they are husband and wife, 
the matter is the same. Let them alone. Do not busybody. 
Even if one of them should come to you and ask 
advice, be slow to give it— decline to hear the case— follow 
the Lord's counsel. Advise the one who complains 
that the Lord has given instructions, and that it is not 
your province to interfere— that Matthew 18:15-17 directs 
the course to be pursued. 

See that you have nothing to do with such a case 
unless it come to you directly in line with this arrangement 
which the Lord has provided. Otherwise you are 
busybodying and will make trouble for yourselves and for 
others. If called into the family mix-up, rather regret 
the necessity than be eager to nose into their affairs. Advise 
them first, in the best way you know how, to adjust 
matters between themselves, reminding them of the words 
of Jesus, "That which God hath joined together let no 
man put asunder," and then see that you do nothing to 
put them asunder or to help to complete the separation of 
spirit which already has started. 

Remember that as the Lord's representative you have 
no authority whatever to be in the least a disturber, but 
are commissioned only to be a peacemaker. When you 
are called in, in such a case, try to be just, fair, reasonable, 
in full accord with the Golden Rule in every word that 
you shall utter. Those who may hope to be entrusted with 
the judgment of the world in the future (I Corinthians 6:2) 
must qualify now by a development of a high sense 
of mercy and love, as well as of justice. 

BUSYBODYING AN EVIDENCE OF PRIDE 

But, says one, is it not a part of our duty to help 
keep the Church pure? And in order to do so, should we 
not be on the alert? If, therefore, we see a husband and 
a wife, or a brother and a sister, or parents and children 
out of accord, are we not in duty bound to pry into their 
affairs, in order to see if we cannot set them straight? 

That is exactly the busybody's spirit. We are mentioning 
it because a great many of the Lord's dear people 
who mean the very best do not know what busybodying 
is while they are doing it. Mind your own affairs! If 
you get too busy watching others, the Adversary will take 
advantage of you. So long as the outward conduct of any 
brother or sister is reasonable and fair, Justice and Love 
both say that you should not meddle with them, in the 
sense of trying to mind their business. Content yourself 
with setting them a good example of meekness, faith, 
patience, brotherly-kindness, love. Then if they ever 
need advice, they may voluntarily come to you. And then 



will be your time to show your moderation and to give 

them advice as an oracle of God, in harmony with Matthew 18:15-17 

—and nothing more. 

But, says another, does not St. Paul criticize the 
Church at Corinth because they had in their midst one 
who had grievously sinned? And did he not upbraid the 
Church for their failure to judge and rid themselves of 
such a person? Quite true. But that was a case of open, 
wilful, acknowledged sin, disgraceful to the individual and 
to all with whom he associated. And so it should be 

R5275 : page 212 

today. If any one lives in open sin, and acknowledges it, 
and boasts of it, the case should be promptly taken note 
of by the Church along the lines of Matthew 18:15-18. If 
the erring one still continues in a wrong attitude, in open 
sin, the final step should be his complete separation from 
the Church. Until he has made a complete reform, he 
should be thoroughly disowned by the Church. 

Surely such cases are rare among the Lord's people, 
and equally rare should be the procedure which the 
Apostle suggests for such a case. The Apostle is not 
suggesting inquisition into the past lives of all those who 
constitute the Church of Christ. On the contrary, in one 
of his Epistles he intimates that he knew full well that 
many who were of the Church had at one time been quite 
disreputable characters. He says, "And such were some 
of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye 
are justified, in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the 
Spirit of our God. " —I Corinthians 6:11. 

It is a wholly mistaken idea that any of us is commissioned 
to set everybody else right. It betokens a great 
deal of pride to have such an impression. If some brother 
and sister do not harmonize very well, let them alone. If 
they think it best not to be very intimate, let them alone. 
If they are married, and believe it to be to their best 
interests to live separate, let them alone— mind your own 
business. If there is some secret fault, let them alone. 
"God will judge His people." You have no business to 
meddle with it, unless He gives you some further commission 
than we find in the Scriptures. 



R5275 : page 212 

THE GREATEST THING IN THE UNIVERSE 

PART II-PHILOSOPHY OF THE ATTITUDE OF SYMPATHY 

BE ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, forgiving 
one another, even as God for Christ's 
sake hath forgiven you." "For if ye do not 
forgive those who trespass against you, 
neither will your Father in Heaven forgive 



you." This means that if we would insist 

upon having from others abject acknowledgement 

of everything that is wrong, and 

if we carry this matter of judgment to an 

extreme, it would indicate that our own 

hearts are in a wrong condition. And then the best thing 

that could be done for us by the Lord would be to give us 

some of our own medicine. By this He would be teaching 

us a corrective lesson, that thus we might become sympathetic 

toward others. 

This matter, then, of forgiveness and sympathy toward 
the world, is one that God inculcates or enjoins upon 
His children after they come into His family. And this 
is in order to give us education. "For what son is he 
whom the father correcteth not?" "For if we be without 
chastisement,. ..then are. ..we not sons." These 
lessons are intensified to us as we grow in grace and in 
knowledge.— Hebrews 12:7,8. 

As our knowledge increases, we see how all fell 
through one man's disobedience. And this gives us a 
basis for sympathy. And our sympathy increases as we 
become more mature children of God. God desires this, 
that by the time we are ready to graduate, we will be very 
helpful. This should become the pleasure of our hearts— 
to be sympathetic with our enemies, no matter how they 
treat us. We know that they are doing these things 
because of the Adversary's influence over them. And we 

R5275 : page 213 

should desire to bless them and to do them all the good 

we can. The fact that they have done evil to us should 

not alter our attitude toward them— to do good unto all 

men as we have opportunity, praying for those who despitefully 

use us and persecute us. 

The thought would not be that we should especially 
devote our prayers to our enemies and persecutors, but 
rather that we should pray for them instead of against 
them. Some who are immature in spiritual things might 
think, "I will pray to God to punish them." But Jesus 
says we are not to do that. "Pray for your enemies." 
What shall we ask for them? He does not tell us this. 
The best thing we could ask for them would be that we 
might be used, or useful, if possible, in breaking this 
superstition upon them, that the eyes of their understanding 
might be opened. That is the very best thing we 
could ask for them. We may pray for them along that 
line, and God will bless us. And if it is possible for us to 
be helpful to them, God will show us how to do it. 

JUSTICE FIRST, LOVE FOLLOWED 

God is very great. We are very small. It is a 
wonderful thing to be informed that God loves us! The 
heathen religions seem to recognize nothing of this kind. 
The thought that pervades their votaries is that their gods 



need to be placated, or they will do them injury. And as 
for a God of love— that is a thought peculiar to the teachings 
of the Bible, and this feature of His character is not 
clearly exhibited in the Old Testament Scriptures— in His 
dealings with the Israelites. God manifested most plainly 
His Justice, and allowed the penalty to come upon the 
sinner. We are sure that He loves the angels. But man 
God placed under a ban and sentence. And year by year 
and century by century that sentence was executed. 

Then the proposition was made by the Lord that 
Israel might come back into His favor, if they would keep 
the Law; and it again looked favorable for them. But 
Israel failed. When man became degraded, sick, dying, 
humanity lost their beauty in God's sight. Man lost the 
gem— like qualities that made him pleasing to God. "We 
have all sinned and come short of the glory of God." 

We come down to the New Testament times, and find 
a new thing brought in— a double testimony— that God 
loved the whole world, even while they were sinners, and 
also the testimony that He loves the Church. "God so 
loved the world that He gave His Only Begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have 
everlasting life." The penalty upon mankind was to 
perish, as being unfit to live and enjoy God's blessing. 
God had a sympathetic love for all His creatures who 
were under such condemnation. How was this love 
shown? We make inquiries and find out that the first 
manifestation of His Love was that He gave His Son to 
die for the world. Here He was merely beginning to 
show us how great He is and how great is His Love. 

THE BASIS OF GOD'S LOVE 

The Scriptures assure us that the great difficulty with 
mankind is that they are weak, fallen, ignorant, under 
bonds of superstition and misled by the Adversary. It is 
because God saw that the hearts of humanity are not 
really in that deplorable condition intentionally or deliberately 
that He has provided the way of escape. If we 
were wilfully, intentionally wicked, then the Lord would 
have no sympathy for us at all. When God looks at us as 
a race, He perceives that only very few have any knowledge 
of Him and of His character of Justice, Wisdom, 
Mercy and Love, and of the principles of His Government. 
And so God said, I will see what can be done with these 
creatures; I will make a Plan by which every one of 
them may be recovered through the gift of My beloved 
Son, the Logos. They shall be lifted up out of sin and 
degradation, and it will be the only lesson of the exceeding 
wickedness of sin that they will need throughout eternity. 
I will make the provision broad enough to include Adam 
and all his race. 

THE MANIFESTATION OF GOD'S LOVE 

The first feature of this Plan began to be manifested 



when our Lord Jesus came into the world. So the 
Scriptures say that Christ "brought life and immortality 
to light through the Gospel." What good tidings did He 
bring? Blessings for all of humanity who would seek 
Him in honesty and earnestness of heart! He brought 
the good tidings that all who would manifest their love 
for Him should have eternal life; and that a special class, 
who would manifest special love for the Lord, might become 
heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ His 
Son. "So great salvation began to be spoken by our 
Lord."-2 Tim. 1:10; Heb. 2:3. 

Not all can hear this Message, because some are so 
stupid through the blinding of the Adversary that they 
cannot believe it. To such it is not good tidings at all, 
but foolishness. Such have no ears to hear, the Bible 
says. Others can hear a little, and say that there is one 
chance in a million of escaping eternal torment. Others 
have their eyes and ears more widely open, and these are 
able to hear something, to appreciate something more 
than the majority. The Apostle tells us that "the god of 
this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe 
not."~2 Cor. 4:4. 

Looking back to the days of Jesus we find that, when 
He preached, many of the people delighted to hear His 
words. They said, "Never man spake like this man." 
He told the people that God loved them. And the people 
said, The Scribes and Pharisees will not have anything 
to do with us; but this man loves us and tells us that God 
loves us, that God does not despise even us poor miserable 
sinners! Oh, "never man spake like this man"! 

But their minds not being free, they were not able to 
appreciate all that He said. They thought that this Message 
which He brought them might be fabrication, and 
they dared not believe it. They asked, Have any of the 
Scribes and Pharisees believed and become Jesus' disciples? 
And when they learned that not many of them 
had, they said: Perhaps we are incompetent to judge; 

R5276 : page 213 

these are our leaders, we must follow them. 

But there were some who were able to take in the 
matter more fully. And to these Jesus said, "Blessed are 
your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear." 
Then to these who could see and hear Jesus gave certain 
special lessons applicable to them— and not only to them, 
but to a certain like company, or class, all the way down 
through the Age. He told them that because they manifested 
a responsiveness of heart they were pleasing to 
Him. He told them that in proportion as they would 
make progress in imitating Him, in that same proportion 
they would come into fellowship with the Father and become 
participants in His Love. 

And when some took this step of consecration, Jesus 
told them, "The Father Himself loveth you"— He loves 
you because you have taken a stand for righteousness; 



because when you saw these principles of righteousness 
you were willing to do in accordance therewith. And the 
Father loves you because you are seeking to walk in the 
narrow way— the way which is difficult. The other way 
is a broad way, leading now to death and destruction. 
But this narrow way that I am pointing out to you, My 

R5276 : page 214 

dear disciples, is the way to life. It will cost you a great 
deal to be My disciples. But the Father will love you, 
and I will love you, and We will manifest Ourselves to 
you. And although you will have trials and difficulties 
you will have the peace of God ruling in your hearts. 
Then the disciples said they would leave all to follow Him. 

HOW TO KEEP OURSELVES IN GOD'S LOVE 

The Apostle Jude admonishes, "Keep yourselves in 
the Love of God." Here the Apostle is addressing those 
who have passed from the condition of the world into 
this special love of God— those whom He has brought 
into His family, as His children by adoption, through 
Christ Jesus. God does not love us because we are doing 
great and wonderful things. His special love for us began 
when He begat us, because of the consecration we had 
made— because we had entered into the Covenant of 
Sacrifice. And the Father delights in all those who desire 
to be sealed with His Spirit— who desire to become His 
children. He began thus to love us as babes in Christ, 
and He loves us as we grow stronger, and He will love 
us to the end! 

The Apostle intimates that there is a growth in us. 
We are babes at first, and then children, then young men, 
then more fully developed. As we learn the principles 
of justice which permeate the Heavenly Father's character, 
we are to rejoice in these, and to have no other 
standards before our mind. We are to say, That is our 
Father's instruction, our Father's standard. So we become 
transformed more and more, and all standards other 
than those of the Heavenly Father become more and 
more displeasing to us. 

As we journey along, we need to keep ourselves in 
the Love of God. It is necessary as babes that we should 
keep ourselves in His Love; it is necessary as children; 
it is necessary when still further developed. How can we 
do this? By keeping His commandments. Thus we bring 
the body into subjection to the perfect will of God in 
Christ. Whoever does this finds himself growing. Day 
by day we are to grow and increase and become more 
and more Godlike; so we are more and more transformed 
as the days go by. Thus are we to keep ourselves in 
His Love. 

But if at any time during the race we should drop out 
and cease to cultivate these qualities, cease to be obedient 
to God, then we would cease more and more to have His 



Love, until finally we would cease to be in His Love, and 
the curse, the wrath of God, would abide on us. Thus we 
would be in a far worse condition than at first, because 
in the second case it would be a matter of knowledge, 
whereas in the first case it was a matter of ignorance, 
a matter of heredity. In this worse condition God would 
have no sympathy for us at all. 

Thus it will be with the world in the future, when they 
will be brought in God's providence to a full knowledge 
and full opportunity, when they shall come to understand 
God and His righteousness. If they do not seek to be in 
harmony with Him, they will be destroyed in the Second 
Death. --I Tim. 2:4; Acts 3:22,23. 

OUR HIGHEST AMBITION 

The Lord Jesus said, "This is life eternal, that they 
might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, 
whom Thou hast sent." Our love for God and God's Love 
for us are two different matters, of course. We reverence 
God even before we love Him. We do not know enough 
about Him at first to love Him. We know that we have 
very little power of ourselves, that we are surrounded 
by difficulties here, and that the Adversary has beset us 
on every side. And so this is the beginning of Wisdom, 
that we should have a reverential fear of God. 

As we come to know God more and more, we see that 
He would not wish to do harm to any creature. And as 
we grow in our knowledge of God, our love for Him increases 
accordingly. We grow in our knowledge of 
how much He loves us. We did not know this 
at first. God is not pleased to reveal Himself to any 
except those who have His Spirit; therefore the very 
highest ambition any of us could have would be that we 
might know Him, that we might know more of His wonderful 
Love, His wonderful peace, because to have this 
knowledge draws us nearer to God. As St. Jude says, 
we must continue to keep ourselves in the Love of God. 

Whoever would come to a full knowledge of God must 
first come to an appreciation of His Word and must 
follow a line of obedience such as would enable him to 
love the Lord and to appreciate His Plan. And all things 
working together— love, appreciation, desire to be obedient 
—lead onward and upward to the goal which the Lord has 
set before us. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES GOD'S LOVE 

The expression Word of God is sometimes used when 
speaking of the Bible, and sometimes when meaning a 
message of God. Our allegiance is due to the One from 
whom we have received every good and every perfect 
gift. There is an eminent fitness in the thought that the 
One who has given us life should have our attention to 
His Word, our obedience to it. Some are disposed to be 
self-willed; some disposed to regard the words of man, 



the creeds of man. Such do not pay sufficient attention 
to the Word of God. 

God's Word is the great Standard by which all of His 
people should regulate their lives. We might have some 
thought respecting the Divine Plan, or others might make 
suggestions to us respecting God's will. But any suggestions, 
whether from ourselves or others, are all to be 
subject to investigation in the light of God's Word. Of 
course, we are first to ascertain that the claim of the Bible 
to be the Word of God is supported by really good evidence; 
then we are also to notice whether various portions 
are interpolations, or additions, that we may have the 
Word of God as pure as possible. But having found the 
Word of God, we should keep it, in the sense of reverencing 
it and obeying it. We should strive to regulate 
our lives and all of our doings by that Word. Whoso 
keepeth God's Word will as a result find that God's Love 
is perfected in Him.— I John 2:5. 

The question then arises, What is God's Love? and in 
what sense can it be perfected in us? The Apostle John 
evidently refers to that love which is most perfectly represented 
in God— that love which is pure, free from all 
selfishness, from all stain— God's Love, because it is the 
right principle, the very underlying principle of His character. 
And all those who are keeping God's Word must 
have the same kind of love that He has. 

At first we had a duty love. We knew that God had 
done great things for us, for which we should be very 
thankful. There was a debt of obligation on us in that 
respect. Then, too, we loved God because He has indicated 
that He will give His favor to those who love 
Him. Therefore a measure of selfishness would be in our 
love for a time. But we believe it is possible for us to 
have this perfect love of God. If it were perfect works 
of the flesh that were required, we might doubt our ability 
to have perfection. But since it is a matter of the 
heart, it is possible for us to attain it; for we can be pure 
in heart. So as our hearts become more and more free 

R5276 : page 215 

from selfishness and sin, more and more will this proper, 
high standard of Love be appreciated by us and perfected 
in us. Our minds will be influenced by this Love; and all 
of our conduct, our thoughts, will come under the same 
regulation. 

To have, then, this Love of God perfected in us, would 
seem to indicate that we would have the very highest ideal 
—that we love as God loves. We love our neighbor— we 
realize that he has certain rights which we are glad to 
respect. We would rather help our neighbors forward 
than to do anything which might hinder their progress in 
any way. God is not an envious, jealous, hateful God, 
but the God of Love. God is the true God, and not the 
one who is set up in our creeds. 

As we appreciate the Word of God, it gives us the 



necessary instruction and guidance. All sin is selfishness, 
and all selfishness is sin. As the child of God comes to 
see the character of God more clearly, as he is desirous 
of being taught of God, he will come under the influence 
of God's Spirit. And he will study the Word and get 
clearer insight into it. Thus we grow in the knowledge 
of God. It is a progressive matter. God wishes all of 
His intelligent creatures to be animated by the spirit of 
His Word— Love. 

LOVE BASED ON FAITH 

We see that the love above described would not be a 
love based on ignorance. On the contrary, it is a love 
based on a clear knowledge of God, on an undissembled 
faith, a faith fully appreciating what He has said. For 
instance, one might have a certain love for God, and by 

R5277 : page 215 

and by a clearer understanding of God's character might 
shake that kind of love. God's intention is that mankind 
shall understand His arrangements thoroughly; and if 
they then appreciate His character, they will have the 
undissembled faith, and a love that appreciates all the 
features of His Plan. 

We all see that in our experiences God gives us instruction 
respecting Himself. As we come to know Him, 
and to love Him because we know Him, we are proportionately 
getting this faith in Him of the undissembled 
kind. It is a faith based on a knowledge of God's character 
and Plan. An angel may be said to have faith— 
a well rounded out faith. "The Father seeketh such to 
worship Him as worship Him in spirit and in truth." And 
God wishes that all of His intelligent creatures shall worship 
Him from this standpoint of undissembled faith— 
a faith that is genuine, a faith that is well rounded out, 
knitted together, a consistent faith. Therefore God wishes 
to have all men come to the knowledge of the Truth.— 
I Tim. 2:4. 

God's arrangement is that we first make use of what 
truth we have, and thus have more appreciation; then 
more knowledge, and then more appreciation. A well 
rounded out knowledge is not yet possessed by any except 
the Church, and we do not have full knowledge. But it 
is God's will that we shall all come to an appreciation of 
the Truth. It is not to be merely a knowledge, but a full 
entering into it that we may the more appreciate it. "This 
is life eternal, that they might know Thee," that we should 
become personally and intimately acquainted with the 
Lord. In order to this, it is necessary that we apply 
our hearts to this Wisdom, that we grow in grace, grow 
in knowledge, that we may know His Love. 

This will also be the procedure in the next Age. The 
object of Christ's Kingdom will be to bring mankind to 
a full, clear appreciation of God's character. Such as 



attain this and sympathetically enjoy God's character will 
appreciate the principles of Justice, Love and Mercy 
represented in Him. Only as one appreciates these qualities 
in his own heart can he appreciate them in God. 
Only those who appreciate them will have everlasting life. 
Even though such should enjoy the full thousand years, 
they still might not be of the class to whom God would 
give everlasting life. 

THE END OF THE LAW IS LOVE 

It is not merely faith that is necessary— not even the 
well rounded out faith— there must be a pure heart also. 
We could not get the well rounded faith unless we had 
a pure heart. A pure heart would be a fully consecrated 
heart— the whole mind given up to the Lord's will. Such 
a condition is necessary before we can enter into and 
make progress in the Lord's way. God would not accept 
us at all unless we had love and purity of heart. And 
even more than this is necessary. We must maintain it 
with a good conscience. Our consciences must be able 
to say, "I have not only a good wish respecting the right, 
but I have good endeavors." We should not only be able 
to say, "I did right," but our consciences should be able 
to say, "I did the very best I was able to do." Anything 
short of this would not be pleasing to God. 

So, then, the end, or intention, of the Divine Law is 
to develop in us this love— a love fully consecrated to the 
Lord, a love like His, a love that will be in accord with 
a good conscience and an undissembled faith— a faith that 
is well founded on the teachings of God's Word, a faith 
that is anxious to know God's will, and that searches the 
Scriptures and delights in God's Law, and that can say 
as the Psalmist has expressed it prophetically, "I delight 
to do Thy will, O my God!" 

A man may discern the principle of justice and say, 
"There is the standard one must go by." Another sees 
love, and says, "There is the best standard! Is not that 
grand? I wish to conform to that fully!" A third recognizes 
that perfection is the standard of the Divine Law, 
and having consecrated himself unreservedly to do the 
will of God, says, "Thy Law, O God, is my delight." This 
one delights in God's Justice, he delights in God's Love. 
He sees more than merely, Thou shalt, and Thou shalt 
not. He sees things from God's standpoint. He sees the 
principles of God's character which govern the universe. 
So all who will ever come to an appreciation of everlasting 
life must learn to view matters from the standpoint 
of Love. 



R5287 : page 215 

WATCH AND PRAY! 



Watch and pray, the storm clouds hover over, 

Fierce billows gather near with threat'ning shock; 

Watch and pray, no harm can e'er come nigh thee 
If thou art safely anchored to the Rock. 

Watch and pray, the powers of night and darkness 
Determine to engulf thee in their sway; 

But swift the answer cometh from our Tower, 

"I still am with thee, loved one— watch and pray." 

Watch and pray, temptations round thee gather, 
Cling to the Rock— its shelter hideth thee. 

Tho' thousands fall, thou'rt safe if thou art watching, 
Safe, in its shelter, from the angry sea. 

Watch and pray, trust fully, thou wilt never 
Be swept away, then, by the seething foam. 

A little while, the storms will all be over, 

Then, child, a loving God will take thee Home. 
-W. H. BUNDY. 



R5277 : page 216 

CROSSING THE RED SEA 

-AUGUST 17.-EXODUS 14:19-31.- 

"Before they call, I will answer."— Isaiah 65:24. 

THE Bible story of Israel's miraculous crossing 
of the Red Sea, which later overwhelmed 
the Egyptian army, has long been 
questioned by agnostics, who also question 
the large number ascribed to the Israelites 
-600,000 men, implying a total of 2,000,000 
or more. However, the Bible finally is 
triumphing. Mistranslations and failure 
properly to interpret figures of speech were 
the basis of our misunderstandings. 

Prof. Flinders Petrie calls attention to the fact that 
the Hebrew word alaf is used in the Scriptures sometimes 
to mean a thousand and at other times to signify a 
group, families, or tents, very much in the same way that 
we use the word regiment as signifying a group of a 
thousand men, yet often far less in number, especially 
after a battle. Thus understood, the record, "Judah 
74,600," would read, "Judah, seventy-four families, or 
tents, with six hundred men in all"; "so they set forward, 
every one after their families, according to the house of 
their fathers."— Num. 2:34. 

Thus reckoned, the entire hosts of the Israelites who 
left Egypt— men, women and children— might be estimated 
at about 30,000. Even this was a goodly host to be 
the descendants of Jacob in but little more than two 



centuries. That the Israelites were very prolific was 
evidenced by the Egyptian decree which sought to destroy 
their children, fearful that eventually they would 
outnumber the Egyptians. 

NECESSITY OF THE MIRACLES 

A miracle is not necessarily a violation of a law 
of Nature. A wonder, an unusual occurrence, indicating 
an interposition of Divine Power in human affairs, 
would be a miracle, even though it conformed to natural 
laws. God rarely works miracles except where there is 
a necessity. 

Three roads led out of Egypt in the direction of Palestine; 
but as a military wall extended from the Mediterranean 
Sea to the Red Sea to protect against invading 
armies, these roads had access into Egypt only through 
strong and guarded iron gates. 

One of these roads led through the country of the 
Philistines, to pass through which so large a body of 
people would have been prohibited. The second road led 
through a sandy desert and would have been entirely unsuitable, 
furnishing no provender nor water. The third 
road was the one which the Israelites took, leading 
through the wild mountain regions of Sinai, where they 
found pasturage. 

After the death of Egypt's first-borns and the beginning 
of Israel's Exodus, several days elapsed before they 
reached the Red Sea. Meantime, Pharaoh and his people 
had measurably received from their mourning. Pharaoh 
perceived that the Israelites, while given the opportunity 
of leaving Egypt, had wandered about as though undecided 
which road to take. He concluded that they would 
be weary of their new freedom and their travelling, and 
that it would be an easy matter to bring them back. The 
gates of the wall were ordered closed, and several hundred 
chariots and footmen were sent to pursue. 

Meantime, the Israelites had passed between two 
mountain ranges, up against the northern arm of the Red 
Sea— the Gulf of Suez. Apparently the Israelites had 
gone into a pen, from which there was no escape. Divine 
providence arranged that a heavy pillar of cloud, or fog, 
hovered over the camp of the Egyptians, while there was 
a bright light in the camp of the Israelites. Thus the 
Egyptians were delayed, and the Israelites moved on until 
they came to the Sea, and beheld that they were hemmed 
in. Then they cried to the Lord and to Moses, discouraged, 
requesting to be permitted to return to Egyptian 
bondage. They favored a surrender on good terms rather 
than a conflict. 

But the word of the Lord through Moses was that 
the people should be of good courage, and that soon they 
would see that Jehovah God would bring them deliverance 
from their troubles and from their enemies. Meantime, 
the wind had begun to blow from the north, and 
gradually the waters receded to the southward, uncovering 



a ledge and sand bar, upon which the Israelites 

crossed to the other side. The befogged Egyptians followed 

them, possibly without realizing that they were 

passing on land usually covered by water. 

As they progressed into the moist sand, the Egyptians 
experienced fresh difficulties. Chariot wheels became 
clogged, horses went more slowly, then balked, wheels 
broke, etc., until the Egyptians began to reason the matter 
out and decided that, in the figurative language of 
that time, God had looked upon them with an evil eye 
out of the pillar of cloud. Possibly there was some manifestation, 
such as a lightning flash. They concluded to 
turn backward and give up the chase. Meantime, the 
direction of the wind had changed, and it was now coming 
from the south. Before they could extricate themselves, 
the water was upon them; they were in a quagmire, 
and were soon overwhelmed. 

R5278 : page 216 

There is nothing in this account to stagger faith. The 
United States Government Reports show that the waters 
of Lake Erie have varied as much as fifteen feet at 
Toledo, by reason of the change of wind, and without 
any special hurricane. The thing that has staggered our 
faith in the past was the statement that the Sea constituted 
a wall on either side of the Israelites as they 
crossed over. But the word wall in its broadest sense 
merely signifies barricade. In the same sense we might 
say that the United States has the Atlantic Ocean as a 
protective wall on one side and the Pacific Ocean on the 
other. 

Thus we see that if the Bible is interpreted with a 
little common sense it is entirely reasonable. More and 
more Bible students are learning not only of its reasonableness, 
but also of its wealth of riches of knowledge 
and wisdom from on High. 

THE ANGEL OF THE LORD 

The cloudy pillar, or mist, which gave light to the 
Israelites at night, but darkness to the Egyptians, is 
spoken of as being the Angel of the Lord, or as though 
the Angel of the Lord were in it. We are to bear in 
mind, however, the broad meaning of the word angel. It 
signifies messenger. In general, spirit beings are Jehovah's 
messengers in human affairs. Sometimes, however, 
human beings are His messengers, as for instance, 
the Apostle declares that all of God's consecrated people 
are God's ambassadors, ministers, servants. 

But the word angel is Scripturally used in a still 
broader sense— as signifying the exercise of Divine Power 
in connection with human affairs. Thus St. Paul 
writes that God "maketh His angels spirits, and His 
ministers a flame of fire." (Heb. 1:7.) Thus, for instance, 
the messenger of the Lord smote the army of Sennacherib 



with death, as this lesson recounts that Pharaoh's 
army was smitten. 
It matters little whether the Scriptures refer to the 

R5278 : page 217 

forces used as being the angel of the Lord, or whether 

they mean that the angel of the Lord had charge of and 

used the forces which operated. The effect would be the 

same in either case. God's Power would be equally manifested, 

whether directly through the elements of nature or 

through the intermediary of a spirit being, commanding 

the forces of nature in the name and power of Jehovah. 

There are valuable lessons for the Christian in connection 
with the manifestations of Divine Power on behalf 
of typical Israel. These lessons suggest that the 
same God is no less willing and no less able to deliver 
the Spiritual Israelites from their bondage to sin and 
Satan, and is no less able to provide a way of escape, even 
through bloody seas of difficulties. 

There is a lesson, also, for us in respect to the interpretation 
of God's Word. As we see it beginning more 
and more to open up unto us with clearness, simplicity, 
beauty, let it increase our faith in God and in the revelations 
which He has made through the Prophets of old, 
as well as through the words of Jesus and the inspired 
Apostles. 

As God had already arranged Israel's affairs before 
they knew about their difficulties, and perceived that they 
were hemmed in on every side, so the same God foreknows 
all of our difficulties and has arrangements made 
for our relief and deliverance, and is merely waiting for 
us to appreciate the situation and to cry unto Him in 
faith. "Before they call, I will answer." Another 
thought is, sometimes we come to the very end of all 
human possibilities. Then, and not till then, should we 
apply the words of Moses to ourselves: "Stand still, and 
see the salvation of Jehovah." 



R5278 : page 217 

THE MANNA FROM HEAVEN 

--AUGUST 24.-EXODUS 16:2-15.- 

"Jesus said unto them, I am 
the Bread of Life."— John 6:35. 

REALIZING their deliverance from bondage, 
and the Divine Power exercised in their behalf 
in the overthrow of the Egyptian army, 
the Israelites were joyful. Moses, their 
great leader, composed a poem of much 
force and beauty and of recognized high 



standard. The men chanted it after Moses; 

and the women, under the leadership of 

Miriam, the sister of Moses and Aaron, 

took timbrels, or tambourines, and joined in a refrain, or 

chorus, their bodies swaying and their feet moving 

rhythmically in what is described as a dance: 

"Sing ye to the LORD [Jehovah]; 

For He hath triumphed gloriously." 
Singing songs of praise constitutes one of the most 
interesting and most profitable methods of worship. But 
we may be sure that they are acceptable to God only as 
they come from the heart and truly represent its sentiments. 
We fear, alas, that many hymns, like many prayers, 
never go higher than the heads of the offerers; indeed, 
we have sometimes feared that careless, irreverent 
singing might really be resented by the Lord as profanity 
—taking His holy name in vain. If so, the results would 
be of course the very reverse of a blessing, and that in 
proportion as the singer comprehended the impiety of 
his course. "The Lord will not hold him guiltless that 
taketh His name in vain." 

We do not mean by this that any unjust or cruel 
torments, future or present, would be the penalty, but we 
do believe that such a course reacts upon the irreverent 
heart to make it colder, more indifferent, and less susceptible 
to the influence of the Divine Message of grace. 
Ah! if all Christians sang with the spirit and with the 
understanding also, and if none others sang hymns, the 
earthly sounds might be more discordant than they are; 
but their Heavenly echoes and fragrance would be the 
more acceptable to God. 

BITTER WATERS, THEN AN OASIS 

The journey toward the Land of Promise began. At 
length, fatigued and thirsty, they came to a fertile spot, 
where there was an abundance of water, but alas, it was 
bitter, or brackish! The disappointment was great. The 
song of reverence was forgotten; the mighty power of 
Jehovah in bringing them through the Red Sea was forgotten; 
even the taskmasters of Egypt were forgotten. 
The people murmured against Moses for bringing them 
away from the fertile fields of Egypt and its abundance 
of good water. They declared that it would have been 
better if they had remained in Egypt, or even if they had 
died there. They declared that Moses and Aaron had 
misled them into leaving the land of plenty, and had 
brought them into the wilderness, to die there of hunger 
and thirst. 

The Lord's Wisdom guided Moses to a certain kind of 
tree, which, put into the water, made it sweet and palatable. 
Moses explained to the people that in murmuring 
against him they were really murmuring against God, 
for he was merely God's agent in the matter. A further 
journey for a season, and they were far from the bitter 
waters— at Elim, a delightful spot, where they rested 



and were refreshed. 

The Scriptures explain that God had a special purpose 
and object in this leading of Natural Israel. He was 
teaching them lessons which would be helpful to them 
and, if rightly received, would prepare them, through 
faith and obedience, for Canaan. "And thou shalt remember 
all the way which the Lord thy God led thee 
these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, to 
prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether 
thou wouldstkeep His commandments, or no."— 
Deut. 8:2. 

The lesson to Spiritual Israel is a still more important 
one. If the Natural Israelites needed heart development 
and faith as a preparation for the earthly Canaan, how 
much more do Spiritual Israelites require for the Heavenly 
Canaan, toward which they journey from the time 
they leave Egypt— the world, and its bondage to sin! 
Can we wonder, then, that God permits many trying experiences 
to come to Spiritual Israel— trials of faith and 
of patience, "bitter waters"? 

Any saint of God may have tears in the trying experiences 
of the journey in the narrow way, but none is excusable 
for murmuring. Rather, each should say with 
the Master, "The cup which My Father hath poured for 
me, shall I not drink it?" To those who approach the 
springs of bitterness with the proper faith in God as did 
Moses, the Lord makes known precious promises, which 
"Steal the Bitter from Life's Woes." 

As the Israelites were led from the bitter waters to 
Elim and its rest and shade, so God's Spiritual Israel are 
not tempted and tried above what they are able to bear. 
With every temptation the Lord provides a way of escape, 
when frequently He revives the souls of His saints 

R5279 : page 218 

by granting them seasons of refreshing and comfort, preparing 
them for their trials in the wilderness state of the 
present life.— I Corinthians 10:11-13. 

"IT IS WHAT?"-IT IS MANNA 

When the Israelites murmured against God and 
Moses, His mouthpiece and servant, it was because of 
insufficient faith. Those who truly believed in the Divine 
providences which had preserved them from the plagues 
of Egypt, and which had brought them out across the 
Red Sea, would reason assuredly that God would not 
leave them to starve in the wilderness. But the majority 
evidently were murmuring through a lack of faith. 

And so it is today. As St. Paul declares, "All men 
have not faith." We do not blame them for this. Evidently 
conditions of environment or heredity have very 
much to do with our possibilities along the line of faith. 
Some by birth, early training and larger experiences 
have therefore a great advantage over others, so far as 



the present Age is concerned; for God has ordained that 
the Message of the present time shall be for those who 
have the ear of faith. "He that hath an ear to hear, let 
him hear." Whoever has an ear for God's Message and 
can exercise faith has a great blessing, in the sense of an 
opportunity which others do not have— an opportunity of 
making his calling and election sure under the call of 
this Gospel Age. 

We thank God that His Word teaches of an Age to 
come, wherein Messiah will bless with precious opportunities 
those who have not the ear to hear and a responsive 
heart in the present time. We thank God that 
His Word expressly declares that in that coming Age, the 
Millennial Age, all the blind eyes shall be opened and all 
the deaf ears shall be unstopped. Then will be fulfilled 
the Scripture that Jesus is the true Light which must 
eventually lighten every man that cometh into the world. 
(John 1:9.) But the opportunities of the Millennial Age 
will not make possible so high a blessing as the High 
Calling of this Age sets before whoever has the ears to 
hear and the eyes to see it. 

In answer to the murmuring of the Israelites, God 
sent them that same night a great quantity of quail. If 
they had hungered for the flesh pots of Egypt, they 
should see that God was able to give them flesh in the 
wilderness. One of the accounts of this wonderful supply 
of quail has been found fault with by some agnostics 
who thought that it meant that the quails covered the 
entire ground to a depth of nearly five feet. The explanation 
is that quail, flying across the Gulf of Suez, in 
their weariness flew close to the ground— within about 
five feet— and thus were easily captured by the Israelites 
in great numbers. 

God promised that on the following day the Israelites 
should have plenty of bread. In the morning the ground 
was covered with small particles, whitish in appearance, 
a little larger than mustard seed and tasting like a honey 
wafer. This was to be their daily supply. It required 
gathering; and this gave them all employment, without 
which they would not have been happy. It required preparation. 
There was a certain amount apportioned to each 
individual. 

A lesson of generosity went with the manna; for 
whatever portion was kept over to the following day corrupted. 
Nothing of the kind was known to the Israelites; 
and they asked, "What is it?" and this became its 
name— "What is it"— or "that manna." The gathering 
of it helped them to remember the Sabbath also, for none 
fell on the Sabbath, but a double portion on the day preceding, 
and what was kept over that night did not corrupt. 

THE BREAD FROM HEAVEN 

Jesus reminded His followers of that manna given in 
the wilderness, and declared that it typified Himself, the 
true Bread. As the Israelites would have perished without 



food, so the Spiritual Israelites would not have sufficient 
strength for the journey without the Heavenly food. 
Jesus gave Himself the title of the Truth. Whoever 
therefore eats of this Bread from Heaven partakes of 
the Truth. "Sanctify them through Thy Truth; Thy 
Word is Truth." Only by partaking largely, regularly, 
daily, of our Lord, His merit and His gracious arrangements 
for us, can we become strong in Him, and prosecute 
the journey faithfully and enter into the spiritual 
Canaan. 

As every Israelite was required to gather manna for 
himself, so each Christian is required to gather and appropriate 
the Truth. We must do our own part along 
spiritual lines, as well as along earthly lines. The graces 
of the Holy Spirit cannot be expected to come to perfection 
without preparatory planting, pruning, cultivating. 
Some one has well said, "Rooming at a college does not 
make a scholar, nor occupying a pew in church make a 
Christian." To grow strong in the Lord and in the power 
of His might, we must feed upon Him daily— we must 
appreciate and appropriate the merits of His sacrifice. 



R5279 : page 218 

CONVENTION-TRAIN REPORT 

BROTHER DR. JONES, with his Special Train 

of Conventioners, starting from Chicago, 

stopping at St. Louis and at Hot Springs, 

received the Editor most cordially at Hot 

Springs, Ark. The conventioners numbered 

240 and represented thirty-four States. 

Some of them we had previously met, 

others we knew by correspondence; but almost 

without exception they were brethren 

in Christ and consecrated Bible Students. 

Nearly all of them paid their own way; while a few, we 

understand, have been financed by their friends or relatives 

in order to give them the spiritual opportunities of 

this Convention Tour, as well as physical rest. 

From Hot Springs the party went south to Texas. The 
Editor saw them at the different meetings and greeted 
them there with others, and also had a nod or a word with 
some occasionally on the train. But his time was occupied 
with literary work, in which he was assisted by two 
brethren who are stenographers. 

Dallas, Texas, June 8, was our next stop. Here, also, 
we had a hearty reception from the Bible Students' Class. 
The morning and evening services were for the Bible 
Students, and proved interesting. The Auditorium was 
well filled— capacity about 500. The afternoon service 
for the public at the Opera House was also well attended, 
notwithstanding hot weather and rain. Attendance 1,200, 
interest good, applications for more literature, 54. 



San Antonio, Texas, June 9.— The entire morning was 
devoted to testimony, symposiums, etc. The Editor addressed 
the interested in the afternoon, to the number 
of about 500. In the evening his public address was 
heard by about 1,300, ninety-two of whom manifested interest 
and desired further reading matter. Altogether the 
Special Train Conventioners had a happy day here, one 
long to be remembered, and their number was increased 
by two at this place. Thence we sped onward to— 

El Paso, Texas, June 1 1.— There are very few Bible 
Students here. We trust that the number will be greatly 
increased shortly. The public attendance was estimated 

R5279 : page 219 

at 1,700, of whom 156 left their addresses requesting 

more reading matter along the lines of the subject discussed, 

which was, "BEYOND THE GRAVE." 

At Tucson, Arizona, June 12, by special request of the 
local Board of Trade, our Convention Committee had arranged 
for us to stay over one day at this thriving little 
city. When the invitation was extended, it was with the 
expectation that the local ministers would give us the 
"glad hand"; but when it was not forthcoming, and on 
the contrary, opposition was made, the business men advised 
us that they thought it unwise to have a public 
address. They did, however, treat us most cordially, and 
showed our entire party around the city in automobiles. 

Meantime, also, the Conventioners, by a distribution of 
literature, got the Message all over the place; and the literature 
informed the public as to why the ministers were 
opposed; namely, because they feared the truth of the 
Bible coming in contact with the errors of their creeds. 
We have reason for believing that some good will come, 
having done our best. The results are with the Lord, 
and we left, well contented. 

At Los Angeles, June 13, where a five-days' Convention 
of Bible Students had been arranged, the Convention 
was already in session when our party arrived. The 
People's Temple was over-crowded, capacity about 1,000. 
The Editor spoke twice, once to the Bible Students, 
numbering 1,000, and once to the public in general. The 
audience at the public service was estimated at 4,000. 
Splendid attention was given, and 475 requests for further 
literature were handed in. The local class of Bible 
Students has been growing considerably within the last 
year. The old friends and the new gave our party a 
hearty welcome. 

San Diego, California, June 14.— Here, as at Hot 
Springs, the ministers made an attack endeavoring to 
prevent our meeting; but here also the Lord raised up 
for us friends amongst the public, who reproved the ministers 
for their unchristian course and Dark Ages' methods. 
The Mayor and a company of business men received 
us cordially, and took us about their city in autocars. 
We appreciated their hospitality and cheerfully 



acknowledged that their city has fine prospects, amongst 
others one of the best harbors on the Pacific and their 
climate par excellence. 

We had interesting meetings with the Bible Students 
here, and a fine public meeting, attendance at which was 
estimated at 2,000. There were 199 addresses handed in, 
expressing interest and desiring reading matter. We believe 
that some of the prejudice has been broken down. 
The public came out freely, notwithstanding an attack 
made by the ministers through a local newspaper. The 
Lord raised up a defender who answered the malicious 
slanders of the ministers, which were merely rehashes 
from the Eagle. This reply published in the same paper 
the next day, we trust offset the evil intended. Additionally, 
the Train Conventioners circulated freely the 
special issue of the Bible Students Monthly which explains 
the attitude of the ministers, and which is circulated 
only in places where there are evidences of a concerted 
endeavor to prejudice the public. 

Santa Ana, June 15, came next— a Sunday morning 
service. The principal Opera House here had been engaged 
for our use; but somebody had influence enough to 
have the building condemned as unsafe, although it had 
never previously been thought unsafe, even when crowded 
to the limit. The friends surmised that this was a strategic 
move on the part of the ministers to prevent our 
meeting— to prevent Bible Students from calling the attention 
of the public to the real teaching of God's Word. 
However, since the Lord was pleased to allow the meeting, 
the Bible Students were quite content, and took the 
next best auditorium available. It was crowded beyond 
its capacity— 1,200— while an overflow meeting of several 
hundred Bible Students was held in another building. 
There were 200 addresses handed in, expressing interest 
and requesting literature. 

Pasadena was reached the same afternoon. Its theater 
capacity was crowded, 1,300 being present, with 
splendid interest. Here 183 addresses for literature were 
handed in. 

San Francisco was our next stop. Here a three-days' 
Convention was in progress. The Train Conventioners 
participated during the day of our stop, Monday, June 
16. The Editor addressed the Bible Students in one semi-public 
service. Approximately, 700 were present. Then 
came the evening meeting for the public, with an estimated 
attendance of 4,000, and 408 requests for more 
literature. 

Tuesday, June 17, was spent in journeying from San 
Francisco to Portland, Oregon. We had no opportunity 
for public service, but had the pleasure of meeting a 
goodly group of Bible Students at Ashland. The train 
remained there fifteen minutes. The friends were on the 
platform awaiting its arrival. They loaded us with 
flowers and good wishes. Some of their number journeyed 
with us to the next station, bidding us Godspeed. 
They sang to us and we to them, "God be with you till 



we meet again." 

Portland, Oregon, June 18.— Here we found the Bible 
Students quite alert, and growing both in numbers and in 
spirituality. We had an enjoyable meeting with the 
Bible Students, exhorting them to love and loyalty, and 
held up before them the cross and the great reward promised 
to those who overcome. The attendance was approximately 
500. Then came the evening service for the public. 
Notwithstanding a heavy rain storm, the audience 
numbered about 3,500 and gave good attention, 271 leaving 
their addresses, requesting further literature. 

Tacoma, Washington, June 19.— More brethren, more 
fellowship, more encouragement, fresh manifestations of 
love and zeal, an excellent meeting with the interested, a 
splendidly attended public meeting— 1,800; 275 gave in 
their addresses, as indicating interest and a desire for 
further literature. 

Seattle, June 20.— The Seattle class of Bible Students 
appear to be making good progress, not only in numbers, 
but also in development of the fruits and graces of the 
Holy Spirit. Here, also, we had a very enjoyable season 
with the friends, giving them one address. The attendance 
at the public address in the afternoon represented 
the capacity of the theater, including the stage— 2,300. 
Requests for further literature from the interested numbered 
283. 

Victoria, B.C., June 21.— Here we had more good 
times with the Bible Students with an attendance of 500. 
Then came the evening service, with an estimated attendance 
of 1,000. The Bible Students gave place to the public, 
and assembled in another building, as an overflow 
meeting. The interested strangers to the number of 156 
left their addresses, requesting further literature. 

Vancouver, B.C., June 22.— We had a grand time 
here. The Spirit of the Lord operating in the Canadian 
mind gives blessed fruitage, similar to that found elsewhere. 
An all-day program had been arranged. We 
were met at the boat-landing and escorted to the place of 
meeting, where a public address of welcome was given. 
To this we responded, assuring the brethren of our appreciation 
of their cordial welcome and of our realization 

R5280 : page 220 

that by the same spirit all the Lord's people have been 
buried in the one Body— the Body of Christ, the "Church 
of the First-borns," whose names "are written in 
Heaven." Then came a testimony meeting with further 
addresses. 

The afternoon service was for the public. The attendance 
was estimated at 4,500, but other hundreds of 
late-comers were turned away; for, owing to the construction 
of the building, the late-comers would have disturbed 
the others by reason of the noise of their shoes. The 
audience was especially fine and the attention excellent. 
Addresses to the number of 224 were handed in requesting 



further literature. 

When it is remembered that the majority of the meetings 
here noted were held on week-days, the attendance 
surely indicated that the people had not lost their interest 
in the Bible and in religion, and that the falling off in 
the general Church attendance is therefore properly 
chargeable to another cause. We believe that the decrease 
in Church attendance, of which we hear so much, 
is chargeable to the fact that the public have lost their 
faith, as well they might, in the creeds of the Dark Ages. 
They are receiving no spiritual food. When the ministers 
preach to them along the lines of sociology, or astronomy, 
or science, the pews, as well educated and as well informed 
along these lines as are the pulpiteers, care little 
for the minister's dissertation. 

Oh, that the ministers of today, instead of feeling 
angry against the Truth and fighting it, would investigate 
it thoughtfully and prayerfully! Then indeed they 
would be a power in the earth, in this, our wonderful 
day, in which God is sending out His Light and Truth 
to be the guide of His people, to guide them to His Holy 
Hill— the Kingdom of Messiah! What a power these 
ministers might be, if backed by the truth of God's Word! 

How pitiable it seems that men so well equipped 
would be not only useless as respects the advancement of 
Christ's cause, but be really the leaders of the opposition 
thereto— ignorantly serving the Prince of Darkness! All 
the more, however, the Truth must be spoken. The 
shackles of the creeds of error must be broken. The 
beauty of the Truth must be exhibited; for it is the Power 
of God for the calling and electing and perfecting of the 
Bride class to be the Lamb's Wife. 

But while we must oppose the error, and must uncover 
its very foundations in our efforts to "show forth the 
praises of Him who called us out of darkness into His 
marvelous light," nevertheless, let us all the more speak 
the Truth in love, without harshness, without personalities. 
Our dear brethren are deluded, deceived, not 
intentionally opposing the Truth, we believe. How glad 
we shall be for the day when the great Adversary, who 
deceived us all and is still deceiving so many, will be 
bound for a thousand years, as promised!— Rev. 20:1-3. 

WORDS OF CAUTION 

This may be as good an opportunity as any for a few 
words of caution. We are all in danger of going to extremes, 
and all should remember the Apostle's words, 
"Let your moderation be known unto all." At one place 
we found that a spirit of antagonism had been aroused 
by means of immoderate statements on the part of a few. 
They had suggested that Brother Russell and his writings 
are divinely inspired, as were the Apostles of old. What 
a great mistake! No wonder such statements were resented! 
When asked if such were our opinion, we 
promptly assured the dear friends to the contrary. 



The view we have always presented, and still hold, is 
that the Lord Jesus appointed only twelve Apostles, St. 
Paul being the one to take Judas' place. The words of 
these would be so supervised by Divine Power that whatsoever 
they would declare binding on earth, the Church 
would know would be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever 
they would declare on earth to be loosed or not binding, 
they might know would not be obligatory in the sight of 
Heaven. In other words, those twelve Apostles were the 
special mouthpieces of the Lord to His Church. They 
still speak to us. We need no others; we expect no others. 

The most we have ever claimed for our own presentations, 
written or oral, is that they are in line with the 
words of the Apostles, that they harmonize with them— 
that we keep so close to the words of the Apostles and 
the words of our Lord that our Message may be said to 
be their Message, except in respect to the particular words 
used and the arrangement of them. In the STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES we have classified the various presentations 
of Jesus, the Apostles and Prophets into different 
studies or topics; and this is what we meant when we 
declared in an old WATCH TOWER that, on this account, 
whoever reads the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES is really 
reading the Bible in an arranged form— topically. In no 
case have we ever presented anything as of ourself. In 
every instance we have fastened our presentations to the 
Scriptures on which they depend and rest. 

Our claim has been, and is, that because we are living 
in the dawn of the New Dispensation, it is the Divine will 
that the Mystery of God should now be finished, in the 
sense of reaching a completion, or unfolding. This we 
hold comes to us, not through special inspiration to speak 
or to write new things, but by the promised guidance of 
the Holy Spirit, enlightening us and directing us to the 
Lord's Word, and assisting us to see the proper application 
of the same. The wonderful light of our day upon 
every subject undoubtedly inures to these ends. 

Because it is due time, the Lord would send the light 
to His people, and as usual, would send it through some 
earthly instrumentality. If, in the Divine providence, we 
have been used or shall be used of the Lord, it will be in 
making clear the sayings of inspiration already written, 
and not in making any new revelations or prophecies. 

We take this opportunity, also, to guard the dear 
friends against the report that we are making any different 
presentations by letter than we have made in THE 
WATCH TOWER and the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. If 
any claim to have such letter, ask to see the letter, and 
refuse to receive as from me anything contradictory to 
the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and THE WATCH TOWER. 
If we ever see it necessary to make changes, we will preferably 
do this in public print rather than in private letters 
or in private conversation. Let us stick to the written 
Word in the Scriptures as well as THE WATCH 
TOWER publications. 



R5283 : page 220 

"My soul be on thy guard; 

Ten thousand foes arise; 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize. 

"O! watch, and fight, and pray 
The battle ne'er give o'er; 

Renew it boldly every day, 
And help Divine implore. 

"Ne'er think the vict'ry won, 
Nor once at ease sit down; 

Thine arduous work will not be done, 
Till thou hast gained thy crown." 



R5281 : page 221 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
SISTER SEIBERT TO HER FRIENDS 

DEARLY BELOVED IN THE LORD: 

Your recent letter of loving sympathy is received and 
deeply appreciated at this time. I want to assure you that 
your prayers on my behalf have been most wonderfully 
answered, and I am enjoying a peace of mind and heart which 
almost frightens me. I say to myself, "I did not know the 
Father loved me so!" His grace has been more than "sufficient," 
so that I have been enabled to comfort other bereaved 
ones in this sad experience. 

I am counting my blessings every hour. I am so thankful 
my dear one was not taken ill three or four years ago, when 
I was so weak myself. Again I am so glad that he did not 
suffer any pain, which was very remarkable when we consider 
the nature of the disease, cancer. But this was my constant 
prayer, that, since he could not recover, the dear Lord would 
not permit him to suffer any more pain than was best for 
him and for me. I was more grateful than words can express 
because of the fact that we had the means to give my dear 
husband every comfort. I spared neither money nor skill 
nor science in order to do everything that could be done to 
cure him, as he was so anxious to get well. And lastly, but 
chiefly, I am so thankful that the dear Lord has seen fit to 
hide my dear one in the grave until "the time of His wrath 
be overpast," and that he has spared him the agony of witnessing 
my painful and probably ignominious death, if I 
prove faithful to Present Truth. 

And thus, while I count my blessings, I do not sorrow as 
do others, but throughout these after-days I seem to hear a 
chime of silver bells every moment sweetly ringing the refrain, 



"All that Thou sendest me, In mercy given!" 

The physicians would not tell my husband his real condition 
and it fell to my painful lot to refer to the matter on 
two occasions. I felt it was terrible to allow him to go down 
into death unconscious of his true condition. Yet, on the 
other hand, I realized I had witnessed to him daily, hourly 
almost, for nearly twenty years, without apparent effect. 
Nevertheless I determined to do what I could to help him. 
And therefore, about two hours before he died, when I knew 
he was failing rapidly, I said to him, "You are so tired, dear, 
wouldn't you like to sleep for a whole week? And how 
would you like to go to sleep and not waken until after the 
time of trouble is over?" He replied, "Oh, don't talk to me 
about death, I'm going to get well, I'm going to get well, I'm 
going to get well!" Then I said gently, "No dearheart, you 
are not going to get well; the doctors knew it from the beginning 
but would not tell you, and now I must tell you. 
Can't you thank the Lord for his goodness in saving you 
from pain and letting you just go to sleep? Can't you say 
a little prayer? Say, Lord Jesus, into Thy hand I commend 
my spirit?" No reply. "You are not afraid, are you, 
dear? Death is only a sleep. The Lord is going 
to let you sleep a little while and then in His due 
time He will call you to awake out of sleep, and the whole 
earth will be as the Garden of Eden, no more pain, no more 
tears, no more death." Still no reply. (Poor dear, perhaps 
he was too far gone, yet when I asked him if he knew me, he 
replied, "Of course, I know you, dear.") 

I held both his dear hands while the cold death-stream 
crept higher and higher, and his breathing grew softer and 
softer until with a sigh he just fell asleep like a weary child 
upon its mother's breast. I caressed the beloved form and 
turning away, said, "Sleep well, dearheart, sleep well, no 
dreams disturb this sleep!" 

He fell asleep on May 23, and on the 29th I laid him away 
amid the love and admiration and sorrow of the whole community, 
without a stain upon his reputation. I was alone, and 
had everything to arrange with respect to the undertaker and 
the services, but I tried to do everything as I believe he would 
have wished it done, without ostentation or extravagance, yet 
withal in good taste and of the best and most enduring quality. 
I have nothing to regret, I believe I have faithfully discharged 
every earthly mortgage, and I trust the dear Lord 
will see fit to give me some further service for Him and His 
during the "little while" that remains for the feet members 
of His body! 

I wished to make the funeral services my final witness for 
the Truth in this community, and requested that the Society 
send me our dear Bro. Woodworth to officiate. Services 
were held in the Presbyterian Church at Mount Union, Pa., 
where Mr. Seibert's family had lived. The Presbyterian minister 
read Scriptures selected by Bro. Woodworth. Prayer 
was offered by the Methodist minister, to whose church my 
husband's family had belonged, and to which he left a bequest 
of $500. Our dear Sisters Detwiler and Virginia Noble from 
"Bethel" then sang "Nearer my God to Thee," my dear one's 



favorite hymn, and as I listened I could not help saying to 
myself, "Oh, that he might hear them, for he never heard 
that beautiful hymn so touchingly sung by human voice before!" 
(I used to sing it for him, but I am not a gifted 
singer.) Then our dear Bro. Woodworth followed with his 
discourse on two texts, "The Lord gave and the Lord hath 
taken away," and "The ransomed of the Lord shall return," 
suggested by me. It was very impressive, and the audience 
of more than a thousand listened most attentively. I had 
arranged for a stenographer to take down as much as possible 
of what he said, and we have had it printed in the "Mount 
Union Times"; some of you have copies. 

While the friends and audience were viewing the body, I 
had arranged for the two sisters to sing some sweet hymns 
very softly, so as to break that awful silence, that saddest 
moment of the whole service. They sang without the organ, 
"There is rest for the weary," and afterward they requested 
the organist to play softly our beautiful hymn, "Many sleep, 
but not forever." My dear one was a lover of peace, and 
"a peacemaker." To me one of the most touching incidents 
of the funeral was the presence of two editors, who had been 
sworn enemies when Mr. Seibert came to Orbisonia several 
years ago, walking side by side among the honorary pallbearers. 
He had brought them together in the bonds of 
peace and good-fellowship. Surely he will have little difficulty 
in walking up the grand "Highway of Holiness," especially 
with the assistance of so many dear Truth friends 
who appreciated his nobility of heart! 

I used to tell my husband that it was pride which kept 
him out of the Truth, and his invariable reply was, "Why, 
what have I to be proud of but you!" 

The floral offerings were the most lavish and beautiful 
ever seen in the town. At the cemetery dear Bro. Woodworth 
offered the most exquisite prayer I ever heard on such 
an occasion. Many persons referred to it afterwards, and 
also spoke favorably of the discourse. I trust that some good 
may have been done, some blind eyes opened, some weary 
hearts comforted that day. Both ministers asked Bro. Woodworth 
for some printed matter dealing with his subject. And 
a letter from the Methodist minister to me declared that my 
"manifest faith and trust had been a help to everybody." 
This greatly encouraged me. And further, I learned that all 
my acquaintances in the community expected that I would 
bear up differently from others, "because of my faith and my 
religion!" So I thanked the Heavenly Father for His marvelous 
fulfilment of His promises, "As thy days thy strength 
shall be," and "My grace is sufficient for thee," and for this 
opportunity to show forth the power of the TRUTH! 

I cannot refrain from quoting here our dear Pastor's 
words to me. He writes, "You have my sincere sympathy. I 
know that you appreciated your husband very highly, as evidenced 
by your patient and continued devotion, not only in 
his illness, but at all times. I am glad that you have had 
the privilege of being with him to the last. I am confident 
that you can look forward to the future with good assurance 
that he was a noble man, and that God loves such characters, 



even as Jesus declared of the young Hebrew who said that he 
had kept the Law to the best of his ability from his youth up. 
Of him we read, 'Jesus, beholding him, loved him.' We may 

R5282 : page 221 

be sure that the Lord has a sympathetic love for all the members 
of the race who have a desire for righteousness. We 
are so glad that the time is hastening when all such will be 
brought to fullest opportunity for knowing the great Redeemer 
and experiencing the fulness of His restitution power." 

Please continue to pray for me that I may be faithful in 
doing His will even until He shall say, "It is enough, come up 
higher." 

With fervent Christian love, yours in our Redeemer and 
King, GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT.-Orbisonia, Pa. 

June 7, 1913. 



HIDDEN PEARLS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

Grace, mercy and peace be unto you. My heart daily overflows 
with joy and gratitude when I consider our Father's 
abundant blessings to us. Help is provided, through the 
appointed channel, for every step of the way. 

How eagerly we welcomed the Resolve, as just the assistance 
we need! I have it written on a post card— the vow on 
the other side— and keep it under my pillow, where I can read 
it as soon as I awaken. How it fortifies and helps one to be 
ready for every emergency! And what a grand beginning it 
makes to each momentous day— the wonderful, amazing days 
in which we live! 

But I desire to tell you of the great help the little Question-books 

R5282 : page 222 

have been. I used them in study with another sister- 
all the class we have in our isolation. Some way I had looked 
upon them as for class study, and not for use in my private 
reading of ten pages a day in the STUDIES. But the Father 
opened my eyes to their full use. 

I was unable to keep my mind fixed upon my reading as I 
desired; it seemed to me I was losing so much. A dear 
sister suggested to me, when I was out at a local convention, 
at Easter, to use the Questions. She was doing so with great 
profit. That was the key to the whole situation. There was 
the proper help provided, and I was not using it; hence not 
receiving the full blessing. 

After that my thoughts were completely on my study, and 
I was not missing the point of each paragraph. I have been 
astonished to find what beauties of Truth— pearls of great 
price— were hidden in the paragraphs, that refreshed, and 
strengthened and cleansed me daily. So now I am eager for 
other dear ones to share the blessings, and whenever our 



Father gives me the privilege (and of late He is graciously 
giving me many such privileges) of meeting with His dear 
people, I desire to testify as to the blessing that lies in those 
little books. 

Words fail to express the joy of fellowship we experience 
through the columns of THE WATCH TOWER. God bless you! 

With Christian love and greetings, 

HOPE TATE.-Ont. 



SEEKING TO SERVE 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 
GENTLEMEN: 

The writer had the pleasure of hearing Mr. Rutherford 
deliver a lecture in our city, Atlanta. Since then, I have 
bought of one of your agents a set of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
I am very much interested in them, as well as your 
work before the public, and will say, if you will furnish me 
with free Literature of any kind on this great work, it will be 
a pleasure for me to place it in the homes as I visit the sick 
each day. I feel that you are doing a great work, and one 
that is much needed in every home. If I can help you in any 
way I am at your service. I am delighted with the lectures 
and will appreciate any literature you may care to send. 
Very truly, 

L. W. WIGGINS, M.D.-Ga. 



page 222 

THE RESULTS OF ZEAL 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY. 
DEAR BRETHREN: 

We are very glad to know that you can serve us with more 
public meetings. We would be sorry to have them stop, as 
they are becoming interesting for the public. The audience 
is increasing at every meeting and more names are being 
handed in each time, and besides that, we are enjoying the 
work; so it is real harvesting and we are rejoicing in it. 

In regard to the financial part, we feel that we are going 
to be able to meet it. It is wonderful how much we can do 
when the Lord is with us, and our hearts are filled with His 
Spirit. So, send us the brethren and the advertising matter, 
and we will try to do the rest. 

Much love and best wishes to you all. We pray for you 
all, as we are sure you do for us. 

Your brother in Christ, 

J. L. MILLER. 



R5282 : page 222 



FINDS HELP IN VOW 

PASTOR C. T. RUSSELL, BROOKLYN, NEW YORK. 
DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST: 

I have often thought of writing you of my experience in 
connection with the special Vow unto the Lord, but have refrained, 
because I knew that your time was so fully taken up. 
My first thought was, It is a needless addition for the consecrated, 
but there can be no harm in it. How surprised I 
was to find what a real help it proved to be! I recommend it 
to all. 

While our opportunities for service in this Present Truth 
have been limited, we have had the pleasure of seeing some 
brought to rejoice in the Truth, and to a full consecration in 
the Truth. 

I append a brief history of my search for Truth: 

Nineteen years ago, while associated with the Free Will 
Baptist people, through a study of the Scriptures, I was led 
to a complete consecration to the Lord, and while I kept my 
membership with them, there was such evident lack of consecration 
and the knowledge of God, that I refused to accept 
a pastoral work among them, working with them in evangelistic 
work, also with the Methodists, United Brethren, Presbyterians, 
and visiting among the Holiness people and the Christian 
Alliance people, being urged by each denomination to accept 
work, but not being able to do so. 

I met one brother who had read the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
and believed them, but he had such a wrong conception 
of their real teaching, that I thought they did not contain 
what I was looking for. Then I met the Adventist people, 
and as they discredited the Hell Fire teaching, and taught 
the truth about the nature of man and the state of the dead, 
I associated myself with them, and accepted a work with 
them, feeling that there was no need to look further; that I 
should have to go through alone if I did. Here I first saw 
that God was doing His work on time; and the thought became 
fixed in my mind that every true doctrine must magnify 
the name of God, and reveal the beauties of His character. 
With this thought I soon found it impossible to give myself 
wholly to their teachings, and as the Truth dawned on my 
mind and became clear to me that the Church is the Temple 
of God, I was convinced that the Adventist institution, with 
all other man-made ones, was Babylonish, and I sent my man-given 
credentials as a minister to those who had granted them. 

This brought me to a very real sense of dependence on the 
Lord. I felt very much alone, but for Him. But providentially, 
a few days before this, a magazine copy of the DIVINE 
PLAN (WATCH TOWER form) was handed to me by a faithful 
colporteur sister. Because of the mental struggle I was undergoing 
in breaking previous ties, I paid no attention to it, but 
went and put it into the stove. Fortunately there was no fire 
in the stove, and after the step was taken that set me free. 
I went to the stove, pulled out the WATCH TOWER, and found 
that it was sent of God for just such a time. 

I shall never be able to express my gratitude for the help 



the Lord has given me through the SCRIPTURE STUDIES, to you 
His servant; but the Lord will reward. 
With much Christian love, your brother in Christ, 
WM. H. BATTERSON.-Neb. 



LUXURIOUS TRAVEL AND SACRIFICE 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

Before anything else let me thank you humbly and gratefully 
for your clear teaching on the Scriptures, and for giving 
it out to the world, at prices that almost any one can afford 
to pay. 

I had practically left the English Church, and had almost 
given up everything, when in 1908, some copies of PEOPLES 
PULPIT were put into my reluctant hand. Since then, through 
the six volumes of STUDIES, a little more light has been coming 
to me all the time; and I have been trying to lead a life 
more acceptable to our Lord. I have been almost alone in 
this neighborhood, as regards believers in Present Truth, but 
the members of the Victoria class have held out helping hands 
to me. Your teaching was so new to me, that for some time 
I was almost afraid to accept it, as we are warned about false 
teachers in the latter days. But all your teaching is based on 
the Bible and far from smoothing or widening the narrow 
way, it shows us we can expect nothing else on this side of 
the Veil; far from teaching we can be Christians in name 
only, it points out that we must be Christlike in deed and 
thought; far from expecting popularity, we must recognize 
that we are a peculiar people, to be despised like our Master, 
and that our own individual responsibility increases, as He 
gives us light, and that we cannot attempt to go hand-in-hand 
with the world; therefore I now endeavor to lead others to 
read the STUDIES. 

I want in all humility to ask you, How can we reconcile 
the description of the luxurious train, the hotel on wheels, and 
its places to lounge, its chef de cuisine, its corps of waiters, 
etc., with the example given us by Jesus of Nazareth? Is it 
not, dear brother, a pandering to the worldly spirit? It seems 
to me, that if Jesus had conducted such a tour, He would have 
chosen a clean emigrant car, containing necessaries but not 
luxuries. How, too, can we reconcile the fact that when on 
earth He had no place to lay His head, with the fact that His 
chief earthly shepherd (whom He has honored as He has you, 
on account of your faithfulness and humility) should stay at 
the best hotels instead of with His humble followers? On 
page 31, Vol. IV, you point out that some of the reformed 
churches did not succeed because they "have made many compromising 
overtures to the world for smaller favors." Is not 
this a repetition of the same kind of thing? I am told that 

R5283 : page 223 

the newspaper men arrange these things for you, but you remind 
us that responsibility rests on each individual. God can 



take care of His work in the future, as in the past, without 
depending on newspaper men. I cannot understand it all, 
brother, and I long for a few lines from you, who have helped 
me so much hitherto. Vol. I, p. 199, "the consecrated, the 
transformed, in addition to the effort to subdue sin, must 
sacrifice the present good things." Vol. I, p. 203, "The transforming 
influences lead to present sacrifice and suffering." 
Yours very gratefully, 



THE EDITOR'S REPLY 

DEAR SISTER: 

Yours dated June 15,1 am reading on the train. I thank 
you for its frank statements and queries. 

It is true that there were no fine hotels in our Lord's day, 
true that there were no railroads, and that His locomotion 
was accomplished partly by little ships, partly on foot and 
partly on an ass. Were we to follow the Master's footsteps 
literally, the possibilities of the present Harvest work would 
be much decreased. It is our thought that the Harvest of the 
Jewish Age was merely confined to the little country of Palestine; 
whereas the Harvest of this Age, world-wide, is to be 
accomplished in a similar length of time— forty years. 

We believe that the wonderful conveniences of our day 
are preparations for the Millennium, and that the Lord is not 
displeased with us for using these in connection with His 
service. Quite to the contrary, it is rather our thought that 
God is providing these wonderful conveniences for the very 
purpose of facilitating the Harvest work. 

In this connection, we remember the Apostle's words 
which assure us that all things were given unto us richly to 
enjoy— to use, but not to abuse. We have an illustration of 
this in conjunction with our visit to India. The chief interest 
there appears to be in the western part, which has almost no 
railroad facilities. We were debating how we could procure 
some kind of conveyance to permit such a visit as we thought 
would be in the interests of the Lord's cause and not require 
too much time. Our queries were answered when we learned 
that just about ten days before our arrival, an automobile 
omnibus line had been established instead of a railroad. 

As respects hotels: In the present instance I had no real 
need for a hotel because I could have stopped quite comfortably 
on the train. But the newspaper people handling my 
sermons are interested in making these somewhat of a spectacle, 
so that they can draw that much more attention to the 
sermons which they publish. In the world's estimation, a 
public man who is great or well thought of would be treated 
to the best that his friends possessed. From their standpoint, 
a very humble entertainment would be a low appreciation; 
and if his friends have a low estimation of him, the 
newspapers, representing the public, would size him up proportionately 
small, and his sermons would not be published. 

The newspaper people surely deserve some consideration 



from me. It is estimated that my sermons weekly, through 
2,000 papers, reach 15,000,000 readers. To accomplish these 
results by advertising would cost millions of dollars yearly. 
For the privilege of preaching the glorious Gospel of the 
Love of God in Christ, I am not only willing to please the 
newspapers by going to good hotels and by long journeys to 
Panama, around the world, etc., but I am willing, also, to 
endure slanders and misrepresentations of jealous ministers 
who seek to prevent the publication of my sermons and the 
gathering of large audiences by slanderous misrepresentations 
of my character. Looking beyond the present, I am hoping 
and I am waiting for the Master's approval— "Well done, 
good and faithful servant, enter into the joys of thy Lord; 
thou hast been faithful over a few things." 

We see no wrong in thus allowing the newspaper interest 
to have a say in respect to our earthly conditions when principle 
is not compromised. If they demanded that we should 
violate our conscience in respect to the publishing of the sermons, 
the case would be different. Conscience is not to be 
sold at any price. But when they arrange to give us additional 
comforts, we see no sin connected therewith. Rather, 
we remember that our Lord did not hesitate to wear a "seamless 
robe" in a time in which such a garment was considered 
extravagant, far beyond the means of the common people 
with whom He usually companied. 

We remember, also, that while Jesus had no definite home 
of His own, one of His disciples, St. John, did have a home. 
So did St. Peter. We remember, also, that our Lord had a 
home whenever convenient at Bethany with Lazarus, Martha 
and Mary. We remember that they honored Him with a 
sumptuous feast and with an alabaster box of ointment, very 
costly. We remember that when Judas found fault with the 
extravagance, our Lord rebuked him and justified Mary. We 
remember that our Lord, on one occasion, at least, attended 
a wedding, and on another occasion was the guest of a rich 
Pharisee in one of the best homes of that time. 

Respecting the luxurious train, with cooks, or chefs, attending 
to the food supplies: It is customary for newspaper 
people to use considerable latitude of language in their descriptions. 
It is not wrong that they call the cooks by the 
French name "chef"; and if anybody gets the thought that 
these cooks got fabulous sums for their services, as we hear 
that the chefs of the Vanderbilts, Goulds, etc., receive, he 
would be mistaken. The chefs, or cooks, on this train were 
brethren who availed themselves of the opportunity of a 
month's vacation, a convention tour, and meanwhile of the 
opportunity of serving the brethren on the train. 

The train was described by the newspaper artist as "De 
luxe," and yet it was just such a train as everybody uses when 
travelling. Some of the cars were of the ordinary standard 
Pullman, and some of them Tourist, or cheaper sleeping cars. 
Of course, as your letter suggests, these friends might have 
gotten the use of a common box car cheaper, or they could 
have travelled afoot still cheaper. If they had gotten box 
cars and fitted them up for their use ever so crudely, with 
plain, wooden bunks and straw, the expense would have been 



nearly as great, if not quite as great, and the inconvenience 
much greater. 

However, dear sister, I had nothing whatever to do with 
the making up of the train. I arranged for visits to the 
Bible Students of the Far West, whom I rarely have opportunity 
to see. My visit was in response to requests that I 
would come and hold public meetings. It was my intention 
to take the usual train service; but Brother Dr. Jones, learning 
of the tour, asked whether I would like to have company. 
I assured him that I would be glad of this. 

Brother Dr. Jones then got into communication with the 
brethren, with the result that a train-load of friends journeyed 
with me. Some of them took the opportunity of meeting 
friends on the Western coast. All had the opportunity of 
fellowship with each other on the train, and at the various 
meetings served. They participated in the work, too. Two 
of them served as stenographers; Prof. Read freely gave of 
his professional ability in connection with the singing; and 
others served as ushers; while all did their best to cheer and 
encourage the local Bible Students in the various cities visited. 
Additionally, considerable volunteering with free literature 
was done. 

We are in danger, dear sister, of getting a wrong view of 
what is meant by suffering with Christ. If we merely think 
of the Master's sufferings as those of weariness of the flesh, 
wearing sandals instead of shoes, and walking instead of 
riding, we shall be gradually led up to the same extremes of 
error which prevailed during the Dark Ages, and which to 
some extent still prevail amongst our Catholic brethren. 
Some of these attempt to have greater sufferings than Jesus 
had by going barefooted, or by whipping themselves torturously 
and then wearing hair-cloth jackets to increase the pain, 
as the hair jags the sore flesh, causing it to fester. These, 
they think, are sufferings of Christ. 

Gradually both Catholics and Protestants are seeing to the 
contrary. Jesus used the best roads and best means of His 
time. His sufferings were especially through the opposition 
of His foes in that He was despised and rejected of men. He 
was slandered, and "when He was reviled, reviled not again." 
He endured these things patiently for the Truth's sake, and 
thus set us an example to walk in His steps, similarly enduring 
worldly contradictions, oppositions, slanders, for the sake 
of the brethren. 

I trust, dear sister, that you will not stumble over the 
means which the Lord is using in this Harvest time to promulgate 
the Message of the hour, one to awaken His people and 
to guide them to better methods of Bible study. But even if 
you cannot see eye to eye with us, do not stumble yourself, 
but remember that to his own Master each servant stands or 
falls. Take all the blessings from our ministry that you can 
get, and leave the remainder of the matters which you cannot 
understand to God. In other words, let us more and more 
realize that God Himself is guiding His own work; and that 
whatever blessing we may obtain we should be thankful to 
Him for the same. 

With much Christian love, 



Your brother and servant in the Lord, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



page 225 
