Let God Guide You to “the Real Life”
AN ESSENTIAL quality for any guide is trustworthiness. Those who know Jehovah, the Author of the Bible, are convinced that he is the most dependable person of all. He “cannot lie.” (Titus 1:2; 2 Timothy 3:16) God-fearing Joshua, who led Israel into the Promised Land, personally testified to Jehovah’s trustworthiness. In an address to the people, he said: “You well know with all your hearts and with all your souls that not one word out of all the good words that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed. They have all come true for you. Not one word of them has failed.”—Joshua 23:14.
Since Joshua’s time, many more Bible prophecies have come true. This flawless record gives us a solid basis for strong faith in the prophecies that are yet to be fulfilled. A number of these concern God’s purpose for the earth and for obedient mankind.
Will You Benefit From God’s Guidance?
Jehovah, the personification of love, wants us to be happy now and forever. (John 17:3; 1 John 4:8) Yes, God desires that we enjoy “the real life”—everlasting life. (1 Timothy 6:12, 19) For this reason, well over six million Witnesses of Jehovah, in obedience to God’s command, joyfully share the “good news of the kingdom” with their neighbors. (Matthew 24:14) At present, they are doing this work in 235 lands—virtually every nation on earth!
God’s Kingdom is a heavenly government in the hands of Jesus Christ. (Daniel 7:13, 14; Revelation 11:15) Under his rulership all the wicked—those who refuse to submit to Jehovah’s righteous standards—will be destroyed. (Psalm 37:10; 92:7) Thereafter, the entire earth “will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”—Isaiah 11:9.
Think of the peace and harmony that will prevail when every person on the planet worships God “with spirit and truth” and willingly submits to his loving direction and perfect standards! (John 4:24) At last, people will experience “the real life” promised by God!
As foretold, however, only relatively few will accept God’s guidance and gain life. (Matthew 7:13, 14) Do you want to be among them? If so, Jehovah’s Witnesses sincerely invite you to examine the Scriptures and let God’s counsel guide you. By doing so, you will “taste” for yourself how good Jehovah really is. (Psalm 34:8) Just as surely as instinct guides birds to their destination, Jehovah will lead his loyal ones to life in Paradise.—Luke 23:43.
[Picture on page 8, 9]
“Happy are the mild-tempered ones, since they will inherit the earth.”—MATTHEW 5:5
“The meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”—PSALM 37:11
“The tent of God is with mankind . . . And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more.”—REVELATION 21:3, 4
“The upright are the ones that will reside in the earth, and the blameless are the ones that will be left over in it. As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth; and as for the treacherous, they will be torn away from it.”—PROVERBS 2:21, 22

