Perfect Life—Not Just a Dream!
A perfect world—what does it mean to you? Imagine a human society where there is no crime, drug abuse, famine, poverty, or injustice. All enjoy excellent emotional and physical health. There is no sorrow or unhappiness because even death has been eliminated. Is it realistic to yearn for such a world?
WHILE not ignoring the advances of science and technology, most people do not really believe that human intelligence or learning will bring about a perfect world in which all will live in peace and happiness. On the other hand, the human tendency is undeniably to want to improve things and to correct imperfections. Of course, mere unrealistic dreaming will not help the homeless and the poor, nor will it satisfy the disabled and the sick who long for relief from their suffering. A perfect world simply will not come about through human creativity. Despite the present misery and oppression, however, there are solid reasons for believing that a world that you would call perfect is actually near at hand.
When you think about perfect life, the life of Jesus Christ may come to your mind. Jesus was not the only perfect human ever to live on earth. Adam and Eve, created in God’s image, enjoyed perfect life in a paradise. However, they lost this excellent condition because of their rebellion against their heavenly Father. (Genesis 3:1-6) The Creator, though, instilled in humans a desire to live forever. Ecclesiastes 3:11 testifies to that: “Everything [God] has made pretty in its time. Even time indefinite he has put in their heart, that mankind may never find out the work that the true God has made from the start to the finish.”
While imperfection and sin led mankind to a life of “futility” and “enslavement to corruption,” note the comforting words of the apostle Paul: “The eager expectation of the creation is waiting for the revealing of the sons of God. For the creation was subjected to futility, not by its own will but through him that subjected it, on the basis of hope that the creation itself also will be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God.” (Romans 8:19-21) The Bible makes clear that God’s provisions for restoring perfect human life are made available through Jesus Christ.—John 3:16; 17:3.
In addition to this wonderful hope for the future, we all have the potential for advancing spiritually, making our progress manifest even now.
Try to Be Reasonable
Jesus Christ considered the matter of perfection to be so important that he told a large audience: “You must accordingly be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.” (Matthew 5:48) Did Jesus really expect us to be flawless in the present wicked system? No. We certainly should strive to cultivate the qualities of generosity, kindness, and love toward our fellowmen, yet we often fail to do what is right. Even one of Jesus’ apostles wrote: “If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous so as to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we make the statement: ‘We have not sinned,’ we are making him a liar, and his word is not in us.”—1 John 1:9, 10.
Nevertheless, we can improve the way we view ourselves and treat others, avoiding extremes. Who can find a better prescription for acquiring a balanced, reasonable personality than that found in God’s Word, the Bible? Cultivating such qualities as joy and moderation will help us in getting along with others at work, with our marriage mate, and with our parents or children. The apostle Paul admonished Christians: “Always rejoice in the Lord. Once more I will say, Rejoice! Let your reasonableness become known to all men.”—Philippians 4:4, 5.
Benefits of Being Reasonable
When you are reasonable in your expectations and avoid self-tormenting and self-defeating perfectionism, you benefit yourself as well as others. Knowing your real potential involves being both realistic and reasonable about what you want to do. Remember, God created us to live on earth and to find satisfaction in meaningful work that benefits ourselves and others.—Genesis 2:7-9.
If you have been too demanding of yourself, why not turn to Jehovah in prayer? Obtaining God’s favor will bring you great relief. Jehovah knows our makeup and imperfect state, so he is not unreasonable or hard to please. The psalmist assures us: “As a father shows mercy to his sons, Jehovah has shown mercy to those fearing him. For he himself well knows the formation of us, remembering that we are dust.” (Psalm 103:13, 14) How grateful we can be that God deals with humans in such a merciful way! He knows our limitations, yet we can be as precious in his eyes as beloved children.
Instead of pursuing perfectionism, how much wiser it is to cultivate spiritual discernment and a balanced viewpoint! Moreover, we can be sure that no one can prevent Jehovah from fulfilling his purpose to elevate mankind to perfection under God’s Kingdom. But what does human perfection mean?
Perfect Life Better Than Perfectionism
Perfection does not mean being a perfectionist. Those privileged to live in Paradise on earth under God’s Kingdom will certainly not be demanding, self-righteous individuals. One of the requirements for surviving the great tribulation is heartfelt appreciation for the ransom sacrifice, as expressed by the international great crowd that the apostle John described: “Salvation we owe to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb.” (Revelation 7:9, 10, 14) All survivors of the approaching great tribulation will be grateful that Christ willingly died for them and all those exercising faith in him. His loving sacrifice lays the basis for bringing lasting relief from their imperfections and weaknesses.—John 3:16; Romans 8:21, 22.
What will perfect life be like? Instead of competition and selfish ambition, love and kindness among humans will make life worth living, eliminating anxiety and low self-esteem. Yet, perfect life will not be boring or monotonous. God’s Word does not provide all the details about Paradise but does describe the kind of life we can expect: “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating. For like the days of a tree will the days of my people be; and the work of their own hands my chosen ones will use to the full. They will not toil for nothing, nor will they bring to birth for disturbance.”—Isaiah 65:21-23.
Rather than wondering about what kind of entertainment, shopping facilities, technology, or transportation the Kingdom will provide, imagine yourself enjoying the fulfillment of these words: “‘The wolf and the lamb themselves will feed as one, and the lion will eat straw just like the bull; and as for the serpent, his food will be dust. They will do no harm nor cause any ruin in all my holy mountain,’ Jehovah has said.” (Isaiah 65:25) How different perfect life will be from what you find today! If you come to be one of those counted worthy to live at that time, you will have reason for confidence that your loving heavenly Father will take an interest in you and your family. “Take exquisite delight in Jehovah, and he will give you the requests of your heart.”—Psalm 37:4.
Perfect life is not just a dream. Jehovah’s loving purpose regarding mankind will be fully realized. You and your family can be among those who will be raised to human perfection and live forever in God’s new world. The Bible foretells: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”—Psalm 37:29.
[Picture on page 6]
We can improve the way we view ourselves and others, avoiding perfectionism or fussiness
[Picture on page 7]
Why not envision yourself already enjoying peaceful and righteous conditions in Paradise?

