R937 : page 1 

VOL. VIII. PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE, 1887. NO. 10. 



page 1 

THE APRIL TOWER we have in good 
supply, for your use in loaning and mailing 
to your friends. Order as many as 
you can judiciously use— free. We send 
with them some pink slips to be pasted at 
the edge on the upper corner. 



R948 : page 1 

DAWN, VOL. I., is now in its twenty-fifth 
thousand. Many hearts are praying 
and many hands laboring for God's blessing 
upon it; hoping that fifty thousand or 
possibly one hundred thousand may be in 
circulation before 1888. Work the works 
of him that sent you while it is day, for 
the night cometh, when no man can work. 
(John 9:4.) "The time will come when 
they will not endure sound doctrine."— 
2 Tim. 4:3. 



R939 : page 1 

THE WORK AND THE WORKERS. 

Zealous Brethren and Sisters in every 
direction are seizing opportunities and devising 
plans for the work outlined in the 
"View" of MAY TOWER. One Sister here, 
went forth filled with zeal and encouraged 
by Bro. Adamson's success, and her first 
day's labor was very successful: She took 
thirty-one orders for the paper bound 
DAWN. Others, in various quarters, have 
varying success, proportionate generally to 
their strictness in following the plans suggested 
in the May View. We suggest that 
all who are out at work would do well to 
read, yes, study that advice carefully and 
try it. 

While many can use the Contents Circulars 
to good advantage, the majority of 
those who are meeting with the greatest 
success, find it best not to leave a circular 



and call later, but to take a couple of clean 
circulars in their hand (along with the 
sample books, a blank memorandum book 
and a pencil). Introduce yourself as The 
Representative of that wonderful book, 
which is making such a stir everywhere. 
Hand the lady or gentleman of the house 
one of the circulars, and pointing to the 

R940 : page 1 

pink slip on it ask them to read it, (or 
read it to them,) saying that it will introduce 
you and your business most quickly. 
Then proceed to talk of the book— its 
character as a faithful Bible exponent 
and antidote to Infidelity— its rapid sale 
—the absolute necessity that all should 
possess the very knowledge this book affords, 
in order to be released from present 
skepticism, or protected from its baneful 
influence in days to come, when it will 
become even more wide-spread and popular 
than now, catching specially the young 
minds, the rising generation. 

You should, first of all, see for yourself 
that the book does this. Note the first 
three chapters, how they in simple language 
which the humblest may understand 
point out the fact of a great Creator and 
the proofs that the Bible is his revelation 
of himself and his plans. 

This done, what could be more convincing 
to the Bible student, (whether he be 
full of trust, or full of doubts, concerning 
its inspiration) than the harmonious presentation 
of the great fundamental teachings 
of the Bible which chapters IV. and 
onward present. Other books attack infidelity 
and fight it vigorously, yet leave 
the stumbling stones which caused the infidelity 
unremoved. This book does its 
work in an opposite manner and with 
much greater success. It simply disarms 
infidelity by showing that though men 
have stumbled, it has been over misconceptions 
of God's plan, and that the Bible 
reveals a plan of God now in progress 
which SATISFIES REASON and harmonizes 
known facts, as nothing else would do. 
This is therefore the best antidote for infidelity 
known to us, and we ask, whether 
you know of a better. 

And this is the line of argument to use 
in canvassing, because though few would 
confess it, nearly all nominal Christian 



people nurse their skeptical thoughts in 
secret, and really long for the firm foundation 
for faith and trust which an appreciation 
of the ransom and its results, Restitution, 
etc., alone can give. 

Bro. Adamson still continues to lead 
all others, though some are following his 
method and success closely. Brothers 
Van der Ahe, Cain, Grable, Hughes, and 
Sisters Raynor and Vogel and others are 
doing remarkably well, and we trust that 
before next month many others will be 
doing as much or more. 

We have been unable to fill orders very 
promptly of late, because our bindery 
could turn out only about 300 copies per 
day; but now this is bettered, so that we 
can supply 600 to 700 per day and increase 
it. So let the orders come, and let 
the glad tidings spread, and let the people 
be fed, to the praise of our Head— Amen. 



R937 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Among the questions of the hour awakened 
by the more vigorous independent 
thought and increase of knowledge of our 
day, is what is known as The Land Question. 
Briefly stated the question is: Can 
one man rightfully hold thousands of acres 
more than he can or does use, while his 
brother man who desires to use land can 
obtain none without paying a speculative 
price for it, which in many cases he cannot 
do, if he would? 

Going back, we inquire: Who held the 
original right, title and claim to earth as 
a whole with all its privileges, rain, sunshine, 
air, water and land. All must admit 
that God, the Creator, owned it all; 
and he gave the control of it to our father 
Adam for his use and the use of all his 
children. So then every foot of land is 
God's property and men are merely granted 
the privilege of using it, and not of hoarding 
it for speculative purposes. Surely no 
one could claim that the heavenly owner 
had given him a right to appropriate that 
which others have need of, and which he 
does not need. 

This principle God laid down clearly 
in his dealings with Israel. His arrangement 



with them in giving them the land 
of Canaan, was on the principle of a lease 
and not of ownership of the land. It was 
to be a perpetual lease, subject to certain 
conditions, one of which was, that they 
must not work the land to death (as because 
of a violation of other parts of the law, 
the reservation of vast parks, etc., etc., the 
tenantry of Ireland are obliged to do, 
bringing on repeatedly failure of crops and 
famine). When God brought the tribes 
into Canaan he divided to each a portion 
according to their numbers and requirements; 
and another of the conditions of 
their lease was, that though they might 
trade with each other and thus be hindered 
from sloth, indolence, and lack of healthful 
ambition, yet they must not permanently 
take advantage one of another, so as to 
create class distinctions, making a permanently 
poor class and a permanently wealthy 
class, as we see it in Europe to-day, and 
as we see that time would bring about in 
America. 

To keep this equilibrium, God arranged 
that he would lease them the land for only 
fifty years at a time. They might treat 
the land as their own, buying and selling 
as their changing circumstances might 
require for fifty years, but at the end of 
that lease all title reverted back to God, 
the owner, who then gave it again as at 
first on another fifty years' lease to the 
same families, or their representatives 
according to their number and needs. 
This fiftieth year of restitution was known 
to the Jews as the Year of Jubilee: and 
concerning it God's regulations were as 
follows: "In the year of Jubilee ye shall 
return every man unto his possession. 
And if thou sell aught unto thy neighbor, 
or buyest aught of thy neighbor's hand ye 
shall not oppress one another: [but] according 
to the number of years after the 
jubilee thou shalt buy of thy neighbor and 
according to the number of years of the 
fruits, he shall sell unto thee: According 
to the multitude of the years [to the next 
jubilee] thou shalt increase the price, and 
according to the fewness of years thou 
shalt diminish the price of it." (Lev. 25:13-16.) 
These are exactly the terms of 
a lease. And the ground and reason for 
this arrangement is specified in a succeeding 
verse (v. 23). "The land shall not be 
sold forever: FOR THE LAND IS MINE; for 



ye are strangers [without ownership] and 
sojourners [tenants] with me." 

While this Jubilee had a typical lesson 
as a prophecy of the Millennial age, "the 
times of restitution of all things" (Acts 3:21), 
yet it had as well a practical blessing 
in it for the Jew: and experience will yet 
prove to the world the wisdom and necessity 
of some such arrangement. Not until 
now, could this necessity be so fully appreciated 
for various reasons. The world for 
several hundred years has found a vent for 
its rapidly growing population in emigration 
to America, Australia, etc., whose 
millions of acres attracted many of the 
most ambitious and enterprising from 
crowded Europe, drawing attention and 
reflection away from the fact that an 
aristocratic class, styled the "Nobility," 
had gradually acquired, some by fair and 
some by foul means, far more than their 
proper proportion of God's land, which 
under present arrangement is really the 
basis of all wealth; while others are forced 

R938 : page 1 

by circumstances to be, and to continue, a 
pauper class, with but slight hope of bettering 
their condition, except by emigration, 
because the wealthy aristocracy holds the 
basis of wealth— the land. 

The time was, that this class did not 
think or hope beyond the liberties and 
stations of their fathers, but not so now; 
now men are thinking vigorously and 
independently— too much so, often extravagantly 
and foolishly, to their own injury 
and to the injury of the cause they seek to 
serve. They are no longer willing to be 
dumb driven cattle, but now demand that 
whatever inequalities the wrong ideas of 
the past have produced, these shall not go 
on increasing, but that the masses shall so 
rule and legislate that, while individuality 
shall remain and individual energy and 
ability have its reward, the conditions 
which produced and perpetuated class 
distinctions shall give place. 

In America where the people rule themselves, 
the laws are being examined and 
overhauled as the best and surest means 
of preventing the evils so manifest in the 
Landlord system of Europe. They see 
that here as there, land is at present the 
basis of wealth, because it is a necessity 



whose value increases with every birth, 
and with every shipload of immigrants. 
They see that present laws and arrangements 
are favorable to land speculation, 
favorable to the acquisition of immense 

R938 : page 2 

tracts of land, the rentals of which may at 
no distant day be as onerous and burdensome 
to the people here, as they are to-day 
in Ireland and Europe. 

The sentiment of the people cries out 
for a wholesome law on this subject, to 
secure to every man an opportunity of a 
share in God's land under his lease. Admitting 
the truth of the principle that 
wealth should be represented in buildings, 
factories, etc., in personal property, representing 
labor, and not in land, which 
is God's and which is given us all to use, 
the question arises: How can this truth 
be gradually approached, so as to work 
the least rupture of society, and the least 
possible injury to those who, under existing 
laws, have and hold title to land as 
representing labor, or wealth? 

Complex and almost unanswerable as 
this question at first sight appears, we are 
living in a time— "the time of the end," 
when knowledge was to be increased (Dan. 12:4.) 
—when we should expect the answer 
to come from some quarter; and sure 
enough, it has come. So far as we know, 
the answer does not come from one of the 
"saints," (We know nothing of the man's 
religious views,) nor should we expect it 
from a saint. It should come from one 
of the world, whose time and talent would 
be absorbed in presenting this truth to the 
world. The saints minister specially to 
the saints, and in spiritual things mainly, 
and would have neither the time nor inclination 
to forsake their higher work for 
the "body of Christ"— the Church, to 
take hold of any of the various reforms of 
the hour among and specially bearing upon 
the World in this dawn of the Millennium. 
It is proper, however, that all the 
saints have right ideas on all the living 
questions of the hour; that he who sees 
the great truths of God's plan may at least 
not oppose by word or deed the grand 
outworkings of that plan in any direction. 
And though the holders of these general 
truths may not appreciate spiritual truths, 



in fact cannot do so, since they must be 
spiritually discerned, yet we should remember 
the words of the Apostle, "He 
that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he 
himself is judged of no man." (1 Cor. 2:15.) 
The saints can understand others, 
while others cannot comprehend the saints. 
We see the plan from God's standpoint, 
and act our part intelligently, while others 
are unwittingly used in its accomplishment, 
and ignorant both of our interest 
and co-operation. 

The answer to the question to which we 
refer has awakened much opposition on 
the part of many intelligent people, some 
of whom do not understand clearly either 
the question or its proposed solution, but 
hastily jump at the conclusion that it is a 
communistic idea of dividing all the property 
of the world alike among all the 
people. This they rightly conclude would 
be useless; because if divided in the morning, 
some would be paupers before night, 
having sold their all for some momentary 
gratification. But this is not at all the 
plan proposed. 

The answer to this land question— the 
remedy proposed for bringing about gradually 
a recognition of the fact that God is 
the real Landlord and leases it to each 
man in such proportion, as he can and 
shall use it, and thus divert capital from 
land, where it is burdensome upon the 
masses, into manufacturing, building, etc., 
where it will benefit all, by giving increased 
employment to laborers— is advanced 
and championed by Mr. Henry 
George, of New York. 

A brief synopsis of this proposed scheme 
of remedial legislation and its effects, as 
we foresee them, is as follows: The plan 
is to assess all general taxes on the basis 
of land holdings, at market value. This 
would be placing the responsibility and 
expense of government and improvements 
upon those claiming and holding the land 
whose value is improved; while the man who 
has none of the land would have no tax. The 
effect of this legislation would be, first, to 
discourage investments in land, except for 
actual use; secondly, to induce all who 
have surplus or idle lands to sell them; 
thirdly, since much of the surplus land 
would be for sale, it would stimulate the 
sale of building lots and small farms, to 
those who cannot now purchase, by 



reducing values of unimproved lands and 
inducing present holders to sell on long 
time and low interest. This increase of 
land and home owners would give additional 
stability to the government which 
protects them, and of which they are factors. 
The capital taken out of land would 
seek investment in building, manufacturing, 
and kindred enterprises, which would 
not only tend to increase the demand for 
labor, but also to cheapen rents and bring 
more of the luxuries of life within the reach 
of the "lower classes," which it would 
thus help gradually to lift to the level of 
manhood, by stimulating in all, the laudable 
ambition to be in every way the 
equals of their fellow men. 

This would not, as some have asserted, 
put the brunt of all the taxes upon the 
farmers and let the owners of small city 
lots go practically free of tax; for the market 
value of the land— what the bare land 
would sell for— would determine the tax, 
and not its size. Thus a city lot on a 
business street might be worth ten thousand 
dollars, and a good sized farm might in 
some places be worth only one thousand 
dollars. In this illustration the city lot 
would pay ten times as much as the farm. 

With most of farms and most of city 
properties the taxes would vary little from 
present rates; the exceptions would be in 
the large increase of the taxes upon "wild 
lands" and upon unimproved city property. 
At present, the man of enterprise 
who invests his wealth in a handsome 
building is taxed every year for having 
thus given employment to artisans and 
helped to beautify his vicinity and thus 
increase the value of his neighbor's unimproved 
property, which pays little tax, 
benefits no one but the owner, and is a 
drawback to the general community. 

If we see this to be a correct principle, 
it will not do to oppose the right. What 
if you have some "wild lands" or unimproved 
town lots, which you bought on 
speculation, whose value would be injured, 
you should be glad to share a part in forwarding 
a general good, even if it costs 
something. And if you are one of the 
saints, while you cannot neglect your work 
to forward this cause, but must wait on 
your special ministry— preaching the glad 
tidings, yet you certainly must not oppose 
any feature of right. Remember, too, 



that while the "little flock" is in a special 
sense "The King's own," and while he 
in a special sense is the "Captain of our 
salvation," yet in another sense there are 
many troops and divisions, in the great 
army by which present arrangements and 
institutions are to be overthrown.— 
Rev. 19:15-21. 

But will this solution of the question be 
accepted and acted upon by the people? 
Will this great change, this peaceable social 
revolution, accomplish the object desired? 
By no means! Those whose selfish 
interests are at stake will misrepresent 
the matter: men of wealth and influence 
will jump at the conclusion that it is a 
form of communism and anarchy, the secular 
and religious press will make light of 
it, and the majority of the people of influence 
and culture will pay no attention 
to it, thinking it a wild fanatical dream. 

The result will be, that this like other 
safety-valves of legislative reform, will be 
closed tight, until finally the pent up force 
of the lower stratum of society will upheave 
and shatter the entire social structure in a 
reign of terror and anarchy which Scripture 
foretells, in which all bounds will be 
passed, leveling all claims to land ownership 
and all values of every sort, as portrayed 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., 
Chapter XV. From our standpoint, therefore, 
we see it would be the part of wisdom 
for all to come into harmony with 
this new land movement; for the holding 
of vast tracts of land away from others 
is certainly contrary to the spirit of the 
dawning Day. Whether Mr. George and 
his co-laborers succeed or not, landlordism 
is sure to go down under the reign of 
Immanuel. 

A ROMAN CATHOLIC PRIEST 

known as Dr. McGlynn, has become an 
earnest advocate of Mr. George's land 
theory, and though opposed by Archbishop 
Corrigan, silenced from preaching and 
ordered to Rome, he has thus far not only 
defied and resisted papal interference, but, 
having the sympathy of many Catholics, 
he bids fair to create a wide split in the 
Church of Rome. Dr. McGlynn seems 
to be an honest man and a thinker, and 
the more he thinks and reasons as at present, 
the wider will be the breach between 



him and the Pope. The following Press 
dispatch is probably truthfully reported:— 

R939 : page 2 

St. Louis, May 16.— Dr. McGlynn was received 
by a large audience last evening when he came to 
the front of the Opera house stage to deliver his 
lecture, "The cross of the new crusade." From an 
interview it is understood that he will never go to 
Rome to recant, even if excommunicated. Dr. McGlynn 
outlines his faith as follows: "I would as 
soon go to Constantinople for my politics as to Rome. 
I believe the teachings of the church to be infallible, 
but the infallibility of popes, prefects, propagandas 
and bishops is quite another thing. 

"Galileo discovered a great truth, but the popes 
and prefects denied it. This did not make it less a 
truth. The inquisition tried to convince him that 
right was wrong, but he explained his truth and refused 
to believe it aught else than a truth. Then 
he was cast into prison, and, being an old man, he 
soon grew tired of prison life and after four days 
he recanted. He knew he was right, but he got 
down on his knees and perjured himself like a 
gentleman. Afterwards the heads of the church 
were compelled to acknowledge that Galileo was 
right and they were wrong. What Galileo ought to 
have done was to go to jail and rot there. If they 
had said: 'You will die without the sacrament of 
the church unless you relent,' he should have said: 
I want none of your sacrament under such conditions; 
I will die without it' Galileo was right and 
the world at the time was wrong. We are now 
right on the Land question and the world is wrong. 
We are not revolutionists; we are not going to hurt 
anybody. We are trying to secure equal justice to 
all men by a peaceful political revolution." 

The Church of Rome has long boasted 
of her invincibility, and that her ministers 
were obedient and her doctrines one. 
That this has been so in the past is largely 
owing to the superstitious hold she has 
had of her subjects; but she cannot expect 
to be free in the coming years as in the 
past. While other sects and systems are 
tottering and falling under the weight of 
their errors, she too must go to fragments. 
She has had many questions to settle and 
has settled many— right and wrong— but 
in this "Evil Day" questions are arising 
which cannot be straddled, and which 
mean disaster to her system, whichever 
side she takes. Two of these questions 
are now before her, the Land question and 
the Labor organization question. The 



Labor problem confronts the Church of 

Rome from the fact that in her desire to 

hold her subjects completely, mind and 

body, through the Confessional, she forbids 

their joining any secret society whose 

affairs might not be freely submitted to 

her priests for their approval. The 

"Knights of Labor" organization has enrolled 

hundreds of thousands of Catholics 

among its members who are bound to act 

according to the commands of the order, 

irrespective of the opinions of priests and 

confessors. Many Catholic Bishops saw 

this to be a question vital to the control 

of Papacy over her subjects: If she sanctions 

liberty of conscience at all, it becomes 

the entering wedge for full liberty 

of conscience on every subject, and hence 

the end of her power. On the other hand, 

she dreads to force an issue with so large 

a number of her subjects on a point which 

they feel is all-important, essential to their 

future earthly well-being. But advised by 

American bishops who appreciate the influence 

and strength of the Labor movement 

in this country, the Pope has recently 

consented to recognize Catholics holding 

membership among the Knights of 

Labor. 

This is a great step, a great concession, 
and is being interpreted as expressive of a 
great sympathy between the Church of 
Rome and the "lower classes"; as indicating 
that she is championing the cause of 
Labor as opposed to Capital. Not so, 
however. She more than any other system 
on earth has been the foe of liberty of conscience, 
and it is her own boast that she 
changes not. This concession to the K. 
of L. is not of choice: it is wrung from 
her. She more than any government on 
earth, is dependent on the servility, unmanliness, 
and mental bondage of the 
people for her influence and continued 
control over them. Hence in the struggle 
of this "Day of Trouble" she will be found 
on the side of monarchy, capital and oppression, 
notwithstanding the fact that the 
masses of her subjects are among the poor. 
She well knows that political liberty is a 
sure forerunner of general freedom of conscience, 
and her chief concern is to keep 
her shackles on men's consciences. Her 
interests bind her to support the thrones, 
and the interests of the thrones of earth 
will bind them to the Church of Rome 



and all others favorable to their maintenance 
—and this in the end will also include 
Protestant "orthodoxy." 

We say, then, that the approval of the 
Knights of Labor organization by the 
Church of Rome will surely not stand; it 
will ere long be revoked. Is this a prophecy 
on our part? No; it is but the 
reading in the light of the past history of 
that apostate church, of the prophetic statement 
of Revelation 19:19, which clearly 
shows that in this struggle the Beast [symbol 
of the Church of Rome] will be found 
on the side of, and banded with, the 
"Kings of the earth" and their armies. 

The Land question she hopes to nip in 
the bud by squelching Dr. McGlynn, one of 
the leaders; but so far he gives evidence 
of being of the sort willing to be martyred 
rather than deny an important truth. The 
above report of Mr. McGlynn's sentiments 
shows him to be a veritable Luther, 
raised up by other issues. Here seems to 
be the entering wedge of a great trouble 
in the Church of Rome, represented in 
Rev. 16:10,11. The darkness represents 
the perplexity rapidly coming over 
that hierarchy; and the gnawing of their 
tongues represents the painful controversies 
and contradictions one of another by 
those who act as Papacy's tongues. Mr. 
McGlynn has already contradicted Archbishop 
Corrigan and has cited the utterances 
of other tongues of Papacy, other 
writers and teachers honored in the past, 

[Continued on Seventh Page.] 

R939 : page 7 

View From The Tower— Concluded. 



to support him. In contradicting and 
controverting Dr. McGlynn, the Archbishop 
has been obliged also to call in 
question the testimony of records and 
writers long regarded by Catholics as 
sacred. Thus the gnawing of tongues in 
pain begins. 

If Dr. McGlynn will stand firm to the 
sentiments above quoted, he will surely go 
farther. He states his belief in the infallibility 
of the Church of Rome, but not in 
the infallibility of popes and bishops. This 



means that he accepts as infallible only 
the utterances of the great Councils of the 
Church of Rome, if we understand him. 
But if this be his position, he must go farther 
and deny the infallibility of Councils; 
for was it not the Grand Council of the 
Church of Rome which in 1869, sitting in 
the Vatican at Rome, declared for the first 
time the Infallibility of the Popes? So, 
then, Dr. McGlynn must come to the 
conclusion reached by unprejudiced, thinking 
men long since, that neither the 
Church of Rome nor its popes are beyond 
the possibility of error— infallible. 

The jangle and turmoil, political and 
religious, which is preparing for the world 
and coming from every quarter, is agonizing 
indeed to those who see not that by 
such means God is working out a great 
blessing, preparing for the permanent 
overthrow of error and wrong on every 
subject and in every quarter, and the establishment 
of the Kingdom for which we 
have long prayed: "Thy Kingdom come, 
Thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." 

In the little interval of peace before the 
storm gets under way, every saint should 
esteem it a privilege to share in the great 
work of the hour— the sealing of the servants 
of God (not the servants of sects), 

R939 : page 8 

the Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile, 

in their foreheads— providing such with 

the intelligent, intellectual, Scriptural understanding 

of God's plan, which alone 

will enable them to "stand" and not "fall" 

in this evil day. And if, while seeking 

out and sealing these, you are able to put 

into the hands of the deluded, Satan-blinded 

world some of the eye-salve of 

truth, you should do so— "doing good unto 

all men as you have opportunity, especially 

to the house-hold of faith." 

Surely those who are getting "The Plan 
of the Ages" (M. DAWN. VOL. I.) into the 
hands of the people so generally, are doing 
just such a work— sealing the saints, 
blessing many, and honoring our Father. 
He that honoreth God shall be honored. 
He that watereth others shall be watered. 



R940 : page 3 
CLEAR THE WAY. 

"Men of thought, be up and stirring 

Night and day. 
Sow the seed, withdraw the curtain, 

Clear the way. 
Men of action, aid and cheer them 

As you may. 
There's a fount about to stream; 
There's a light about to beam; 
There's a warmth about to glow; 
There's a flower about to blow; 
There's a midnight blackness changing 

Into gray. 
Men of thought and men of action, 

Clear the way. 

"Once the welcome light has broken, 

Who shall say 
What the unimagined glories 

Of the day? 
What the evil that shall perish 

In its ray? 
Aid the dawning, tongue and pen; 
Aid it, hopes of honest men; 
Aid it, paper, aid it, type; 
Aid it, for the hour is ripe: 
And our earnest must not slacken 

Into play. 
Men of thought, and men of action, 

Clear the way! 

"Lo, a cloud's about to vanish 
From the day; 

Lo, the right's about to conquer- 
Clear the way! 

Many a brazen wrong to crumble 
Into clay. 

With that right shall many more 

Enter smiling at the door; 

With the giant wrong shall fall 

Many others, great and small, 

That for ages long have held us 
For their prey. 

Men of thought, and men of action, 
Clear the way!" 

—Charles Mackay. 



R940 : page 3 

"MORE THAN THESE?" 



During the three and a half years of our 
Lord Jesus' ministry, the disciples who had 
sacrificed reputation, business, etc., to devote 
time and energy to heralding Messiah's 
presence and the establishment of his 
kingdom, had necessarily crude ideas regarding 
the manner and time of their 
Master's exaltation, and their exaltation 
with him as joint-rulers. It was quite 
sufficient, too, that they should faithfully 
take each step as it became due; hence 
the Master told them not all that he knew, 
but little by little as they could bear it- 
saying to them, "I have many things to 
tell you, but ye cannot bear them now." 

Who can tell how great was their disappointment, 
when they saw him whose 
kingdom and glory they had been declaring, 
ruthlessly murdered, and that as a 
felon. What though they knew him to be 
a "good man, mighty in word and deed," 
falsely accused and wrongfully crucified, 
this did not alter the fact that their long 
cherished national hopes of a Jewish king 
who would restore their nation to influence 
and power, were dashed suddenly. Yes, 
and their own individual hopes, ambitions 
and air-castles of important offices on the 
right and left of this king, in whose service 
they had left all else to engage— these 
were all suddenly and ruthlessly demolished 
by the unfavorable turn which matters 
had suddenly taken in the crucifixion 
of the expected king. 

Well did the Master know how desolate 
and aimless and perplexed they would feel 
at and after his crucifixion, for thus it 
was written by the Prophet: "I will 
smite the Shepherd, and the sheep will be 
scattered." And during the forty days 
between his resurrection and ascension, it 
was therefore his chief concern to gather 
them again and to re-establish their faith 
in him as the long-looked-for Messiah, by 
proving to them the fact of his resurrection, 
that he that was dead had come to 
life again, and that since his resurrection, 
though retaining the same individuality, 
he was "changed," and was no longer a 
human but a spiritual being, with all that 
this "change" implied, illustrating it by 
his appearing or manifesting himself in 
different forms and then vanishing from 
their sight. He also corrected their misapprehensions 
and kept them from going 
back to former occupations, by making 



them further acquainted with their future 
work. 

It is interesting to note how our Lord 
gave this instruction— not all at once, 
hastily, but little by little, and in such 
manner as to make the deepest impressions. 
Though we know of only seven appearings 
during those forty days, and those but 
brief, we cannot doubt that he was often 
invisibly present with them, hearing them 
express their doubts and fears and hopes 
and wishes, yet manifesting himself to 
their sight only when he had some lesson 
to impart which would best be given in 
that way. 

He broke the news of his resurrection 
gradually to them through the Marys, to 
whom he first revealed himself— women 
naturally catching more quickly than men 
the truth in such a matter. Then he overtook 

R941 : page 3 

two of the sad, downcast disciples 

as they walked into the country, and as a 

friend inquired the cause of their trouble 

and despondency. Their hearts overflowed 

at the touch of his sympathy, and 

they told him of their Master who had 

been crucified three days before. They 

told how they had been with him for over 

three years, having left former employment 

and made themselves foolish in the 

eyes of their fellow men by believing that 

Jesus of Nazareth was indeed God's anointed, 

mentioned in the prophecies as 

the one who should re-establish their nation, 

and finally rule and bless the world. 

Ah! said they sadly, this is what we "had 

hoped," but these hopes, and our own personal 

ambitions, founded on his promises 

that we should reign with him, are all suddenly 

dashed. We cannot tell you how 

we feel— we have no heart, no ambition 

left for anything. After having such great 

expectations, the ordinary things of life 

seem common and distasteful. Our Master 

seems to have deceived both himself 

and us, for he was truly a good man, 

"mighty in word and deed before God 

and all the people." 

Then the stranger preached them a stirring 
sermon from the prophecies, showing 
them that the very things which had so 
disheartened them were the things which 
the prophets had foretold concerning the 



true Messiah,— that before he could rule 
and bless and lift up Israel and the world, 
he must first redeem them with his own 
life from the curse of death, which came 
upon all through Adam, and that afterward, 
raised to life and glory by Jehovah, 
their Master would fulfill all that is written 
by the prophets of glory and honor, 
as well as shame and death. 

A wonderful preacher and a wonderful 
sermon was that: It started new ideas and 
opened new expectations and hopes. Years 
afterward they remembered it, and drew 
strength and hope from it, and said, "Did 
not our hearts burn within us while he 
talked with us by the way and while he 
opened to us the Scriptures." 

Again he appeared to the disciples, except 
Thomas, assembled in an upper room. 
And again, Thomas having said he would 
not believe unless the Master should appear 
and show the nail prints and the spear 
mark, our Lord did appear just so, and 
showed that he could as easily appear so, 
as in any other form, and that he wanted 
to meet every reasonable doubt with satisfactory 
proof. Yet he also showed Thomas, 
and all, that he was no longer flesh, 
but spirit, by vanishing from their sight. 

Five weeks after the crucifixion, when 
the excitement of that event and of the 
appearances of the risen Lord had passed 
off, the practical questions of life began 
to present themselves to the disciples. 
They gradually settled down to the conviction 
that though somehow God had 
been doing something with them, and had 
used them somewhat in his service, yet 
that whatever it accomplished, that work 
was at an end. Peter, the oldest, and 
James and John, the youngest of the 
disciples, had formerly been partners in 
the fishing business, and had left their 
boats and nets at the Master's call to become 
"fishers of men." These at Peter's 
suggestion formed their partnership anew, 
taking with them Thomas, and Nathanael 
(he whom Jesus termed "an Israelite indeed, 
in whom there was no guile," who 
though not one of the apostles was one of 
the "brethren"), and two other of the 
disciples, probably Andrew and Philip. 

They knew not what a turning point 
that was in their lives. Hear Peter, usually 
a leader and spokesman among them, 
address the others, saying: Brethren, we 



must do something, we cannot spend the 
remainder of life as we have recently been 
doing. We followed the Master, and taught 
from city to city that the King had come 
and that the kingdom of God was at hand, 
to be set up in glory and power. And 
though we still have evidence that our 
Master was Jehovah's special messenger, 
and that divine favor still rests upon him 
and has raised him from the dead, yet, 
after all that has happened, we certainly 
cannot go about now with the same message 
—we would be adjudged insane. From 
the four manifestations of our Lord made 
to us shortly after his resurrection, we got 
new hopes and thoughts, and wondered 
whether he would not after all somehow 
continue the work. But still, all things 
move on as usual, and we see no sign of 
his kingdom, and he has not even appeared 
to any of us for a long time now. So my 
counsel is that we seven, bound by unusual 
sympathy, become partners in the fish 
business, and in some degree bury our 
hopes of kingdom honors. And they all 
assented. 

Arrangements made, boats, nets, etc., 
procured, they make a fresh start at the 
old business. Who can doubt that the 
Lord was among them often, whilst they 
were preparing, and that he had all things 
arranged which would make this a valuable 
lesson. If they should have great success 
and become swallowed up with interest in 
the business, they would soon be unfit for 
the higher service, yet if they should have 
no success, it would seem like forcing them, 
so the Lord adopted a plan which taught 
them a lesson which he often teaches all 
his followers, viz., that the success or failure 
of our efforts in any direction he can 
control if he please. 

They toiled all night and caught not a 
fish and began to feel disheartened. A 
stranger on shore calls to them to know 
of their success. Poor success! they answer, 
Caught nothing! Ah! says the stranger, 
now cast your net on the other side 
the boat and try. No use, stranger, answers 
one, we have tried both sides all night 
long, and if there were fish on one side, 
there would be on the other. But we will 
try again and let you see. They did so 
and got an immense haul. It is strange, 
said some! but the quick and impressible 
John at once got the correct idea, and 



said, Brethren, the Lord only could do 
this; don't you remember the feeding of 
the multitudes, etc.? That must be the 
Lord on shore and this is another way, 
"another form" and time, that he has 
chosen to manifest himself to us. Don't 
you remember too that it was just so when 
the Lord first called us? Then, too, we 
had toiled all night and caught nothing 
until he told us, "Let down your nets for 
a draught" (Luke 5:4-9). Yes, surely 
that is the Lord, notwithstanding we do 
not recognize him by his appearance and 
form, since his resurrection. He now appears 
in a variety of forms, but we know 
each time, that it is he, by some peculiar 
circumstance like this. 

And when they got to shore, they found 
that Jesus had bread as well as fish, and 
learned the lesson, that under his direction 
and care, they would not be left to 
starve, because he "knoweth that ye have 
need of these things." They did not ask 
him, if he were the Lord; for on this as on 
other occasions, the eyes of their understanding 
being opened, they knew him, 
though he had "another form," different 
from the one they had been used to seeing 
before he died.— John 21:12. 

This was the Lord's opportunity to impress 
a lesson upon them all, so specially 
addressing Peter, the leader, pointing to 
the fish, and boats, and nets, he said, 
Simon Peter, lovest thou me more than 
these?* You left these things once to 
follow me and be a fisher of men; have 
you changed your mind, Peter? Are you 
sure which you love most— me and my 
service, or this business to which you have 
returned? When our Lord asked this the 
third time, it began to imply to poor Peter 
that the tendency with him was to love 
and serve business more than Christ. And 
he no doubt remembered also the three 
times he had denied the Lord. Peter was 
grieved; he felt remorse, and no wonder, 
but he immediately threw himself upon 
the Lord's mercy and answered, "Lord, 
thou knowest all things," thou knowest 
my weaknesses, yet "Thou knowest that I 
love thee." Then said Jesus, Feed my 
sheep and lambs; make that, not fishing, 
your business, Peter. Peter heeded and 
left the fishing business, and while feeding 
the flock over whom God had made him 
an overseer, proved by his faithfulness even 



unto death in his service, that he did really 
and truly love the Lord more than the 
fishing business, and that his love was not 
in word only, but in deed and in truth. 

Had Peter continued in the fishing business 
and neglected the sheep and the 
lambs, which the great Shepherd had asked 
him to seek out and feed, would his actions 
not have contradicted his reply to our 
Lord's question— "Thou knowest that I 
love thee" above all? This would have 
been loving in word, but not in deed and 
in truth. (See 1 Jno. 3:18.) Had this 
been the course of the apostles, had they 
loved the Lord with their mouths, or professedly 
only, and not acted in harmony 
with their profession, we know they would 
not have been acceptable as members of 
the body of Christ; they would have been 
"castaways" from the heavenly calling. 
Called, but not faithful to the conditions 
of the call, they would not be among the 
chosen. Had their love for the Lord been 
overcome by their love for business, or 



*Some have supposed that our Lord's question referred 
to the other disciples standing about— that he 
asked Peter whether he loved him more than the 
other disciples loved him. But such a supposition 
is quite unreasonable. Our Lord would not ask 
Peter a question which he could not answer; for 
how could Peter tell the depth of love which his 
fellow disciples bore for the Master. Neither would 
our Lord ask a question so impolite, for it would 
certainly be very unkind to ask one friend among 
others, whether he loved more than they. And furthermore 
the structure of the Greek indicates that the 
comparison is with impersonal, inanimate things; 
such as nets, boats, etc., would be. 

R941 : page 4 

honor, or family pride, or love of peace 

and ease, they would have been "drowned," 

or "choked," and would have become 

unfruitful. And what would thus 

have been true of them, applies with equal 

force to us who are now living in the 

world, the consecrated, anointed representatives 

of the Shepherd, to seek and feed 

his scattered and starving sheep. 

R942 : page 4 



The Lord tells us that he is seeking a 
choice little flock to be his Bride, to be 
with him and to behold and share his glory; 
and he tells us the character of the 
class he seeks, and that he will have no 
others. He tells us plainly (Matt. 10:34-38.) 
that such as love business, pleasure, 
self, ease, honor of men, or family, or even 
life itself, more than they love him, so 
that they would not sacrifice more for him 
and his word than for these, are NOT WORTHY 
to be of the class he is now selecting. 

Let us be very much in earnest, dear 
brethren and sisters, fellow racers for the 
first grand prize. We cannot serve 
both God and mammon; we will please 
neither, if we try it. We will by a half-hearted 
service fail even to please the world, 
get its chief favors; and more than all, 
surely the Bridegroom would accept of and 
crown as an overcomer and his joint-heir, 
no such faint-heart. Let us not deceive 
ourselves; that is love in truth, which works 
by deeds and sacrifices, and consists not of 
professions of love merely. Let us each, 
then, scan carefully his own life. Let each 
ask himself how his life must seem to the 
Master's eye. What does he who reads 
the thoughts and intents of the heart see 
to be your chiefest love, your chiefest aim 
in life? The world or even loving brethren, 
not knowing the heart, might misjudge 
you, but the Lord knows, and you 
should also know— whether you love him 
and his will more than self, family, business, 
etc. Let us not deceive ourselves, 
unless our love is active and full of that 
joy which esteems it a privilege to bear 
the cross in following Christ, it is not the 
supreme motive of our hearts. 

Do not dodge the question, it is all important 
—answer the Lord's question: 
"Lovest thou me more than these?" And 
if you answer with Peter, "Yea, Lord," 
then like Peter obey the call, Feed my 
sheep and lambs, rather than the calls of 
business, the world, the flesh, and the devil 
to selfishness and ease. So, like Peter, you 
shall be accounted meet [worthy] for the 
inheritance of the saints in light, and to 
be confessed by the Master as his fellow 
overcomer and joint-heir, before his Father 
and the holy messengers.— Col. 1:12; 
Rev. 3:5. 

Do not offer as an excuse for not feeding 
the sheep, that there are others more 



capable of feeding them, and you prefer 

to let them do it. That is not the language 

of love. The loving servant will anxiously 

inquire, Lord, how much can I do? 

Show me how to manage my temporal affairs 

and how to cultivate my one or many 

talents to secure the largest possible results 

in thy service. The Chief Shepherd is responsible, 

and he will see to it that every 

true sheep shall now get the "meat in due 

season," whether you do what you can in 

the service or not. The question is, Will 

you accept of the honor of sacrificing other 

interests in his service to which he thus 

invites you, and thereby prove your love 

for him to be SUPREME, above all other 

loves. He is passing by the great and 

wise and prudent, according to the wisdom 

of this age and is calling to his service 

just such as you (Matt. 11:25). This has 

always been his plan from the first. He 

chooses "babes" who will babble forth the 

truth unceremoniously, to confound the 

wise and great, while, as it is written, "He 

taketh the wise in their own craftiness."— 

ICor. 3:19; Job 5:13. 

The worldly-wise are often ensnared by 
their own boasted wisdom, or rather conceit, 
which from God's standpoint is foolishness. 
So then, no matter how unlearned 
any may be in earthly learning, no matter 
how uncouth in speech and address, no 
matter how many are more able naturally 
to represent the shepherd and call and feed 
the sheep in his name, let each appreciate 
his own privilege of showing his love for 
the shepherd, by laying down time, influence, 
money, yea, life itself, in feeding the 
sheep. Such shall be approved and accepted 
of the Master as his joint-heirs, no 
matter how humble and ignoble and unworthy 
they may be now, in the eyes of 
the world. 

It is thus— in the service of the church, 
our fellow sheep, that we are exhorted by 
the apostle to sacrifice present interests, 
when he says, As Christ laid down his life 
for us, we ought also to lay down our lives 
for the brethren (1 John 3:16). We begin 
laying down life, by laying down luxuries 
and worldly advantages and end the 
service with the actual death of our human 
self. It was to this, the great business of 
life, that Paul exhorted believers to consecrate 
themselves, saying: "I beseech you 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye 



present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, 
acceptable unto God."— Rom. 12:1. 

How many of the Lord's professed followers 
are to-day making fishing for earthly 
things of some sort, the chief business 
of life— fishing for money, or influence, or 
a great name, or self-gratification, or some 
thing of the sort— leaving the great work 
which the Master gave all his followers, 
viz., to be fishers of men, feeders of his 
sheep and lambs. 

True, all are not apostles, as Peter, and 
all are not called to such special service, 
as his, requiring all their time. But each 
one is called upon to improve and use 
whatever openings and opportunities he 
does possess in preaching the good tidings. 
The apostle Paul said, we should follow 
his example, which was truly worthy and 
noble; and Peter refers to all the members 
of the body of Christ, as the "Royal 
Priesthood" that "should show forth the 
praises of him who hath called you out of 
darkness into his marvellous light" (1 Pet. 2:9.) 
This should be the chief business 
of all the saints. To this work we were 
anointed as members of the body of Christ 
by the same spirit which anointed our 
Head, and for the same purpose. See 
what was the purpose of his anointing, and 
learn therefrom the purpose of your own 
anointing under him. It is written of 
him, and of us as members of him, "The 
spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because 
he hath anointed me TO PREACH THE GOSPEL 
to the meek."— Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18. 

We have no hesitation in saying that 
every member of the anointed body of 
Christ will be a preacher of the gospel, 
though probably few of them will be of 
those known as "clergymen." The fact 
is, that those who have the truth and are 
governed by its spirit, could not avoid 
preaching as much as they have opportunity. 
Such will not need pay (neither 
money, honor, nor flattery), as inducement 
to enter the ministry (service) of the 
gospel, but would be glad to preach regardless 
of these and even at a loss of honor, 
money, etc., like Paul counting it joy 
to be considered worthy to suffer loss for 
the truth's sake, and to be God's ambassadors. 
The spirit of the truth had taken 
firm hold of some in the early church 
whom the Apostle addressed saying: "Ye 
endured a great fight of afflictions," "Ye 



were made a gazing-stock both by reproaches 
and afflictions," "and took joyfully 
the spoiling of your goods." (Heb. 10:32-34.) 
True, earnest preachers imbued 
with the spirit of the truth were those 
also, mentioned in Acts 8:4. In the 
persecution for the truth they hid not their 
light under a bushel, but openly declared 
the truth; therefore they were scattered 
abroad. But even as exiles, "they went 
everywhere preaching the word." They 
all preached, but seldom did they get a 
chance to preach in a synagogue, and few 
probably had ability for public speaking. 
They preached as Jesus and the disciples 
did, from house to house, or by the wayside, 
wherever they found hungry hearts 
and hearing ears— the "meek." 

Why was it that these and the apostles 
did not say to themselves: We must be 
prudent, and not let it be known that we 
believe this gospel; for we have our business 
and family interests to attend to, and 
if we are zealous for the gospel, it will result 
in breaking up our business prospects, 
and we and our families will be unpopular 
and may be driven from home or cast into 
prison— Why did they not reason thus? 
We answer, because they had the spirit of 
the truth, the holy anointing was on them 
and they delighted to do God's will, and 
to be engaged in his service at any cost. 
Peter and John, when commanded to 
preach this gospel no more, answered, 
"We cannot [help] but speak, the things 
which we have seen and heard" (Acts 4:20). 
Paul tells how the fire of the truth 
and its service was burning in his heart 
and must find vent through his mouth, 
cost it what it might and did, when he 
says: Woe is me [Wretchedly unhappy 
would I be], if I preach not the gospel of 
Christ. To be obliged to keep silent and 
not declare the boundless love and glorious 
plan of God, would have been misery 
indeed to Paul, while he could rejoice 
with joy unspeakable, if permitted to 
preach it, even at the cost of home, comforts, 
fame, honor, wealth and "all things." 

YOUR REASONABLE SERVICE. 

None should gather from the foregoing, 
that God expects the same service from 
each of the consecrated, regardless of talents 
and opportunities. There is just one 



sense in which the same exactly is expected 
of each; that is, each to be accounted 
worthy of joint-heirship with Christ must 
DO WHAT HE CAN. Those who have one 
talent, may do what they can as really and 
truly and as acceptably with God, as those 
who have ten talents, who at most can do 
no more. And none who have consecrated 
all, and who have seen how little their all 
is, in comparison to the favors of God, 
past, present and future, can conscientiously 
offer less than all, the little service they 
can render. 

But some inquire, What can I do? My 
life seems so hemmed in, and my opportunities 
for testifying to the truth and suffering 
for the Master and his word in feeding 
his sheep, seem so small, that I fear I 
am not one of the sacrificers at all. Can 
that be so? Now brother, tell us of your 
case. Well, I am a miner; I work alone 
and have only Sundays and my evenings 
to myself, and my neighbors are ignorant 

R943 : page 4 

and seem irreligious. Very well, begin 
by using the advantages you have, and 
trust God to open larger and wider doors 
of usefulness before you by and by. First 
think over the good tidings of great joy 
yourself, and let it fill and overflow your 
own heart. Then think, how much good 
the joy and peace which you possess would 
do your fellows. Think, how much they 
need it, and how it might lighten and 
sweeten all the future of their lives. Think 
then of the privilege of being God's messenger 
to tell your neighbors of the great 
ransom price given for sin, and the full 
atonement which is made, and the grand 
results to follow, urging them to investigate 
and accept and be reconciled to 
God. Then pray God for wisdom to use 
the privilege he has granted you. By this 
time your heart will be full of love, fervor 
and zeal in your work as God's representative, 
and fear and shame will be cast out 
of your heart. Gradually with study and 
care you will learn to be wise as a serpent, 
as well as harmless as a dove, in presenting 
the truth; and sooner or later you will 
find proof of your ministry (service) being 
acceptable, in the fruits it will bear. Some 
will be interested and hear you gladly, 
while more will revile you and say all manner 



of evil against you falsely, for the 

truth's sake, because the world knoweth 

you not, even as it knew Him not (1 Jno. 3:1). 

Rejoice and be exceeding glad of 

this evidence of your faithfulness and at 

these promised present rewards, for great 

is your reward in heaven. Do not unwisely 

intrude your message at inopportune 

times, nor in a rough blunt manner, nor 

in harsh language, but let your speech be 

with wisdom seasoned with grace. 

But a mother in moderate circumstances 
with a large family inquires, What can I 
do? I find no opportunity to sacrifice in 
the Lord's service. My time is wholly 
consumed in the care of my home and 
children— their morals as well as their persons. 
Ah! Sister, much depends upon 
how or to whom you sacrifice. Most of 
mothers know well what it is to sacrifice. 
To properly raise a family costs much self-sacrifice 
as every good mother knows. You 
sacrifice your health, your convenience, 
your time and comfort by night and by 
day. All good mothers find it thus, whether 
consecrated or not. But there is this 
difference: The majority do it simply from 
pride and selfish motives, in the desire to 
be honored in their children's honor and 
display. But the consecrated mother should 
regard the matter thus: I have given myself 
and my family for the present and the 
future to God; He has given me charge 
to use and dispose of these as so many talents 
according to my judgment for his 
glory; His word clearly teaches me that my 
children are my first charge; and it is God's 
will that I do my best to train them for 
usefulness to themselves and society. This 
part of your sacrifice rendered to God, 
results much the same as though you had 
not consecrated— in sacrifices for your 
children, yet in your case it is as actually 
a sacrifice of your talents to the Lord, as 
though done more directly to him. In fact, 
it is more acceptable to him, than if you 
were to leave your little ones to grow up 
like weeds, while you go abroad to preach 
the Gospel. 

But if the spirit of consecration is back 
of all you do for your children, and not 
selfish pride, it will have this effect: while 
anxious and careful for their best interests, 
you will remember that you have no more 
right to simply gratify pride in their dress, 
etc., than in your own, and they, though 



neat, will not be so extravagantly dressed 
as some of your neighbor's children whose 
care is backed by pride and vanity. You 
will seek to economize the Lord's money 
and time in dressing them as well as yourself, 
and you will not always naturally like 
to have them, just as your consecration 
will lead you to have them. But you will 
say to yourself, It is the Lord's time and 
money and must not be wasted; he wants 
me to care for my children, but not to 
make dolls of them and cultivate pride in 
them, to spoil their dispositions and unfit 
them for the present as well as future true 
pleasure and usefulness. Soon you will 

R943 : page 5 

find, that thus doing all things as unto the 
Lord, you will be able to save some time, 
etc., for use in more direct service of the 
truth; and you will find time and inclination 
to speak to a thoughtful neighbor or 
caller, or to write of the message to a 
friend, sending or giving a suitable paper 
with the seasonable word. Thus your life 
is as truly consecrated and acceptable with 
God through Christ, as that of one whose 
every day is spent in public preaching to 
multitudes. And just so it is, in whatever 
circumstances we may be placed— If we 
use the opportunities we possess, to the best 
advantage according to our best judgment, 
with an eye single to the Master's glory, 
it is as acceptable unto him, as the faithfulness 
and greater results of those possessing 
greater opportunities. And every faithful 
one will be able to increase his opportunities 
and service and shall thus increase 
his joy.- 1 Cor. 7:20-22. 

Is not this a reasonable service? Surely 
it is; and furthermore, it is the most enjoyable 
use you can possibly make of your 
talents. Think you, that those who spend 
their lives in attempted self-gratification 
are truly happy? Nay, none ever succeeded 
in pleasing himself— in gratifying 
all selfish desires. But he whose life is 
entirely given up to God and whose aim 
is to do God's will and honor him, is supremely 
happy. Even though it brings 
persecution and trouble he can rejoice, 
and be exceeding glad with a joy that the 
world can neither give, neither take away, 
and which even death cannot quench. 

"Let us not love in word, neither in 



tongue; but in deed and in truth. And 
hereby we know that we are of the 
truth and shall assure our hearts before 
him. For if our heart condemn us, God 
is greater than our heart and knoweth all 
things. Beloved if our heart condemn us 
not, then have we confidence toward 
God."-l John 3:18-21. 



R943 : page 5 

"WHO IS MY MOTHER? AND WHO 
ARE MY BRETHREN?" 

It is well for those who have entered into 
the new relationship of spiritual sons 
of God to consider carefully and frequently 
the changed relationship into which it 
has brought us. Our most intimate relationships 
are no longer those of earthly 
origin. Our interests, hopes, and aims 
are now bound up with those of the heavenly 
family; and as we come to realize 
this more fully, our affections reach out 
after the family of God and our communion 
one with another should be such as 
to deepen and broaden that love one for 
another. 

The above expression of our Lord shows 
how he regarded the heavenly relationship. 
When one said unto him: "Behold 
thy mother and thy brethren 
stand without desiring to speak with 
thee," he answered, "Who is my mother? 
and who are my brethren? And he stretched 
forth his hand toward his disciples, and 
said, Behold my mother and my brethren! 
for whosoever shall do the will of my Father 
which is in heaven, the same is my 
brother and sister and mother."— 
Matt. 12:47-50. 

As new creatures, we are spiritual sons 
of God, soon to be joined in heirship with 
his dear Son; we are the espoused virgin 
who, forsaking all earthly ties, is to be 
joined in marriage to our heavenly Bridegroom, 
and with joy we are now making 
all possible preparation for the great event. 
When this new condition is fully entered 
upon, we shall no longer be husbands and 
wives, parents and children, brothers and 
sisters, etc., with those on the earthly 
plane; for we shall be "kings and priests 
unto God," prepared to rule and to bless 



all the families of the earth, every member 
of which will then be as dear to us as 
to God. Our love to our former dear ones 
will be no less than now. Our love will 
be greatly intensified, though not bounded 
by the former narrow limits of blood 
relationship. 



R943 : page 5 

SON OF MAN AND SON OF GOD. 

BY B. WILSON. 

In what sense was Christ the son of man? 
There is no doubt whatever as to Christ 
being "the Son of Man"— but in what sense 
it is asked. Did this phrase mean that he 
was simply a man— one of human kind; 
or did it imply something more than this? 
I think more is comprehended in the 
phrase. Jesus very frequently spoke of 
himself as the Son of Man, and must have 
meant something beyond the idea that 
some have advanced, that he was the son 
of the man Joseph, the husband of his 
mother Mary. I will give a few references 
for the reader to examine, where Jesus 
calls himself the Son of Man. Matt. 20: 18; 
18:11; 16:13-16; 12:8; 20:18,19; 
25:31; 26:64. These are all from 
Matthew's testimony. They prove that 
the Son of Man was the anointed one, and 
are to be so understood. The Jews also 
understood the term as synonymous with 
Messiah. What other conclusion could 
they or we arrive at after reading Dan. 7:13,14? 
Let the reader turn to this reference, 
and see if it does not refer to the 
Messiah. But why is he called the Son of 
Man? Surely not in the same sense that I 
am the son of a man, because begotten by 
him; nor as the term is so frequently applied 
to Ezekiel the prophet; nor as used 
by David in the eighth Psalm, and as 
quoted by Paul in Heb. 2:6. The phrase 
as used by Jesus is always in the emphatic 

R944 : page 5 

form, though our English versions do not 
show it. The Greek is— ho whyos tou 
anthropou, "the Son of the Man." This 
definite form of expression implies that 



Christ was the son of some particular man. 
Shall we say the son of Joseph, the carpenter? 
Did Jesus mean this every time, when 
he used this emphatic form of expression? 

1 trow not. Then whose son was he? I 
answer, "the son of David." The Messiah 
was to be the seed of David, according 

to the Prophets, and the genealogical 
records as given by Matthew and Luke, 
prove that Jesus was the Son of David, 
with whom Jehovah made an everlasting 
covenant, saying, "His seed shall 
endure forever, and his throne as the sun 
before me," Psa. 89:36. The genealogical 
records prove him to be the Son of David. 
The prophets foretold that the Messiah who 
should sit on David's throne, and order 
his kingdom, was to be the Son of Jesse 
and David. Isa. 9:6,7; 11:1; Jer. 23:5; 
33:15; Psa. 132:11. The apostles 
believed that Jesus was the Messiah and 
the son of David. Peter, in his discourse 
on the day of Pentecost, tells the Jews 
that Jesus, according to the flesh, was from 
the loins of David; and Paul says that he 
was "made of the seed of David according 
to the flesh," Acts 2:30; Rom. 1:3; 

2 Tim. 2:8. And the glorified Jesus himself 
declares: "I am the root and offspring 

of David," Rev. 22:16. From these 
testimonies I conclude that Jesus the 
Christ was the Son of Man, not in the sense 
of simply being a man, but because he was 
the son of the man David, with whom Jehovah 
made an everlasting covenant, that 
the throne and kingdom of Israel should 
belong to him and his seed forever. 

[Our Lord was "Son of David" according 
to the flesh through his mother, who 
was of the lineage of David. As to how 
it was possible for our Saviour to be born 
of a woman who was of the fallen, condemned, 
imperfect race, and yet be perfect, 
undefiled and free from the condemnation 
which came upon every other member 
of the race through Adam, we refer the 
reader to an article in the TOWER of Sept. 
1885, entitled "The Undefiled One."- 
EDITOR OF Z.W. TOWER.] 

In what sense was Christ the son of God? 
He was called the son of God while in the 
flesh. But it is asked in what sense? I 
answer, because he was God's son, in the 
sense of being begotten by him. Christ 
called God his Father, and God acknowledged 
him as his son. See Matt. 3:17; 



17:5. If Christ was the Son of God 
only as we are sons of God, then he 
was not the son of God, but a son; nor 
would there be any more reason in confessing 
him to be the Son of the living 
God, as Peter and all the apostles did, than 
in confessing some other believer to be 
God's son. But Jesus claimed to be the 
Son of God, and consequently the Messiah. 
He also required his disciples to 
believe this truth. See John 9:35-37; 
10:36. The belief that Jesus, the Son 
of Man, was also the Christ, the Son of 
the living God, lies at the very foundation 
of Christianity— on it the Church was to 
be built. Matt. 16:16-18. Jesus was more 
than an adopted son by faith— was more 
than a begotten son by the word of truth; 
he was "the only begotten of the Father," 
John 1:14; 3:16; 1 John 4:9. The 
Father with audible voice, proclaimed him 
as his beloved Son, Matt. 3:17; 17:5. 
Paul calls him God's own Son, and his 
dear son, Gal. 4:4-5; Col. 1:13.- 
Millenarian. 



R944 : page 5 

"COME OUT OF HER!" 



Auburn, Ills., April 25th, '87. 
DEAR MRS. RUSSELL: -Pardon me for 
troubling you so soon again. I am so very 
much alone in the world, because of my 
peculiar belief, that I find it a relief to 
open my heart to you. I wish I could make 
you realize the change that has come over 
me regarding worldly affairs, since I have 
taken the liberty to think for myself. I 
was first impressed with these newly discovered 
ideas regarding the teaching of 
God's Word, in the fall of 1881. I 
grasped the central idea, the Atonement, 
from the first; also the Restitution of all 
things, through justification. These central 
points seem to me as clear as the 
noon-day. Some other points, and in 
comparison to these, minor ones I should 
say, such as the Trinity— the exact state 
of the being after death, the Communion, 
Baptism (the outward symbol and its correct 
form), and the Law touching the 
keeping of the Sabbath— these four questions 
have caused doubts and arguments 



for and against, to harbor within my mind. 

In regard to "the spirits in prison" (1 Pet. 3:18-20): 

Does this not teach that Christ, 

during his stay in the tomb, went in spirit 

to the spirits in prison? In regard to 

Baptism: It appears to me unimportant as 

to the form. It also appears immaterial, 

whether the person baptized be an infant 

or an adult. Children are bidden to come 

to Christ. And they are readier to believe 

and to love a Savior, than older ones. I 

feel that it is right to bring God's children 

to his altar, leaving them in the care 

of the Spirit. I feel that no time should 

be lost in putting them into his care. I 

feel deeply upon this subject, because I 

wish to do what is right. 

Though I keep every day holy to God, 
yet, to be conscientious, I must keep one 
special day. 

Perhaps now you will say, I have not 
truly been begotten of the Spirit. Dear 
Sister, I can echo your fears upon this subject. 
And that brings me to the principal 
part of my trouble. My life is one of 
small trials and vexations. Like Mary I 
have chosen the better part, but I am a 
veritable Martha, though indeed with all 
the aspirations and ideas and longings of 
a Mary. That is, I am so surrounded with 
worldly anxieties and petty cares— having 
the care of my family, trying to make ends 
meet and working from morning till night, 
with miserable health continually, which 
of itself is a cause of nervousness and 
fretfulness. Do you wonder I doubt my 
own position in the Plan of the Ages? I 
do not presume to know where I stand in 
this matter— whether upon the spiritual or 
human plane. But I can say, with a conscience 
void of intentional, wilful offence, 
that I shall be grateful, if I may be accounted 
worthy even to be a doorkeeper 
in the house of our God. 

In my present circumstances I am unable 
to take a stand even as a Christian, 
unless I attend a nominal church. My 
mother is a staunch Episcopalian. She is 
determined I shall either be a "somebody" 
in the Church, or a "nobody" 
out of it. She has influence. This is my 
position here. I speak not against my 
mother— all honor be to that sacred name! 
I only mention the fact, that you may 
see how I am placed. 

Now, what is my duty? Can I do more 



good in my peculiar position, by going 
with my mother, thus making manifest 
my interest in religion and introducing 
my own views, as I see opportunity— or 
shall I continue as at present— in obscurity, 
almost absolute seclusion from society, 
for the sake of my principles? I am 
perfectly willing to do so— if it is right. 
I have made no secret of my way of 
thinking; nor can I. My nature is too 
frank and open to admit of that. Hence 
the estrangement between myself and 
every one. But is this as it ought to be? 
I know I must suffer persecution, and 
gladly have done so— yet I may be standing 
in the light of others, if I cannot see 
plainly myself. I fear, I have not made 
myself plain. I will try and send some 
money soon— for O! I want this work to 
go forward! My husband and myself 
took Communion this year by ourselves, 
and it seemed a blessed season. I remain 
Yours lovingly, MRS. S 



REPLY. 

MRS. S , MY DEAR SISTER:-Your 

esteemed favor of the 25th April is at 
hand and be assured that in your questionings 
and fears I fully sympathize with 
you. I do not look upon them however 
as evidence of any lack of consecration to 
God, or that you are not begotten of the 
Spirit. They come only as the result of an 
imperfect understanding of God's great 
comprehensive plan. 

What you need, then, is to take plenty 
of time, and with patient carefulness and a 
meek and teachable spirit which is intent 
on knowing and doing God's will only, 
to study his great plan of the ages. Keep 
well in mind its deep foundation— its complete 
satisfaction of the demands of justice 
in our redemption through the precious 
blood of Christ; its righteous principles 
recognizing God's absolute and universal 
sovereignty and man's individual free 
agency; and then mark the wonderful scope 
of the plan— so far reaching in its grand 
results as to affect all creatures "in heaven 
and in earth," to establish once and forever 
the absolute authority of God in all 
the universe, and to establish all his creatures 
in righteousness and joyful and loving 
obedience. 

Seeing that such is the wondrous scope 



of the divine plan, we should not be surprised 

to learn that it requires 7,000 years 

for its development— the 6,000 past and 

1,000 future. The plan will have reached 

its culmination when Christ gives up the 

kingdom to the Father at the end of his 

millennial reign. Taking this grand view 

of the subject, many otherwise troublesome 

questions will settle themselves; for instance 

your anxiety for your children and your 

responsibility as a mother. God says: "All 

souls are mine: as the soul of the father, 

so also the soul of the son is mine" (Ezek. 18:4). 

God does not leave the eternal 

destiny of a single soul to the faithfulness 

of father or mother, or pastor or teacher, 

or any one. They are all his; he knows 

them every one individually, and every 

R944 : page 6 

phase of their character and disposition, 
and all their surrounding circumstances 
from earliest infancy. And each one of 
these individuals must stand on trial for 
himself: their eternal destiny, whether 
it be life everlasting in its glory and perfection, 

R945 : page 6 

or death— the blotting out of existence 
(Job 10:19; 7:21; 14:21.) must 
be decided by each for himself, when 
brought to a full knowledge of the truth- 
trie plan of redemption and reconciliation 
accomplished through Christ. God himself 
has made full and complete arrangements 
for the eternal welfare and blessedness 
and glory of every individual, who 
will appreciate and submit to his authority. 
And he has also made arrangements for 
the discipline so necessary to their development 
and final perfecting. Where then, 
you ask, is a mother's responsibilities? It 
is simply this: In view of your greater influence 
over the child, your opportunity, 
and THEREFORE responsibility to God, for 
the right use of that influence, is greater 
than that of any other person. We are 
each accountable to God for the right use 
of whatever talents and opportunities we 
have, and no more. If you have naturally 
good judgment and make good use of it 
in training your children to righteousness 
and obedience to God, you will not only 
receive the divine approval, but without 



doubt you will see at least some of the good 
effects of your training in the present life, 
though your children will not reach perfection, 
until the better and effectual influences 
and agencies of the next age complete 
the work. 

But if naturally you have poor judgment, 
and if much of your own life before your 
children, was spent out of harmony with 
God, so that the opportunities of the early 
years of your children's training were 
lost, and in consequence you now find it 
impossible to train them as you would, 
and you see them wandering from God 
and with no disposition to submit to either 
God's authority or yours, and though you 
try to do the best you can for them, your 
efforts all seem fruitless, still take courage: 
God says, "All souls are mine;" they are 
in his care whether you realize it, or have 
placed them there or not, and he will see 
that they get the discipline they need. 
He may in the present life let them run 
their course and see the result of their folly, 
though it be painful indeed to you, 
and then in the next age put on the brakes 
and check, restrain, punish, and encourage, 
and help them, as his wisdom and 
love will see best, until their reform is 
thorough and complete, or they are adjudged 
incorrigible and cut off from life. 
The mistakes of injudicious parents will 
all be overruled under the discipline of 
Christ whom God hath appointed as Prophet, 
Priest and King for that very purpose. 

As a mother do the best you can with 
your present knowledge and ability and 
dismiss all anxiety, casting your burden 
upon the Lord, who is able to sustain you, 
and to make all things work together for 
the accomplishment of his purposes— "in 
due time." God only holds us accountable 
to the extent of our ability and opportunity 
since we became his children; all 
our sins and short-comings, previous to 
that time, having been freely forgiven for 
Christ's sake. 

Now about giving your children to God: 
They are not yours to give; they are his 
already— "All souls are mine." But it is 
your privilege at the very dawn of their 
existence to recognize God's right and 
authority over them whom he redeemed 
by the gift of his Son, and to ask for wisdom 
to so train them that they may early 
learn to love and obey him and to recognize 



his love manifested through Christ. 
But what has baptism to do with this? 
Nothing at all. Study carefully the subject 
of baptism as presented in TOWER of Oct. 
'84. The sprinkling of babes is entirely 
out of harmony with the significance of 
either John's baptism or Christ's. 

And again, Our Lord did not institute 
any ordinance in the Church to be practiced 
in an indefinite, haphazard way. 
Both the ordinances and the only ones 
which he did establish were very simple 
and clearly defined, both in form and in 
significance, and it will not do for Christians 
to say, I am not quite sure what they 
mean and how they are to be performed, 
because there is difference in men's opinions 
about them. There is no necessity for 
difference of opinion when the Scriptures 
are plain and explicit. And it is our business 
to make sure of what the Scriptures 
teach, and then to follow their directions, 
though a thousand opinions prevail to the 
contrary. 

On the subject of the trinity (which is 
not a Bible subject) I would refer you 
to the TOWER of July '82, if I had it to 
send you. I presume you have no TOWERS 
so far back. I will suggest to Mr. R. 
however that he republish that article for 
the benefit of yourself and others. It 
would not be possible to satisfactorily canvass 
the subject in a letter; but if you study 
carefully Chap. X. of M. DAWN you will 
see that the common view is unscriptural 
and unreasonable. 

On the other subjects I would refer you 
to the following articles: "The Spirits in 
Prison" in TOWER of Dec. '84, "The Ten 
Commandments" Oct. '83, "Sunday and 
The Law" Dec. '85, and recent articles 
relating to "The Lord's Supper." 

With reference to going back into the 
Nominal Church your duty is clear if you 
are of the class designated "My People" 
in Rev. 18:4. You know that it is Babylon. 
Its Babel, confusion, mixture, is manifest 
even to the world. You were called out 
of her that you might not be a sharer 
of her sins, and that you receive not of her 
plagues. Her sins are those of conformity 
to the opinions and ideas and manners 
and customs of the world irrespective of 
God's will, and also the rejection of his 
truth to an increasing extent. If you return 
to Babylon and give that system the 



support of your influence in permitting 

your name to swell the list of its membership, 

or your money to support and extend 

it financially, or your presence to encourage 

its teachers in proclaiming as gospel 

that which is not gospel, then you are 

partaking of its sins and must share in its 

plagues. Your mother's wishes or the opinions 

of your friends should not have a 

feather's weight with you when God speaks 

—and remember he does not speak to us 

by mere impressions or imaginations, but 

plainly and unmistakably by his Word. 

He has shown you Babylon's confusion. 

You know that you are in it. And now 

he says, "Come out of her my people" etc. 

You need to remember that you belong to 

God, and while you love and honor your 

mother for her care and good influence in 

your youthful days, neither she, nor any 

one else must now be permitted to come 

between you and your God. And should 

your fidelity separate you from every earthly 

tie, rejoice that it links you closer to 

the throne of God. Consider it a privilege 

to be a "nobody" for Christ's sake 

and let others see by your cheerfulness that 

you enjoy the privilege. Perhaps after all 

as you decidedly wear his yoke you will 

find that his yoke is easy and his burden 

light, being lightened by the love you 

bear with it. 

Now take courage dear sister— walk in 
the light, obey the truth as fast as you 
see it and study the plan of God with care, 
that you may be firmly established— rooted 
and grounded in the faith. Yours in 
Christian love, MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R945 : page 6 

LIGHT FOR THE RIGHTEOUS. 

"Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for 
the upright in heart."— Psa. 97:11. 

Light is a most beautiful and fitting symbol 
for truth; and not only do the Scriptures 
so use it, but it is a symbol in common 
use to-day. Men frequently speak 
of the "light of our day," and in contrast 
speak of the ages past as "the dark ages;" 
they speak of the light of civilization, the 
light of truth, etc.; and that remarkable 



statue recently erected in New York harbor 
is an apt illustration of this symbol in 
present use. It represents liberty enlightening 
the world— liberty as an aid to the 
finding of light, truth. And truly as men 
gain liberty, and make proper use of it, 
truth on various subjects begins to open 
up, and brings with it its train of blessings. 
But liberty and light abused are as sure to 
sink those who abuse them, in deeper darkness 
and greater evils. 

In the above text reference is made particularly 
to one certain class of truth, 
nevertheless we recognize it as a principle 
in the divine economy in dealing with mankind 
in general, that to the extent that 
men observe the principles of righteousness, 
they are correspondingly favored 
with truth and its attendant blessings. 

The Scripture saith, "There is none 
righteous; no, not one." All mankind 
are unrighteous, they are under the penalty 
of death. But thank God, a redemption 
has been provided, and those who lay 
hold of it by faith, are justified, reckoned 
righteous in God's sight. And it is for 
these justified (reckonedly righteous) ones, 
who by faith have accepted the righteousness 
of Christ, and who in gratitude and 
love to God for such favor are endeavoring 
to live lives of obedience and faithfulness, 
that light is specially sown. 

It is not for those who once by faith accepted 
of justification through the ransom, 
and who, simply consoling themselves 
with this thought, straightway turned back 
to the world to revel with it and stifle all 
thought of responsibility. Truth is not 
for such, but for the righteous who not 
only thankfully accept the righteousness 
of Christ, but who go further and consecrate 
themselves to the divine service, their 
rightful, reasonable service. Only such 
grow in grace and in knowledge. 

It is in the Word of God that this light 
for this special, justified and consecrated 

R946 : page 6 

class, is sown; and while the justified and 
sanctified of past ages enjoyed a measure 
of light, all that was then due, the justified 
and sanctified of this age have far greater 
privileges in this direction than any of former 
times; for in the ages past the light, 
the truth, was being sown for our special 



benefit. Unto the prophets, to whom so 
much truth was given, yet in such a way 
that but little of it was understood by them, 
it was revealed, in answer to their earnest 
searching, that not unto themselves, but 
unto us (the Gospel Church) they did minister 
(1 Pet. l:12)-that the truth which 
God was sowing, through their instrumentality, 
was not then due, but was being 
sown for the righteous some centuries 
down the stream of time. 

The faithful prophets were not left in 
darkness, however, to blindly grope their 
way along without special evidence of divine 
favor. They had their measure of 
light, and because faithful to it, great will 
be their advantage in the resurrection. 
And while it is true that a great store-house 
of divine truth was prepared for the Christian 
Church through the instrumentality 
of the prophets of past ages, and while 
much more was added to it by the Lord 
and the Apostles, yet it has only been revealed 
by degrees, as the age advanced 
toward its termination; consequently the 
early church did not enjoy as great light 
as it is our privilege to enjoy to-day. Occupying 
our present position on the stream 
of time, it is the privilege of the Christian 
Church to enjoy such views of God's plans 
and doings as none before our day could 
possibly have. Yet only this special class, 
the righteous, are so privileged; and their 
continuance of the privilege is conditioned 
upon their faithfulness, both in searching 
for and in using the light. 

It is a very noticeable fact that those 
who have been greatly blessed with light 
and have made no use of it, have not been 
privileged to retain it. The truth always 
brings with it its measure of responsibility, 
and to the extent that we measure up to 
that responsibility, more light is given. 
And vice versa— to the extent that we ignore 
that responsibility, further increase 
of light is denied, and the light that is in 
us, begins to wane. 

If we accept the truth, and begin to act 
from its standpoint, very soon we find 
ourselves marked as peculiar, very different 
from the world, and very different too, from 
merely nominal Christians. This is as it 
should be. If this be your experience, 
brother or sister, go on; you are on the 
right track. But if you find yourself very 
much like other people, then take heed. 



Quite likely you are looking and acting 
from the world's standpoint, and not from 
the divine standpoint in which the truth 
has placed you. 

You have made a covenant with God, 
and have received favors from him, which 
alter your position and responsibility entirely. 
Think of this: Let your mind run 
back to your earliest experiences as a child 
of God. When you first realized that you 
were bought with a price, even the precious 
blood of Christ, that you were redeemed 
from death through faith in that 
blood, call to mind how your heart was 
filled with joy and praise to God for his 
loving favor toward a justly condemned 
sinner. And when you turned the sacred 
page on which you read your title clear to 
everlasting life, and read further the exhortation 
of our brother Paul— "This is 
the will of God, even your sanctification," 
—"Present your body a living sacrifice, 
holy, acceptable unto God, which is your 
reasonable service" (1 Thes. 4:3; Rom. 12:1), 
you said, Yes, surely all that I can 
do to express my love and gratitude for 
such favor is at best but a poor return; 
and then on bended knees you said in all 
sincerity and fervency, Here, Lord, I give 
myself away; 'tis all that I can do. 

Then you joined a church— as you 
supposed, a company of people all justified 
and consecrated like yourself. Your own 
heart was full of warm, fresh zeal: you 
meant to do just what you had covenanted 
to do. Your heart's inquiry was very much 
like that of Brother Paul, "Lord, what 
wilt thou have me to do?" Then the Lord 
began to show you what you should do, 
how you should make your life one worthy 
of imitation, how you should let the spirit 
of God rule in your heart, conforming 
every feature of your character to the principles 
of the gospel, how in eating, and 
drinking, and wearing of apparel, in manner 
and conversation, and home and business 
life, you should first of all be a living 
epistle known and read of all with whom 
you come in contact. Then he began to 
point out fields of usefulness in his service, 
which would afford you the privilege of 
cross-bearing. 

But do you remember how the love that 

R946 : page 7 



was in your heart helped you to set a vigilant 
watch over yourself, and to bravely 
and cheerfully take up your cross and follow 
the Master? And as thus for a time 
you stepped along joyfully in the narrow 
way, you said, Yes, truly I am proving 
day by day that his yoke is easy and his 
burden light. 

But by and by your first love began to 
cool a little, and turning your thoughts 
upon yourself you began to think, How 
weary I am ! how much I have to suffer 
by conforming so strictly to these principles. 
No one thinks more of me for it. 
Why there is brother A. and sister B.; 
they don't seem to trouble themselves 
about cross-bearing; they do very much 
as others do; they look and talk and act 
very much as others do, except that they 
make long and seemingly very earnest 
prayers in public, and make themselves 
generally agreeable, particularly in the 
church. And they are considered the very 
cream of the church, and most devoted 
Christians. As you looked around a little 
further, you noticed that nearly all were 
doing just so, except perhaps a poor old 
saint very generally overlooked, or else 
considered an extremist or a fool, unworthy 
of respect and attention. And 
verily you began to feel that you also were 
losing ground in their estimation. Why, 
surely, you thought, these are good Christians, 
and you must have taken an extreme 
view of your obligation to God. As you 
thus looked more and more at the examples 
of those around you, and less and less 
at the Word of God and the noble example 
of the Lord and the apostles, your own 
zeal became cold and you concluded that 
your first impressions of the Christian life 
must have been erroneous. 

But they were not erroneous; they were 
right, and were derived from the right 
source, the Word of God, and should have 
been followed regardless of consequences. 
You would have had plenty of cross-bearing, 
but your Christian character would 
to-day be much stronger and more symmetrical. 
But thank God, he considered 
your unfavorable surroundings, and that 
while you were still willing to follow him, 
your flesh was weak; and so he sent you 
a special message of meat in due season 
which wonderfully awakened and encouraged 
you. Wonderful love! Do you suppose 



the Lord would so tenderly call you 
by his grace, and encourage and help you, 
if he did not desire to make you his bride? 
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, O favored 
one, to whom God has granted present light, 
and forget not that if thou wilt prove faithful 
unto death, faithful is he that hath called 
you, who also will exalt you in due time, 
according to his promise.— 1 Thes. 5:24. 

Take for your examples the noblest runners 
on this course. They looked not at 
the things behind, to pine and fret for 
those things they had covenanted to sacrifice, 
but walked according to the light 
they had. Consider, for instance, the 
daily life of Jesus after his consecration: 
While with his unequaled abilities as a 
man he might have had the esteem and 
honor of his fellow men, and while he 
might have had an honorable fame throughout 
the world, and while he might have 
spent time in accumulating wealth, and in 
the gratification of other legitimate earthly 
ambitions, he turned aside from all these 
and chose the life of continuous service 
of his Father esteeming it a privilege 
to preach the gospel to one or two or many, 
as opportunity might offer. With it came 
reproach, poverty, persecution, ingratitude 
from those he benefitted, and finally death 
by ignominious crucifixion. 

Then look at our beloved brother Paul: 
With all his talents and advantages of birth 
and education, his worldly prospects were 
fair, but he resolutely curbed all ambitions 
in that direction. And when he inquired, 
"Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" 
he conferred not with flesh and blood, but 
set himself at once to doing what the Lord 
directed. And though the Lord said he 
would show him how he must suffer great 
things for his name's sake, Paul counted 
the sufferings as not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall follow, 
though as yet he only saw that glory by 
faith. Truly, Paul suffered great things, 
but mark how he rejoiced even in those 
sufferings. When he and Silas were publicly 
beaten and then cast into prison, did 
they complain and say, they had had about 
enough of this, that some of the other 
apostles up there at Jerusalem ought to 
come out now and take their turn, that 
he was getting old and it was about time 
for him to settle down and take care of 
number one, he couldn't stand this kind 



of thing much longer? 

No, you never heard a word of that kind 
from Paul. He had no notion of giving 
up, or of resting on his oars; he had 
learned the valuable lesson of contentment 
in whatever condition duty required him 
to be in (Phil. 4:11). Nay, more! he 
had learned to rejoice always, and in every 
thing to give thanks; and so he rejoiced even 
in tribulation, and sung for joy even in prison. 
The light of God's truth received in 
unfaltering confidence gave him a joy which 
the world could neither give nor take away. 
And no amount of persecution stopped 
Paul from rejoicing; for he remembered 
that all the sufferings endured for Christ's 
sake, work out a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory. 

But he warns us, that if we would so run 
as to obtain the prize of our high calling, 
if we would receive the light of divine 

R947 : page 7 

truth and walk accordingly, we must look, 
not at the things which are behind, which 
we have covenanted to sacrifice, but at the 
things which are before, and which are yet 
unseen, except by the eye of faith. 

To look back is one step, and a long 
one, towards ignoring and breaking our 
covenant. It is the first step in unrighteousness, 
and if not quickly retraced, it 
will sooner or later lead to darkness and 
apostacy; and the joy and peace we once 
experienced in believing will be taken 
away. He that looketh back is unfit for 
the Kingdom.— Luke 9:26,62. 

We cannot too strongly urge upon God's 
covenant people their duty and responsibility 
in view of the light they have received 
—the duty of living for the heavenly things, 
and using the earthly things only as necessary 
aids in the divine service; the duty 
of viewing every matter of an earthly character 
from the standpoint in which the 
truth has placed us, from God's standpoint; 
the duty of acting promptly upon our convictions, 
and thereby giving no advantage 
to the adversary; the duty of enduring 
toil and persecution in the Master's service 
with uncomplaining meekness and joyful 
thanksgiving for the privilege; the duty 
of preaching the truth at any cost and at 
any sacrifice. 

Light was indeed carefully sown centuries 



ago for the righteous, and it is now 

being most gloriously revealed to those 

for whom it was sown; but take heed, ye 

that have received it; for if through unfaithfulness 

the light that is in thee be 

turned to darkness, how great is that darkness! 

The messengers of darkness were 

never so active as in this "evil day," to 

overthrow the faith of the consecrated 

children of God; and never were their 

methods so subtle and so deceptive. Truly, 

they are calculated to deceive if it 

were possible the very elect. But thank 

God, that is not possible. The elect are 

those who faithfully, carefully study to 

know the will of God and are very earnest 

and faithful in doing it. Take heed that 

you make your calling and election sure. 



R947 : page 7 
PERILOUS TIMES. 

It is frightful to contemplate the rapid 
increase of crime in all parts of our country. 
Scarcely a newspaper can be opened 
that does not contain the account of the 
perpetration of some horrible offence 
against society. The enormity of the 
crimes keeps pace with the rapid increase 
of their number. One day a man shoots 
his wife— the next a son stabs his father, 
a brother kills his brother for some slight 
difference of opinion, then a father murders 
his whole family. Common robberies 
and murders are of everyday occurrence. 
Forgery, swindling, and speculation are 
carried on by the wholesale. Private houses, 
banks and the government are indiscriminately 
robbed. Men of established reputation 
for business integrity, suddenly disappear, 
taking with them fabulous sums 
of money, the property of others. By perjury 
and other means the nation is defrauded 
of money more than enough to 
pay the interest upon the national debt. 

Licentiousness prevails to an alarming 
extent. It appears as though Satan was 
let loose, and was exerting himself to the 
utmost, knowing that his time is short. 
What is the meaning of all this? Are the 
last days in reality upon us? Is the world 
[society] ripening for destruction? Look 
upon the face of society and see how perfectly 



its features correspond with the likeness 

by the pen of inspiration. "This know also 

that in the last days perilous times shall 

come. For men shall be lovers of their 

own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, 

blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, 

unholy, without natural affection, 

truce-breakers, false accusers, incontinent, 

fierce, despisers of those that 

are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, 

lovers of pleasure more than lovers of 

God; having a form of godliness but denying 

the power thereof— from such turn 

away." Did not modern society sit for 

this picture? Could the Camera reflect 

a more accurate resemblance? Can this 

striking agreement be the result of 

accident? 

It is time for the followers of Jesus to 
be up and doing. But the perpetrators 
of these high outrages are generally among 
those who call upon his name and attend 
upon his worship. They own pews in 
magnificent temples, or belong to a 
church which boasts of the imposing character 
of its rites, and the liberality of its 
terms of communion. Would you not be 
carried away with the current of ungodliness 
which appears to be sweeping all before 
it? You must build upon the rock 
for the storms are upon us. You must 
bear an unequivocal testimony against 
prevailing sins, and like Lot in Sodom, 
vex your righteous soul from day to day 
with their unlawful deeds. From a quiet 
acquiescence to active participation the 
transition is gradual, easy, imperceptible 
and well-nigh certain. Above all let us 
call upon God in mighty prayer, to lift up 
a standard against the tide of iniquity 
which is poured out like a flood. Help 
Lord; for the godly man ceaseth; for the 
faithful fail from among the children of 
men.— The Earnest Christian. 



R948 : page 7 

"WHAT selfishness asked for, was vain; 
What came for that asking, was pain. 
Gain! none save the giver, receives; 
Yet who that old gospel believes? 
But one way is Godlike. Then give! 
Then pour out thy heart's blood, and live. 



R947 : page 7 

PREJUDICE. 

Prejudice is pre-judgment. It is forming 
an opinion without examining the facts; 
it is hastily accepting a conclusion without 
investigating the evidence upon which 
it rests; it is allowing ourselves to be hoodwinked 
and deceived, when the slightest 
reflection would keep us from such a mistake; 
it is being satisfied with hearsay, 
when we should demand the proof; it is 
rejecting everything at first sight, which 
does not confirm our former convictions 
or suit our former tastes or agree with our 
preconceived ideas; it is a revolt against 
the unpalatable and distasteful; it is a deep-seated 
reluctance to part with that to which 
we have been accustomed— a persistent 
hesitation to accept as true what we have 
not hitherto believed; a wicked unwillingness 
to admit that we can be wrong and 
others right. It favors or condemns upon 
the slightest pretext; it recoils or embraces 
as it is moved by caprice. It is not limited 
to persons— has to do with places, 
and creeds, and parties, and systems: hence 
its influence is extensive, and its evils manifold. 
Prejudice does not hold opinions; 
it is held by them. Its views are like 
plants that grow upon the rocks, that stick 
fast, though they have no rooting. It 
looks through jaundiced eyes; it listens 
with itching ears; it speaks in partial and 
biased accents. It clings to that which it 
should relinquish and relinquishes that to 
which it should cling. When beaten it 
remains defiant; when disproved and vanquished, 
it is sullen and obstinate. There 
is nothing too low for its love, or too noble 
for its hatred; nothing is too sacred for 
its attacks, or too deserving for its aspersions. 
It is as cruel as it is universal, as 
unjust as it is relentless; as unforgiving as 
it is conceited and ill-informed.— S el. 



R947 : page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

page 8 



New York, May 8th, 1887. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-"The 
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with 
your spirit!" You have received no report 
from me recently because of sudden, recurring 
and very painful sickness. The 
physician said yesterday I must keep quiet 
"for another week." At present, therefore, 
I am but a broken reed. I have before 
suffered great mental agonies, but this 
is my first experience in long-continued, 
intense physical pain. I received the 25 
hymn books safely, and can only thank 
you for them now. 

Because "Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed 
for us: therefore" we "kept the 
feast" on the evening of April 7th last. 
A very precious season we enjoyed, as we 
remembered Him who laid down his life 
for us, and as we covenanted anew to follow 
our Head in sacrificing to the death 
our reckoned-perfect humanity that we 
may also possess with Him the Divine nature. 
Bro. Bowen and Mrs. Hickey went 
with me to Newburgh and about twenty, 
in all, partook of the emblems. 

The May TOWER which came yesterday 
was weighted with blessed, refreshing 
Truth. Your article on Rom. 1 to 6 is 
logical, convincing, and destructive of the 
"damnable heresy" it strikes at. God 
bless you, my beloved Brother! May He 
strengthen and encourage you day by day! 

Yours in loving sympathy in Christ, 
S. I. HICKEY. 

Scotland, April 7th, 1887. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Enclosed find 
money-order which pays for two copies of 
the Tower in advance, from April, 1887, 
and three copies of "Millennial Dawn," 
which you were kind enough to send me. 
Any balance can be devoted to whatever 
fund you think most useful. Through 
reading your articles in the TOWER, and 
your valuable books, I have got much 
light, and I wish to take this opportunity 
of thanking you for help received, and of 
assuring you of my sympathy with and 
good wishes for your good work. Believe 
me yours, in fellowship and service, 
JOHN McLEAN. 

[Joyfully we acknowledge that every 
good and perfect gift, among them the 



precious, soul-cheering truths on which we 
all feast, come from our Father in heaven. 
To Him be all glory and praise, now and 
forever. We merely give out what we receive, 
and no grateful heart could do less, 
to the honor of the giver and the blessing 
of his fellows.-EDITOR.] 

Greenville, Pa. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have nothing 
special to write except to say that I have 
made my delivery in Greenville in part, 
and can see that the Dawns deliver well. 
One can sell more than he sets down on 
his list. Over one hundred copies delivered, 
and over one hundred names yet, to 
do on next Saturday. The people are being 
moved as by an avalanche. The results 
of Bro. Blundin's and my own lecturing 
in Greenville are apparent. One 
lady said to-day, "I pray the Lord the 
doctrine is true." I think nearly one 
hundred books to every thousand inhabitants 
could be sold. I wish you could get 
brethren and sisters awake. Those who 
need the money that the Tract Society 
donates for selling Dawn, need not fear 
that they can not pay their way. There 
is no excuse now for any who really believe 
the Dawn to be a good preacher. I 
can take forty to fifty names daily, and 
expect to sell my usual one thousand copies 
per month. I am now selling at this 
rate, and have lost time in ways I shall 
not take again. Hope you are fully recovered. 
Our love to yourself and Sister 
Russell, and the kindest remembrance, in 
which Mrs. A. always joins. Yours in 
Christ, J. B. ADAMSON. 

Youngstown, O. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-My deliveries, 
at Greenville 200 Dawns, Lewisville 25, 
and Jamestown and Conneautville each 60 
copies, were successful to the extent of 
delivering more than my list, in some 
cases. 

I do hope that the brethren who want 
to preach and teach in this practical way 
of selling Dawns will soon get started. I 
send you a very encouraging letter from 
Williamsport. I have 240 names at Sharon 
and some at Sharpsville, and will order 
books for next deliveries soon. While 
changing cars at Chenango Junction, I 
showed Dawn to the news agent. He took 



three at his own offer, 20 cents each, to 
be resold. 

Dawn's influence is a mighty one. I 
wish that brethren who could sell it, and 
do not, had a little of the blessed experience 
that comes to me. It is exerting a 
mighty power on many classes, and moving 
the masses as "Food" never did. 
J. B. ADAMSON. 

[Bro. Adamson sends the letter below, 
received by him recently. It shows the love 
and zeal of one who sees spiritually, but is 
blind physically.] 

Williamsport, Pa., May 9th, '87. 
DEAR SISTER AND BRO. ADAMSON:-I 

am glad to have an opportunity of writing 
to you. I received both of your last letters, 
and am glad that you enjoyed the 
feast of the Passover. I would have liked 
to be there, to hear Brother Russell 
preach. I have heard only a part of the 
book read, but think it the plainest and 
best work on the Bible I have ever heard 
read. Sister Garrison says she has read 
hers through with the Bible in one hand 
and the book in the other, and says she 
has never had any other reading that did 
her so much good. A few of us have 
formed a Bible class in connection with 
Mr. Russell's works. We read one half-hour 
from one of his tracts or the Tower, 
and the rest of the evening we give to Bible 
investigation. My sister Sue is one of 
the most interested of the class. We meet 
on Monday evenings. Sister Aletta is 
taking the TOWER this year. She has become 
quite interested in the reading of it. 
I have not found a suitable person to go 
out with me with the book, but expect to 
go out as soon as possible. I would like 
to go to Glen's Falls, take the book with 
me, and canvass that place, Colwell, Sandy 
Hill and Fort Edward, but I will try 
Williamsport first. I truly feel as though 
I must do something in some good work, 
and help others into the light by circulating 
the book-DAWN. 

Oh! how disappointed I was when I 
found I could not meet you all at Pittsburg. 
Well, perhaps it is better that I 
have all these disappointments. I am trying 
patiently to trust in the Lord and be 
led by his hand. He only knows how 
many thorns are in the way of his blind 



child. It is such a comfort to realize that 
he does know and care; and though at 
times I am very weary, yet I can sweetly 
rest in his promises. Accept kindest regards. 
Your sister in Christ, A. B. E. 

R947 : page 8 

Middlebrook, Arkansas. 

ED. Z.W.T., DEAR SIR:-I received 
an April copy of your paper last Saturday 
evening, and must say that I was truly astonished 
at its doctrine. I sat down, and 
in about two hours had devoured its contents. 
After seven years of hard study of 
the Word of God, to the exclusion of all 
theological writers, am I so near-sighted 
as not to see that God is intending to give 
to the heathen who have died without the 
advantage of gaining a knowledge of the 
ransom prepared by Him for all, a chance 
to hear and accept the truth? Great God, 
is this thy word, or am I in a dream? 
What can it mean? How good, how merciful, 
how grand and beautiful thy plan, 
so far as I have seen! If this glimpse of 
light proves true, Great God, what other 
adjectives can I employ to describe more 
fully thy love and mercy. I am too weak 
even to contemplate the sublime grandeur 
of thy lovely purposes to man, thy fallen 
creature. Indeed I can only fall at thy 
feet and allow to pass through my mind 
the words, Holy, most holy, art thou, O 
Lord God. 

I believe that man fell, that Jesus became 
the ransom, and I believe that the 
times of the restitution of all things, 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets, 
is near at hand. But does that restitution 
embrace the restoration of all 
Adam's fallen race to the first estate, that 
they may individually have a chance to 
render obedience to the great King of 
kings? O God, the knowledge of thy 
word is replete with goodness toward man. 
What can I say? Wonderful! wonderful! 
most wonderful! and mercifully loving art 
thou, O God. It is almost too good to 
be true, and yet God is good. 

Dear Sirs, I am astonished, amazed, 
confounded, and even the tears start. I 
thought I was rooted and grounded in 
the faith. For years I have taught that 
the heathen had had their portion of light, 
and they that had received it and walked 



by it, would gain a reward, while those 
who rejected it, were dead to rise no more, 

R948 : page 8 

and though I had proved it by the word. 
But O, if those who had not light are to 
see light, and be permitted to accept that 
light, what a throng, what a glorious 
throng, praising God day and night! Why 
surely, there will be but few that will not 
accept it under the glorious reign of our 
King. Why friend, they will rend the 
heavens and burst the bars of space by 
their united shouts of praise. 

If this be true, O King Jesus come, and 
come quickly! Amen. Yours in hope of 
more light, O. S. G . 

Toronto, Canada, May 6th, 1887. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:--! came across 
the following clause in a very old work of 
the third century known as "Constitutions 
of the Holy Apostles," which may interest 
you, in the matter of the Lord's Supper, if 
you have not seen it before,— Book V. 
Chapter XVII. 

"It is therefore your duty, brethren, 
who are redeemed by the precious blood 
of Christ, to observe the days of the Passover 
exactly, with all care, after the vernal 
equinox, lest ye be obliged to keep the 
Memorial of the one passion twice in a 
year. Keep it only once in a year for 
Him that died but once.... Keep 
it when your brethren of the Circumcision 
do so. ...If they err in their 
computation, be not you concerned.... 
While they are lamenting and eating unleavened 
bread in bitterness, do you 
feast." 

Various instructions follow about fasting, 
etc., etc., but I copy enough for the 
point in view, as showing what was the 
probable custom of that early period, though 
one of much defalcation in the matter of 
truth, and of much introduction of error 
into Christianity. Love to all yours. 
Ever in Him, W. BROOKMAN. 

London, March 14, 1887. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-A sister in 
Christ, whose acquaintance I made only 
ten days ago, and who is having her house 
open for meetings on these subjects, invited 
me to come to her meetings. I went, 



and was surprised to see that the truths 
dealt with there are the very same that the 
Lord revealed to me, since I came to the 
knowledge of God in Christ Jesus. She 
also lent me a few copies of the WATCH 
TOWER, which I read with much interest, 
and I praise God for you and your fruit. 

Allow me to give you my life's history 
and testimony in as few words as possible. 
I was born in Austria. My parents were 
very bigoted Jews. Of course their aim 
was to train me according to their knowledge. 
When six years of age I began to 
study the Talmud. When thirteen I entered 
the Rabbinical schools in Hungary, 
where I continued for six years. When I 
was seventeen years old, my eyes were 
opened to see the emptiness of my religion, 
consequently I turned to infidelity. 
All I then thought of Christianity was, 
that Christ was an impostor, that it was a 
sin to mention his name, and that I ought 
to hate him and all those who worship his 
images and crosses; for I knew only Roman 
and Greek Catholic Christians. 

I lived in infidelity for about twelve 
years, though leading a moral life and always 
active in different philanthropic 
works and institutions. In 1883, while in 
Roumania, I felt inclined to emigrate to 
Palestine and to work there for the idea 
of "Colonization of Palestine by persecuted 
Jews from Russia and Roumania." 
Having to correspond with Hebrew 
periodicals, and to write and think on the 
subject of the restoration of the Jewish 
nation, I was obliged to read and study 
the Bible. This led me to see Christ as 
revealed in Moses and the Prophets. In 
order to inquire after the truth more freely, 
I went to Jerusalem, and on Easter 
Sunday, 1884, 1 made public confession 
of my faith in Christ. I soon began to 
see, by comparing the New Testament 
with church theology, that the theology 
was unscriptural and misleading; and 
the spirit of truth led me into the truth as 
revealed by God's prophets and apostles. 
I obeyed the voice of the spirit to "come 
out from Babylon and be separate." In 
February 1885, 1 left Jerusalem for London, 
with the hope to find here some 
Christians, as a Church of my opinion, 
but alas, I only found a greater variety of 
Satan's works, in sects and divisions, 
and that only confirmed me in my idea 



that the Church of this age is a Babel of 

confusion. I made up my mind to have 

Christ as my only Priest, Friend, and 

Guide, and to be joined to the saints of 

"the Church," "the Christ," "Head and 

Body," who are scattered all over the 

world, living the life of Christ as joint-self-sacrifices, 

waiting for his appearing to 

gather them in as joint-heirs and to reign 

with him for ever and ever. The Lord 

has laid it as necessity upon me to carry 

the Glad Tidings of Peace, to my own nation, 

the Jews, as a reasonable service. 

In order to do this, I was led to consecrate 

myself as a living sacrifice to God, and to 

make this my life's mission. 

Your precious publications will always 
be to me an odour of a sweet smelling 
savour. Yours in Christ, L. K . 

[We are glad to hear from our Hebrew 
brother, and in our next issue will have 
something of interest to him and his race, 
under the caption, "To the Jew First." 
-EDITOR.! 


