From Our Readers
Why Obey One’s Parents?
Thank you very much for your article “Young People Ask . . . Why Should I Obey Mom and Dad?” (January 8, 1988) Today, just as the Bible said, there is much disobedience to parents by young ones. (2 Timothy 3:2) In your article, you highlighted the need for young ones to obey their parents, and you even gave a fine example, that of John and the two girls. I wish that every young person would read and study that article and follow the course of the Bible.
S. O., Nigeria
Civil War Date
I recently read the article “We Were Lilliputians Among Dwarfs.” (February 8, 1988) Isn’t it true that the Spanish Civil War was fought from 1861 to 1865? If this is true, there seems to be quite a discrepancy in the age of the two sisters. The girl says she was still very young a few years after the Spanish Civil War, which would put them well into their 100’s. Yet toward the end of the article, they say they are 50 years old or so. Can you explain this?
L. M. K., United States
The explanation is that it was the American Civil War that took place from 1861 to 1865. The Spanish Civil War was from 1936 to 1939. When referring to the Spanish Civil War in the article, it would have been helpful if we had included the dates.​—ED.
Hope for the Homeless
While it is most commendable that you draw attention in your publications to the problems of “The Homeless” (March 8, 1988), wouldn’t it be much better to follow the example set by other religious organizations and lend a helping hand? Surely your resources could stretch to allow even a small financial contribution. But instead of doing something about it, you constantly point to a new system under God’s rule as the solution to this and other woes.
B. B., Federal Republic of Germany
Many religious, charitable, and governmental organizations are endeavoring to help meet the material needs of the homeless, and this is commendable. Few are helping with the very essential spiritual needs of mankind. We put our first emphasis on preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom, as commanded by Jesus at Matthew 24:14. We have found that when people learn to trust in what God’s Kingdom will bring about, it gives them a purpose in life and motivates them to try to take care of themselves and to cut out misuse of drugs and alcohol, which wastes their health and their resources. They not only improve their life now but also get a hope of everlasting life on a paradise earth. Jesus emphasized the importance of this when he quoted from God’s Word: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matthew 4:4) Further, Jehovah’s Witnesses are well known for providing necessary material assistance to needy ones in times of privation and distress, thus exemplifying true neighbor love as outlined in Mark 12:29-31 and James 2:15-17. And the help we provide goes quickly and directly to the needy, without being reduced or delayed by cumbersome and costly administration.​—ED.

