VOL. XXVIII SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 259 

Young Men and the Christian Ministry 259 

Looking the Facts in the Face 260 

The Race, the Prize, the Course 260 

Berean Bible Study in Tabernacle Shadows 261 

The Dying Message of a Great Man 261 

Earthly Prosperity and Reward 262 

The Chief or Primary Commandment 263 

"The Servant of the Lord Died" 266 

The Hidden Sepulchre 267 

The Meekest and the Greatest 268 

Quarterly Review 269 

The Chatauqua Salute 270 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 270 

page 258 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



KARATOLS NO MORE 



Our supply of STUDIES, VOL. I., bound in Karatol is exhausted. 
Expect no more. 

VOLUNTEERING METHODS, ETC. 



An experienced Volunteer writes, suggesting that, instead 
of trying to slide the tracts under the doors, he puts them between 
the door-knob and the door-jamb so that they form a 
spring like the letter U. Then they will flutter to the floor 
just in front of whoever opens the door. He does not ring 
the bell, for this would be an annoyance and only prejudice 
the recipient against the tracts. 

ABOUT ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS. 



Whenever you see on last page that your invitation for a 
One-Day Convention has been accepted, and a date for it assigned, 
please proceed at once to make all necessary arrangements, 
—for hall, etc. As soon as you have these completed 
write to us, giving all particulars, so the full notice may be 
published in ample time. Hymn slips will be sent you, also a 
fair supply of tracts. These should be on hand for general use. 



Colporteurs will please use our Order blanks and direct 
letters to "Colporteur Department." 



R4049 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
YOUNG MEN AND THE CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 



THE fact that fewer young men than formerly are preparing 

for the ministry is arousing comment in 

nearly all denominations. We extract below from 

Rev. D. J. Burrell's comments on this question and concede 

that as an educator his opinion should have weight. 

Nevertheless we can agree with it only in part. From 

our point of view the loss of positive faith, induced 



by so-called "Higher Criticism" and the "Evolution 
Theory," make void the Word of God. The very 
few young men who come out of college with a remnant 
of positive faith in the Bible are perplexed and inclined 
to doubt their convictions, and see that anyway they are 
out of tune with the majority of those with whom they 
had hoped to colabor and to serve, and that the message 
they intended to give would no longer be palatable to 
the people they would address nor satisfactory to 
themselves. 

They feel drawn more to some service like that of 
the Salvation Army, and yet they feel that somehow it 
is not right either, and certainly far from their original 
ideal when entering college. Several of these, as well 
as some ministers who have resigned their pulpits in 
Churchianity, are now having blessed times "harvesting" 
— colporteuring. 

Those described, however, are seemingly but the 
few. The vast majority seem intent merely on choosing 
a profession; and law, dentistry, medicine, osteopathy 
call loudly to them, and business holds out still more 
inducements. Hence the smaller proportion offering 
themselves for the ministry. 

Dr. Burrell's views from "The Christian Intelligencer" 
are as follows:— 

"Put yourself in his place. With life before you, 
presenting its various avenues of usefulness, you 
would be likely to reason thus: 'I am urged to go 
into the ministry. What for? "To seek and to save 
the lost?" But they say there are no "lost." To 
preach the truth? What truth? A personal God? 
They say there is no God but law, energy, a "something 
not ourselves, that maketh for righteousness." The 
supernatural? They say the miraculous is played out, 
and all things are to be accounted for by natural law. 
A divine Christ? His virgin birth is denied, and he is 
affirmed to have been a mere excellent man. The 
atonement? The idea that sin requires expiation is 
pronounced unphilosophical and therefore untrue. 
Justification by faith? Justification from what and by 
faith in what? In the New Theology faith has no object 
and justification no ground. Well, then, since all the 
doctrines once regarded as fundamental are explained 
away, suppose I devote my life to the preaching of ethics? 
But where shall I find my ethics? In the Bible? 
Pooh, pooh! The Bible is merely one of the many volumes 
of the world's literature and by no means the 
truest of them. In the Decalogue? The Decalogue is 
declared to have no more authority back of it than any 
other portion of the discredited book. Is there, then, 
no ultimate authority for truth and morals? Only in 
the inner consciousness of the individual. The question 
of entering the ministry, then, resolves itself into 
this: Shall I invest the assets of my life in a profession 
which has no end but to persuade a man to believe 
what pleases him, to be what he would like to be and 



to do what, in his opinion, without any reference to 
"authority," he ought to do? And, that being so, is 
the game worth the candle?' 

"If he is a really 'smart' young man he will be sure 
to answer, No. He knows that he has only one life to 
live in this world, and it behooves him to make the 
most of it. He would be a fool to put all his eggs in 
such a basket as the ministry of 'The New Theology.' 
It isn't worth while. The man who chops wood to 
keep people warm and bake their bread is a contributor 
to the general good, but the man who preaches when 
he has nothing to say is a non-producer. His profession 
ought to fail for want of candidates, because there 
is nothing in it. 

"It is a mistake, however, to assume that 'bright 
young men' are not consecrating themselves, here and 
there and everywhere, to the work of preaching the 
straight gospel. The doubter drops out; why not? 

R4049 : page 260 

But the youth who believes in Christ and the Bible covets 
the privilege of treading in the beaten path of service; 
and he knows that the higher form of service is 
proclaiming a positive gospel, on the authority of a 
'Thus saith the Lord,' with the supreme purpose of 
saving men." 

LOOKING THE FACTS IN THE FACE 



There are over 250,000 insane and imbeciles in the 
United States today. Statistics show that insanity is 
increasing three hundred times faster than the population. 
At the present ratio of increase, even if it gets 
no worse (in reality it is getting worse each year), it 
will require but 290 years to produce the utter destruction 
of the mental endurance of the race. 

One death in every seven is from tuberculosis. 
Recent statistics issued by the German government 
show that one-fourth of all people dying of diseases 
other than tuberculosis, have had consumption at some 
time in their life. It would thus appear that very nearly 
one-half of the grown-up people have had or now have 
tuberculosis in some form or other. 

The deadly cancer is terribly on the increase, and 
a prominent surgeon, appointed by the State of New 
York to investigate this disease some time ago, said 
that if it continues to increase the next ten years as 
fast as it has in the last ten years, it will claim as 

R4050 : page 260 

many victims as tuberculosis. 
On every side there is abundant evidence of the 



rapid increase in the numbers of deformed, defective 
and degenerate human beings. 

Nervous diseases and stomach troubles number 
their victims by millions, and very nearly three-fourths 
of the population are afflicted with one or other of 
these disorders. 

It is an acknowledged fact that vice and crime are 
tremendously on the increase. The rapidly increasing 
army of dentists testifies to the fact that, as a race, we 
are tending toward toothlessness.— Exchange. 



R4050 : page 260 

THE RACE, THE PRIZE, THE COURSE 

UNDOUBTEDLY the Apostle does in two of his epistles 
more or less clearly represent the Christian as 
running a race to win a prize. But as is usual 
with all figures and parables there seems to be room for 
slightly divergent views of his meaning, or rather of how to 
apply his figure of speech to the recognized facts. Let us 
be glad that the facts are generally very clearly seen. This 
is the important matter anyway. 

Shortly before St. Paul was executed he wrote, "I have 
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept 
the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of 
righteousness." (2 Tim. 4:7,8.) If this was written six months 
before he died or even one month or only six days should 
we understand it to mean that the day before he wrote or 
the year before it would not have been true? We think not. 
We must believe also, that when, some time before, the same 
Apostle wrote, "I am in a strait betwixt two" as to choice 
between living and dying, he must have felt equally sure 
that he was at the mark which would win for him the great 
prize. 

But we cannot assume that the Apostle was always at 
that mark which would win for him the prize. Surely he, 
like all of us, was first begotten of the Spirit and subsequently 
quickened of the Spirit. Surely during the period 
between the begetting and the quickening neither he nor we 
could be at the "mark" for the prize. 

There must, therefore, be recognized a mark or standard 
of character necessary to the overcomers, which is not 
possessed at the beginning of the course nor usually for a 
considerable time thereafter— and a mark or character development 
which may be possessed a considerable time before 
death. Since "love is the fulfilling of the law of God" is it 
not proper that we consider it to be the mark or standard? 
We have, therefore, assumed that PERFECT LOVE is the standard 
of our acceptance with God to life eternal: and that to 
die before attaining it would insure our losing the prize, 
as death at any time after reaching this mark would insure 
us the crown of life. 

Perfect love includes love for God, for the brethren, for 



our own, for our neighbors and for our enemies; and much 
of the teaching of the Scriptures is devoted to the outlining 
of this perfect love and to encouraging God's people to 
strive for it; for it represents the fruits of the Spirit which 
must be grown or developed as the fruits of the vine. The 
pruning of the branches is to bring this fruitage to perfection, 
for without it the branch will be cut off from the Vine. 

True, some things are imputed to us from the time we 
become members of Christ; purity is imputed, but not the 
fruit of the Vine— Love. That must be developed. Hence 
it behooves every Christian to run, to strive, to attain this 
acceptable standard or mark. All of this is surely true 
whether the Apostle had in his mind a race illustration or not. 

When the Apostle exhorts, "Having done all, stand!" 
it implies that the race has been run, the acceptable mark 
of character attained before death. And is it not thus with 
all the "overcomers?" Did we not begin our Christian experience 
with a mere duty-love toward God and the brethren? 
Did we not "go on unto perfection"— progressing toward 
perfect love? True, the Apostle says, "Not as though 
I were already perfect"— and we with him may well disclaim 
actual perfection. But from the time he in heart 
reached the mark of perfect love, the righteousness or perfection 
of the Law was reckoned or accounted to him. Hence 
he adds, "Let as many [of you] as be perfect be thus 
minded." 

But what, if anything, is expected of those who reach 
this mark of perfect love? Ah! very much! Only after 
they reach it do they begin to tread in the footsteps of 
Jesus around and around that mark on its every side. Being 
actually perfect our Lord needed not to run to get to the 
mark, for he was actually there, even as the perfect man. It 
was for him to "stand" firmly and uncompromisingly at this 
"mark" as it is exhorted of us that after "having done all" 
we should stand complete in him. This standing at the 
mark is the real trial, the real test. To stand is to be an 
"overcomer" of the world, the flesh and the devil. The 

R4050 : page 261 

attainment of the mark is often tedious and slow, but it 
should not be. Since it is merely a state of the mind it 
surely might be attained speedily, whereas from lack of 
zeal many are long years about it and some never gain it,— 
are never quickened, and will never, therefore, be born of 
the Spirit. 

It is after we have reached the mark of perfect love 
that we, like our Lord, must endure hardness and fight the 
good fight. The encouragement held out is the "far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory" promised to those who 
display special valor in the King's service. 

When the Apostle says, "A man is not crowned except 
he strive lawfully," he in other words is saying that a man 
must be at the mark of perfect love (the fulfilling of the 
law) ere his strivings would be meritorious or acceptable in 
God's sight. 



Another possible view of the race is to suppose a line 
marked out and that line to represent perfect love, each 
runner being expected to keep as close to that line as possible 
to the end of life. But this view does not allow for or 
explain St. Paul's having finished his course weeks or 
months before he died, nor his "strait betwixt two," years 
before that. 

So then whatever view illustrates the facts best to our 
minds let us enjoy it, and meantime rejoice that the facts are 
so clear and plain as to be beyond dispute. 



page 26 1 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
"THE ASHES OF A HEIFER SPRINKLING THE UNCLEAN" 
SUNDAY, OCTOBER 13, 1907 

1. Was the sacrifice of the red heifer a "sin-offering" 
in any sense? How do we know this? Num. 19:1-5; 
T.105. 

2. What was done with the ashes of the heifer? T.105. 

3. Was this sacrifice in any way related to the sacrifices 
of the Day of Atonement? T.106, par. 1 (1st 

5 lines). 

4. Was it different from the sacrifices offered by the 
people of Israel after the Day of Atonement? T. 106, 
par. 1 (6th line down). 

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 20 

5. What, then, did this sacrifice of the red heifer signify? 
And what class was represented by it? 

And how would their sufferings have to do with 
the cleansing of the people of God, both of this 
age and the age to come? Heb. 9:13; 11:32-38. 
T.106, par. 3. 

6. Is this class, represented in the red heifer, a part of 
the Body of Christ, the Royal Priesthood? Heb. 1 1:39,40; 
T.107, par. 1. 

7. How can we be sure of this? Matt. 11:11; Heb. 6:19,20; 
2:3; T. 108, par. 1. 

8. What was typified by the "ashes" of the heifer? T.108, 
par. 2 (first half). 

9. What will be the station or position of the "Ancient 
Worthies"? Psa. 45:16; T.108, par. 2 (last half). 

10. Who witnessed the burning of the heifer? and what 
did he do? 

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 27 

11. What was typified by the "cedar wood," the "sprig 
of hyssop" and the "scarlet string"? 



12. Why were they cast into the midst of the burning 
heifer? T. 109. 

13. Who would seem to be typified by the under-priest 
who approved this burning and took of the blood 

and sprinkled it toward the Tabernacle door? 
T.109, par. 1. 

14. What was typified in the choosing of a red heifer 
which "never wore a yoke"? T.110, par. 1. 

15. Why was a heifer chosen and not a bullock? And 
why must it be red? T.l 10, par. 1. 

16. For what particular cleansings were the ashes of 
this heifer prescribed? Ex. 12:22; Lev. 14:4,49; 

Psa. 51:7; Heb. 9:19; T.lll, par. 1. 



R4050 : page 261 

THE DYING MESSAGE OF A GREAT MAN 

--DEUT. 6: 1-15. --SEPTEMBER 15.- 

Golden Text:— "Beware lest thou forget the Lord." 

DEUTERONOMY is the title of one of the most 

important books of the Bible. From it evidently 

David and the other prophets of the 

Old Testament drew considerable of their inspiration, 

and from it our Lord and the apostles freely quoted. 

It may be said to be a grand summary of the whole 

Law of God. It presents to us a number of the orations 

of that great man of God and leader of Israel— the 

mediator of the Law Covenant. Its preparation may 

have been a gradual work on the part of Moses, but 

its delivery to the people of Israel was apparently reserved 

until shortly before his death, and about the 

time the Israelites were ready to pass over Jordan under 

the leadership of Joshua to take possession of the 

promised land. The grandeur of its language and figures 

of speech is freely conceded by all, and some have 

ranked its orations quite as highly as those of Demosthenes 

of ancient times and of Burke, the more modern. 

The evident object of the book was to impress upon 

the Israelites the glorious lessons of their past, and to 

inspire them with reverence for Jehovah their God, 

and thus to be to that people the voice of Moses and 

the voice of the Lord through Moses, encouraging and 

admonishing them and, through them, future 

generations. 

Note carefully the loyalty of Moses to the Lord. 
He boasted not of Israel as "his people," as we frequently 
hear modern preachers do respecting their 
congregations— although Moses indeed might have 
been excusable had he used such language, because he 

R4051 : page 262 



was personally the mediator, the representative of the 
whole nation according to their covenant with the 
Lord at Sinai. Note well that his great work as a 
leader passes comparatively unnoticed, and that his 
exhortations to Israel are all along the highest conceivable 
lines of duty towards God and responsibility 
to him for all the comforts and blessings of the past, 
as well as for all the hopes they cherished for the future. 
The preparation and delivery of this oration to 
Israel reminds us of the words of the Apostle Peter in 
connection with his epistle when he says, "Wherefore I 
will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance 
of these things, though you know them, and be established 
in the present truth." (2 Pet. 1:12.) Not only 
did these orations of Deuteronomy have a valuable 
influence upon the Israelites at the important juncture 
of their passing from the guidance of an old leader to 
that of a younger one and into a new land, but Scriptural 
history tells us that six hundred years afterwards, 
when the nation had fallen into idolatry, when 
the Temple of Solomon was practically abandoned, 
and the religious worship of the people was at a very 
low ebb, the finding of this book, Deuteronomy, in the 
rubbish of the Temple, and the reading of it first in 
the ears of King Josiah and afterward at his command 
in the hearing of all the people, awakened one of the 
greatest revivals in the history of that nation, and led 
to the destruction of idols throughout the land and the 
reestablishment of divine worship.— 2 Kings 22:8-20. 

PROPER FEAR OF THE LORD 

Our lesson of today is generally recognized as belonging 
to the second oration (Deut. 5:11). Some 
surmise that at the close of this oration the "Book of 
the Covenant"— the Law contained in Deut. 12:26— was 
recited or read. Later the book was placed beside 
the Ark of the Testimony in the Holy of Holies, as described 
in Deuteronomy 31:24-29. 

This lesson opens with the statement that the book 
is a summary of the divine commandments, the statutes 
and judgments which the Lord commanded to be 
taught and to be performed in the land of promise. 
The word "judgments" here, as in many other places 
in the Scriptures, signifies decisions as to right and 
wrong. The object of these is stated (v. 2): "That 
thou mightest fear Jehovah thy God, to keep all his 
statutes." This was not only to apply to those who 
entered the land, but to extend to all their children, 
and their favor in the land and their continuance in it 
were made dependent thereon. The Apostle counsels 
us that perfect love casteth out fear, but the Scriptures 
also show us that the "fear [reverence] of the Lord is 
the beginning of wisdom." Nor are the two statements 
in disagreement, for a proper reverence carries 



with it a fear to displease or offend one who is loved and 
reverenced. Moreover, it is only the perfect love that fully 
casts out all fear, and the perfecting of love is a gradual 
matter. A beginning of love is not incompatible 
but quite harmonious with the spirit of deep reverence, 
and, as related to the Almighty, a feeling of reverential 
awe as respects his greatness and perfection and 
in contrast with our own littleness and imperfection. 
It is as the Christian grows in grace and knowledge 
that he is enabled to "perfect holiness in the reverence 
of the Lord" and at the same time to perfect his love— 
the latter eventually entirely swallowing up every feeling 
of fear, although reverence will remain an integral 
part of the love, for who could fully love God without 
reverencing him? 

EARTHLY PROSPERITY AND REWARD 

There is no doubt about it that in this lesson (v. 3), 
and in many other parts of the Old Testament Scriptures, 
the Lord distinctly sets before that people earthly prosperity 
as reward for their obedience and loyalty to 
him and his laws. This to some has been a stumbling-block; 
and not recognizing the fact of the dispensational 
change from the Jewish Age to the Gospel Age, 
they have applied this promise equally to Spiritual 
Israel, and their error has resulted in confusion of 
mind, for it is plain to be seen by any one that earthly 
prosperity in the present age does not attend the Spiritual 
Israelite, but rather, as the Apostle expressed it, 
"Yea, all who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) Ah! how important it is, 
as the Apostle suggests to Timothy, that we learn to 
"rightly divide the Word of truth"— that we notice 
which Scriptures belong to the Jewish Age, which to 
the Gospel Age and which others still to the Millennial 
Age. Observing this rule, everything is plain. 
Fleshly Israel had earthly promises and not heavenly 
ones, while Spiritual Israel has heavenly promises, 
and merely the assurance of bread and water as respects 
their earthly interests, and no assurance beyond 
these as respects their temporal prosperity. 

So far, therefore, as this teaching of earthly rewards 
is concerned, instead of reflecting against the 
book of Deuteronomy and its inspiration, it supports 
them. The promise to Natural Israel, that they would 
be blessed in basket and in store, in flocks and in 
herds, in long life and many children, finds its counterpart 
in Spiritual Israel on a higher plane. The 
heavenly Father was pleased to give Natural Israel earthly 
blessings because they were of the earthly seed, and 
because the dealings of their dispensation foreshadowed 
the divine dealings with the world during the 
Millennial Age in rewarding every good deed and punishing 
every misdemeanor. To God's people, begotten 
of the holy Spirit at Pentecost and since, belong the 



"exceeding great and precious promises," the heavenly 
glory, honor and immortality as members of the New 
Creation, spiritual. Your Father is more willing to 
give the holy Spirit to them that ask him than are 
earthly parents to give earthly good things to their 
children. Spiritual Israel, therefore, is to seek to 
grasp, to appreciate, to enjoy spiritual things by faith 
now, and, if faithful to the end, will enjoy these actually 
throughout eternity by participation in the First Resurrection 
as New Creatures. 
As the opening statement of the most important of 

R4051 : page 263 

all truths, the great Prophet, Moses, cried to the people, 
"Hearken, O Israel!" 

"JEHOVAH OUR GOD IS ONE-JEHOVAH" 

If this statement was true at the time of its utterance, 
it is still true; if its importance put it at the 
very top of the list of injunctions, it should still be 
regarded as the most important amongst the doctrines 
or teachings of the Lord's Word. Yet what do we see? 
We see as respects Fleshly Israel that they soon forgot 
the words of Moses, and time and again they were punished 
on the score of idolatry— for recognizing other 
gods, for forgetting the declaration that there is but 
the one, and his name Jehovah. Quite similarly we 
find amongst Christian people a tendency to forget 
this great integral truth that there is but one God and 
his name Jehovah. Our Roman Catholic friends make 
many gods: the Father, the Son, the holy Spirit, Saint 
Mary, all the apostles and saints, are gods of higher 
or lower dignity, with various degrees of reverence, 
and objects of adoration and prayer. And even Protestants, 
while rejecting many of the lesser gods of 
Romanism, yet, contrary to this Scripture and every 
other Scripture and without any reason, persistently 
declare that we have three Gods in one; nevertheless 
they reject this statement also and reverse it, saying, 
that there is one God in three persons ! If we attempt 
to question them and to ask a reason for their 
hopes and beliefs on this subject they are silent, except 
to say that it is a great mystery, which neither they nor 
any one else can understand— how there could be three 
Gods in one person or one God in three persons. No reasonable 
mind could grasp this; it would be a mystery 
indeed. But why should we make a mystery out of the 
plain, simple statement of God's Word? Why not accept 
the inspired statement of Moses that there is but one 
God, and that he has not three names but one name, 
Jehovah. 

Nothing in this need hinder us from recognizing 
our Lord Jesus as a god also, a "mighty God." Thus 
the Scriptures describe him, and clearly tell us of his 



greatness, his wisdom, his love, his power, his full 

harmony with the heavenly Father, Jehovah, and his 

full submission to his heavenly Father's will in all particulars. 

As he himself said, "Of mine own self I can 

do nothing," "My Father hath sent me," "I came not to 

do mine own will but the will of my Father"; and again, 

"The Father is greater than I." (John 5:30,36; 14:28.) 

Is it not the part of true wisdom and faith to take the 

inspired Word on this subject as on every subject, and 

not to trust to wild theorizings of our own or those of 

other men, which admittedly make confusion and mystery 

and darken the counsels of the Lord's Word? 

How beautiful the thought presented in the Scriptures 

in the language of the Apostle, "All things are of the 

Father— all things are by the Son." (I Cor. 8:6.) How 

beautiful the thought that the Son was the very "beginning 

of the creation of God," and that "by him all 

things were made," that he was the active agent and 

representative in all the great work, not only as respected 

man but angels also. The Bible teaching of 

the relationship between the Father and the Son honors 

both, does violence to neither Scripture nor reason, 

but leaves the teachable in a happy frame of mind, 

the more ready to be taught of the Lord on all subjects. 

How beautiful the thought that Jehovah God presented 
to his first-begotten Son— our Lord Jesus, in 
his prehuman condition— the proposition that he should 
be the Redeemer of the world, and that this should be 
accomplished by the humbling of himself to man's 
nature, and then the further humbling of himself even 
to death, even the death of the cross; and that as a 
result of this humiliation and this evidence of loyalty 
to the Father, he should be raised from the dead to a 
plane of nature above and beyond his original glorious 
estate, made partaker of the divine nature, and share 
in all the glories of that nature. How grand the 
thought that the dear Redeemer did thus manifest his 
love and loyalty, and that he is now exalted and is set 
down at the right hand of the majesty on high, awaiting 
the time when in the Father's name he shall take 
possession of the dominion of the world to rule, to 

R4052 : page 263 

bless with light and knowledge, and to uplift the 
willing and obedient from the mire of sin and death to 
all that was lost in Adam and redeemed at Calvary. 
Truly all who really hearken to the Word of the Lord 
are made both wiser and happier thereby. "The secret 
of Jehovah is with them that reverence him, and he 
will 

"SHOW THEM HIS COVENANT" 

That wonderful Covenant, shown to all who are 
seeking the Word in honesty and sincerity, assures us 



that as our dear Redeemer humbled himself for our 
and the world's redemption and has been highly exalted, 
so, if similarly faithful, we may suffer with him 
now and by and by share his glory and be co-laborers 
with him in the Kingdom which is to bless all the families 
of the earth. O, what riches of grace! what loving 
kindness! what tender mercy! what evidences of 
divine wisdom, skill, justice, love and power! How 
this view of the Only Begotten of the Father shows him 
to us as our Redeemer and also as our Lord and 
Head, who by and by, according to his promise, will 
present us as his Bride, blameless and irreprovable 
before the Father in love. Viewed from this standpoint 
the recognition of Jesus, our dear Redeemer, the 
Sent of God, the Savior of the world, is not in derogation 
of the command of our text, "Jehovah, our God, is 
one"; for the Apostle assures us that, according to divine 
authority, all should reverence the Son even as 
they reverence the Father— not reverence him as the 
Father, but reverence him as the Son whom the Father 
has appointed heir of all things, and who, as the Father's 
associate, is to bless all the families of the earth, 
and who a thousand years later will deliver up the 
Kingdom to God, even the Father, that he may be all 
in all. 

THE CHIEF OR PRIMARY COMMANDMENT 

After calling attention to the one true God, Jehovah, 
we are exhorted, "Thou shalt love Jehovah thy God 
with all thy heart, with all thy soul and with all thy 

R4052 : page 264 

might." This is the summary of the first great commandment, 

as approved by our Lord himself. (Matt. 22:37.) 

It is not in conflict with this that we love our 

Lord Jesus also, for the Apostle declares, "Every one 

that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten 

of him." (I John 5:1.) He who loveth the 

Father must love the Son also, who is the Father's 

express image and who has manifested to us in his 

own flesh the glorious character of the Father. As 

the Son loved the Father, prayed to the Father, and 

felt that he must be about the Father's business, and 

finally died in the accomplishment of the Father's will 

—the work unto which the Father had sent him— so 

with us, imbued with the Spirit of our dear Redeemer, 

our Head. We as his members must have such a reverence 

for the Father and for his will as is here specified. 

The nation of Israel could not love the Lord with 

all its heart, with its soul, with its might; this exhortation 

must be understood to be of an individual kind. 

Similarly the Church, Spiritual Israel, is not called 

upon to love the Lord with heart, soul, being, strength, 

but the individuals who are the Lord's and who are 



seeking to please him, to serve him, to lay down their 
lives in obedience to his will and in the forwarding of 
the divine purposes, are called upon so to do. 

"And these words which I command thee this day 
shall be in thine heart." It is not sufficient, as the 
Lord subsequently pointed out, that we should make a 
profession to be his people, for the "Lord looketh upon 
the heart." The complaint of the Lord through the 
Prophet against Spiritual Israel of today is the same 
as against Israel of old— "This people draw night unto 
me with their lips, while their hearts are far from me" 
—not all, but apparently the great majority. (Isa. 29:13; 
Matt. 15:8.) The lesson to us as Spiritual Israelites 
is contained in the Apostle's words that this 
command of chief love shall be in our hearts. If so, 
this love for God will permeate everything; we will 
love him and his service better than we would love sin 
and its pleasures, better than we would love friends, kindred, 
houses or lands or any other thing; and whoever 
has this first great commandment in his heart and is 
living in harmony with it, will be sure also to have the 
second commandment, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself." 

THE FRUITS OF SUCH A LOVE 

That the Lord and Moses, his mouthpiece, did not 
seek to inculcate the mere nominal professions of love 
for God is clearly attested by the next verse, which declares 
respecting these divine commands, "Thou shalt 
teach them diligently unto thy children and shalt talk 
of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when 
thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, 
and when thou risest up." One whose mind and heart 
would be so filled with love for God and the glorious 
attributes of his character would indeed be a saint. 
What time would he have for sin or frivolity? What a 
model home his would be! how well instructed his children 
would be in the dealings of divine providence and 
all the gracious promises of the divine Word! What 
moderation of word and of act would result from this 
intimate fellowship with God, and yet how the light 
would shine out from such a life! 

The highest attainments under this exhortation were 
not reached under the Jewish dispensation, as the 
Apostle most clearly sets forth. The Jew did recognize 
a grandeur in the Mosaic Law, but it was so far 
above him and all his abilities that he gradually drifted 
into mere outward and formalistic observance of 
its propositions. But the Apostle explains that the 
highest attainments under this Law may be made by 
Spiritual Israelites during this Gospel Age. He declares, 
"The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, 
who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit."— 
Rom. 8:4. 

In other words, although we are not more able to 



accurately keep that grand law than were the Jews, 
we who are in Christ, having his righteousness imputed 
as a covering for our blemishes and being made 
partakers of his holy Spirit, are able to approximate in 
spirit this grand position. And, although there are 
not many such "saints" in the world, we believe that 
WATCH TOWER readers represent a considerable number 
of those of whom the description in the verse before 
us is a fitting one. (v. 7.) And a still larger number are 
awakening to a realization of the true standard which 
the Lord has set for those who are following in the 
footsteps of Jesus. These are more and more watching 
and praying for the fulfilment in themselves of the 
Lord's will as here expressed. They are seeking to 
teach the divine statutes, laws of righteousness, etc., 
to their children by word and by example. They talk 
of them continually in their leisure moments, in the 
house, on the train, on the street— and thoughts of the 
Lord and his wonderful plan of salvation come first 
into their minds on awaking in the morning and are 
last in their thoughts as they retire to rest at night. 

We are glad to testify that our increasing knowledge 
of the readers of this journal leads us to believe 
that they are in their hearts and in their lives seeking 
to approximate the condition of mind and heart here 
set forth as the ideal one, most pleasing to the Lord. 
At conventions this is particularly noticeable, and 
many have remarked that, with from five hundred to a 
thousand gathered from various parts, very rarely is 
there a word heard respecting business or pleasure or 
any other matter except as associated and connected 
with the Lord, his character, his plan and the service 
of his Truth. Strangers have commented upon this 
and marveled at it. Nevertheless, what else might 
we expect amongst those who are growing in grace 
and knowledge and love— amongst those who are coming 
nearer and nearer to an appreciation of the divine 
standards and whose hearts are full of the desire to 
know and to do the divine will. 

Nor would we discourage those who have not yet 
attained to anything like this, the proper standard for 
the Lord's people. Rather would we bid them be of 

R4052 : page 265 

good courage and continue the fight against the world, 

the flesh and the Adversary, and to continue to watch 

and to pray, and to strive to attain the conditions here 

set before us as those pleasing and acceptable to our 

Father in heaven. To have the desire of heart is the 

first condition, and to heroically carry this forward in 

all the affairs of life is the second step. The two constitute 

overcoming the world. Thus God works in us 

first of all to will aright, and subsequently as we become 

stronger in faith and knowledge and grace the 

spirit of the truth works in us to do his good pleasure, 



so that in all our ways we acknowledge him and request 

that he may direct our paths. The family worship, 

the Heavenly Manna at the table— if we give it 

as important a place as the earthly food— and the study 

of the divine plan are channels through which the divine 

blessing is more and more entering the hearts and 

lives of many of our readers, and we trust that the 

good work will continue to go on and progress. Proportionately 

each one is a burning and a shining light 

in his home or amongst his acquaintances, whether 

they acknowledge this or make little of it. His testimony 

is pleasing to God and hopeful to himself, and 

ere long the Lord's favor will be abundantly 

manifested. 

THE JEWISH PHYLACTERIES 

Our Lord Jesus referred to a custom amongst the 
Jews of his day which still prevails— of binding the 
phylactery upon their foreheads and their arms, while 
making void the law of God through their traditions. 
The eighth verse is the foundation for this custom. 
It says, "Thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine 

R4053 : page 265 

hand and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes." 

A phylactery is a little square leather box attached 
to a leather strap about a yard long. In the cubical 
leather box are placed parchments containing four 
passages of Scripture in four columns. (Exodus 13:1-16; 
Deut. 6:4,11,13-21.) These the Jews at times 
fastened upon the head, the box coming above and 
between the eyes; or again they fastened the box 
at the inside of the elbow, and wrapped the strap 
about the arm, holding the end in the hand. Poor 
Jews! they grasped with fervency an outward form, 
but, as the Lord pointed out, they missed the real kernel 
of the Law, namely, love out of a pure heart for God 
and for their neighbor. The wealthy and infidel Jews 
have of course abandoned this custom, but it is still in 
vogue amongst the most earnest or orthodox, who 
usually spend one hour in prayer every day and in putting 
on and off the phylactery. 

There is a lesson for us in this failure of Natural 
Israel to catch the spirit of the divine command. Our 
Lord said that while they thus made an outward show 
their hearts had vicious thoughts, unloving, unkind 
thoughts, and hence they were merely drawing nigh to 
God with their lips in a formal manner and were not 
acceptable. We Spiritual Israelites do well to remember 
that, while we do not use the same outward forms, 
we might bow the knee and pray long and much and 
yet be far from acceptable to the Lord unless we allow 
his spirit of grace and truth to enter into our hearts 
and there produce that transformation which he tells 



us is alone pleasing and acceptable to him— a transformation 

which will make us less selfish, more generous, 

less proud, more humble, less children of this 

world, more the children of the Kingdom, seekers less 

of the things of this present time and more of the Kingdom 

of God and of the righteousness which it represents 

and will in due time enforce. 

OUR OUTGOINGS AND INCOMINGS 

"And thou shalt write them upon the door-posts 
of thy house and upon thy gates." It is doubtful if the 
Lord meant this to be understood and practised literally. 
It is probable that, instead of introducing to the 
people phylacteries, the meaning of the Lord's word 
was that they should consider the divine laws as overshadowing 
everything that they saw and as affecting 
everything that they did with their arm (strength) and 
as affecting every affair of life, in the home and outside 
of it. However, if the spirit of the matter could have 
been retained by the Jews, their phylacteries, we presume, 
would have proved no interference to the divine 
blessing nor their method of complying with the last 
requirement (v. 9). They complied with the letter by 
fastening in a prominent place in the doorway what 
they termed "mezuzah." This is a square piece of paper 
or parchment inscribed with Deuteronomy 6:4-9; 
11:13-21. It is rolled and placed in a small cylinder usually 
of wood or tin. It is the custom of the pious Jew 
to touch this with his finger on each occasion of his 
passing it, and say in Hebrew (Psa. 121:8), "The Lord 
preserve thy going out and thy coming in," etc. 

The real thought which we attach to this injunction 
is that everything pertaining to us who are the 
Lord's, especially everything pertaining to the Church, 
which is the house, the family of God, is sacred to him 
and under his blessing, and we must confess him in 
every matter— "In all thy ways acknowledge him, and 
he shall direct thy paths." 

Next (vs. 10-12) Moses exhorts on the blessing and 
prosperity soon to come to them in the Lord's providence 
should they not turn their hearts away from the 
source of their blessing. And we as Spiritual Israelites 
—especially we who at this time are enjoying so 
much refreshment at the Lord's hand in spiritual 
things— should never forget while enjoying these that 
they have all come to us through the Father. True, 
the Father, now as ever, uses means, agencies, Pilgrims, 
Colporteurs, books, tracts, etc., for bringing 
his grace and truth to his family, and everything that 
God is pleased to use for our blessing should be appreciated 
by us if we are in the proper attitude of heart 
and truly thankful to him. But neither the good things 
themselves nor those who bring them to us are to distract 
our attention from the great fact that all these 
blessings are of God, who giveth to us liberally, richly, 



and upbraideth us not for our seeking of them, but 

R4053 : page 266 

rather rewards us richly. As Israel was exhorted continually 

to remember how God had brought them out 

of the house of bondage, so we should continually remember 

how the Lord brought us out of the house of 

bondage— bondage to sin and error, and that this was 

accomplished through the great antitypical Moses, our 

Redeemer. 

The closing verses of the lesson are exhortations 
again for reverence for the Lord and his name, and the 
repudiation of all other gods or rulers, and the assurance 
that instead of divine favor would come reprobation 
if we, after having been recipients of his favors 
and blessings and the spirit of adoption, should 
forget our obligations or turn from him unto sin. 
These lessons, so appropriate to Natural Israel, we 
recognize as still more appropriate, still more important, 
to us as New Creatures. Let us then take a valuable 
lesson, gird up the loins of our minds and 
strive patiently to the end of the way, when we shall be 
crowned if we faint not. 



R4053 : page 266 

"THE SERVANT OF THE LORD DIED" 

--DEUT. 34:1-12.-SEPTEMBER 22.- 

Golden Text:— "Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of his saints."— Psalm 116:15. 

MOSES had faithfully fulfilled the work of the 
Lord committed to his care down to and 
including his orations, mentioned in our last 
lesson, in which he urged upon Israel faithfulness to 
God similar to that which he had illustrated in himself. 
The Lord's time had come for a change in Israel's 
leadership, and Moses was instructed to go up into the 
mountain called Nebo, whose culminating peak is Pisgah 
—about nine miles east of the northern end of the 
Dead Sea. There God gave him a vision, a view of the 
glorious land where the people he had loved— and in 
whose interests he had sacrificed the honors and dignities 
and luxuries of the Egyptian Court— were to have 
their home as the people of the Lord, under the terms 
of the Covenant which he had mediated at Mount Sinai. 
In the clear atmosphere of that country any eye may 
see much of the land of promise, but under divine 
blessing and assistance, as in Moses' case, we can 
readily realize that the vision, the view, could be a very 
comprehensive one. It was a part of this great leader's 



reward, which doubtless greatly comforted his heart, 
enabling him to see that his labor for the Lord had not 
been in vain, but was destined finally to bring forth 
great fruitage. 

The mental vision of Moses probably took in more 
than was visible to his natural sight. He understood 
that the Lord's blessing upon the nation, including 
that upon himself, was all a part of the great Abrahamic 
promise. He understood that the coming of 
Israel into this land which God had given to them was 
merely one step in the development of the divine plan. 
He understood that Israel was to become very great in 
the world, and ultimately be used as the Lord's instrumentality 
in guiding and instructing all the other 

nations. He understood that ere this would be accomplished 
a greater teacher than himself would come, a 
greater lawyer, a greater leader, a commander of the people 
—the Messiah. He could see in the promise made 
to Abraham— "In thy Seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed"— the ultimate results, but he could 
not see, we may be sure, the intermediate steps of 
divine providence as they are now open and plain before 
the eyes of those who are guided by the Lord's 
Word and Spirit to an understanding of the "deep 
things of God," which other eyes have not seen nor 
ears heard. 

"THE HIDDEN MYSTERY" 

The Apostle tells us that the riches of God's grace 
revealed during this Gospel Age were mysteries hidden 
from past ages and dispensations. (Col. 1:26.) Due 
time for their revealment had not come. Nor were they 
ever intended to be understood except by the Elect— To 
you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, 
but to outsiders these things are spoken in parables 
and dark sayings.— Mark 4:11. 

The mystery of the divine plan, which Moses saw 
not, but which we now see through the apostolic explanation 
provided by the holy Spirit, is that the natural 
seed of Abraham, though it will have a part in the 
blessing of all the families of the earth, will not have 
the chief part except as it is represented by Jesus and 
the apostles and members of the early Church, who according 
to the flesh were of the natural seed of Abraham, 
but according to the spirit were the spiritual Seed— 
the true heirs. Neither did Moses nor others of his time 
see that to this spiritual Seed, which originally was of 
the Jews, would be added members gathered out of 
every nation, people, kindred and tongue during this 
Gospel Age. Nor was it necessary that Moses should 
see or understand or appreciate more than he did. 
Greater knowledge would have been confusing to him 
instead of favorable. Thus, "God moves in a mysterious 
way, his wonders to perform." And again, as the poet 
declares: 



R4054 : page 266 

"Deep in unfathomable mines 

Of never-failing skill, 
He treasures up his bright designs, 

And works his sovereign will." 

As we in mental picture see the great Moses looking 
over the land of Canaan and feasting upon the gracious 
promises of God to Israel— as we note his faithfulness 
in his long and arduous service and his peaceful 
resignation of his life into the hands of the Lord at 
its close, in full confidence of the fulfilment of the Oath-Bound 
Covenant, it points a lesson for us. We similarly 
are standing at the close of a great epoch. The 
antitypical Moses, Christ the Head and the Church his 
Body, has arisen amongst men, and for eighteen centuries 
has been leading onward in the direction of the 

R4054 : page 267 

Millennial Kingdom. The journey is almost concluded. 

By the Lord's direction the living representatives 
of the Body of Christ, the antitypical Moses, are 
already on Mount Pisgah, and, looking beyond, are 
getting the antitypical vision of the glories of the age 
to come— of all the blessings that shall come to the 
world of mankind during the Millennial reign of Christ. 
With the eye of faith we perceive the blessing of all the 
families of the earth through the faithful ones of 
Spiritual Israel and the Ancient Worthies. We see gathering 
to their leadership and instruction, not only 
Israel, but all the families of the earth. We perceive 
the blessing of the light of the glory of the Lord as it 
shall fill the whole earth and make it no longer necessary 
for each to tell his neighbor and his brother, Know 
thou the Lord, because all shall know him. We perceive 
the fall of Babylon, the antitypical Jericho, and the rescue 
at the time of the Great Company of the Lord's 
true people who there were represented by Rahab. With 
the eye of faith we perceive the victory after victory 
which the people will gain over their various foes under 
the Spiritual Joshua, the Christ of glory. We perceive 
that ultimately, with still continued victories, even the 
last enemy shall be destroyed, and the whole groaning 
creation brought to the glorious place where there 
shall be no more sighing, no more dying, no more crying, 
because all the former things of sin and condemnation 
shall have passed away. This is our present 
vision from Mount Pisgah, and surely it is glorious and 
heart-inspiring. Soon in our changed condition beyond 
the vail we shall be members of the great Joshua, leading 
all the families of the earth to the victories and 
blessings promised through faith and obedience. 

The prophecy of Baalim might properly be considered 



as the sentiment of Moses, as, looking down into 

the future he endeavored to discern the shadowy outlines 

of the coming blessings of God's Covenant, 

namely: 

"I see him, but not now; 

I behold him, but not nigh: 

There shall come forth a Star out of Jacob, 

And a sceptre shall rise out of Israel." 

"So Moses, the servant of the Lord, died... according 
to the word of the Lord: This is the land which 
he sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, unto Jacob, saying, 
I will give it unto thy seed. I have caused thee to 
see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go over 
thither." As we look into the beauties of the Millennial 
epoch, the Lord tells us that we shall not go over to 
possess it, but that it shall be for mankind. But he 
tells us more, namely, that he has "provided some better 
thing for us." (Heb. 1 1:40.) He tells us that we must 
die, that "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God." (I Cor. 15:50.) The glorious vision shown us 
is merely for our comfort and strengthening in connection 
with the closing scenes of this age. 

In the Hebrew language the expression, "according 
to the word of the Lord," would literally be, "by the 
mouth of the Lord," and Jewish rabbis have given this 
a poetic turn and say, "by the kiss of the Lord." It is 
a beautiful thought, for while Moses was about to pass 
to the extreme limit of the curse— death— he was recognized 
of the Lord and dealt with as a faithful servant; 
and in view of the fact that the divine plan had arranged 
for his redemption from sheol, the grave (Hosea 13:14), 
his death is appropriately described as a sleep. And 
thus we have the picture of a father kissing his child 
to sleep, and the other picture of the glorious morning 
of the resurrection in which the antitypical Moses, as 
the Father's representative, will awaken him to the 
blessings and eternal rewards which are his in the 
divine plan because of his faithfulness. 

"THE DEATH OF HIS SAINTS" 

This is the signification of the Golden Text, 
"Precious in the sight of Jehovah is the death of his 
holy ones." In a prominent sense our Lord was the 
Holy One of God, and his death was in the sight of 
the Father very precious, and his soul was not left in 
sheol, in hades, in the state of death. He was "raised 
again from the dead on the third day." And through 
him not only the faith and obedience of the Church are 
counted for righteousness, but likewise the faith and 
obedience of Moses and the Ancient Worthies. It is on 
this account that these may be called saints, holy ones, 
because in the divine plan the merit of the Redeemer 
is imputed to them, and through him all these 



are now in divine favor. Consequently, precious in Jehovah's 
sight was the death of all such; and of all now 
walking by faith and seeking to do his will. 

From this standpoint we may understand that the 
death of our dear Redeemer, like that of all of God's 
consecrated ones who have died, and much more so, 
was precious in the Father's sight, and that even though 
he died as the sinner, crying, "My God, my God, why 
hast thou forsaken me," nevertheless he died with the 
Father's kiss. So may it be with all those consecrated 
to walk in the footsteps of their Redeemer. Covered 
with his robe of righteousness they are all precious to 
the Father, and their death under whatever circumstances 
will really not be accidental, but a kiss of 
divine approval and seal of the coming blessing in the 
First Resurrection. 

THE HIDDEN SEPULCHRE 

The Lord himself buried Moses, hiding the place of 
his sepulchre. The primary reason for this probably 
was to hinder the Israelites from carrying his corpse 
as a mummy, which in after time might have become a 
temptation to idolatry. The passage in Jude 9, which 
mentions Michael contending with Satan concerning 
the body of Moses, is a hint along this line, that Satan 
desired to have the corpse to use it for the further misleading 
of the people, but that the Lord through 
Michael the archangel hindered, prevented this, and 
kept the burial-place a secret from the Israelites. 

But there is another view of this matter which is 
interesting because it relates to Spiritual Israel. Jesus 
and the Church unitedly constitute the antitypical, or 
greater Moses— the Spiritual. Their inheritance is not 

R4054 : page 268 

to be earthly but heavenly, and a grave is a symbol of 
hope as respects an earthly resurrection. Hence it was 
appropriate that the type should not show an earthly 
grave since the antitype has no hope in that connection. 
Our hopes are not fleshly, not restitutional hopes, but 
hopes as New Creatures of glory, honor and immortality 
in joint-heirship with our glorious Head. 

THE MEEKEST AND THE GREATEST 

The Scriptures write down Moses as the meekest 
man, and history has written him down as one of the 
greatest of men. Our Lord and the apostles and others 
of the Church are not introduced in this comparison 
because their greatness is not as men but as New Creatures. 
They sacrificed earthly occupations, etc., that 
they might preach the Gospel of the Kingdom and 
suffer therefor. 

When one hundred and twenty years old Moses' eye 



was not dim, his vigor had not fled! This is a remarkable 

statement in whatever light we view it. Forty 

years was he schooled in all the learning of the Egyptians, 

a member of the Court and a general. Forty 

years more he was hidden from view in the desert region 

as a herder of sheep, learning, we may be sure, 

lessons of patience, endurance, self-control and humility. 

And now, finally, the last forty years of his life he 

was used mightily of God, and yet maintained humility 

and exemplified the wonderful qualities of a judge and 

lawgiver, and later a general, a prophet, a priest, a 

teacher. The poet has said of him:— 

"This was the truest warrior 

That ever buckled sword; 
This the most gifted poet 

That ever breathed a word. 
And never earth's philosopher 

Traced with his golden pen 
On the deathless page, truths half so sage 

As he wrote down for men. 

"And had he not high honor? 

The hillside for his pall, 
To lie in state, while angels wait 

With stars for tapers tall; 
And the dark rock pines, like tossing plumes, 

Over his bier to wave, 
And God's own hand, in that lonely land, 

To lay him in the grave." 

Our lesson says of him that there has risen no 
prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, because not 
only was his birth and development specially under 
divine blessing and guidance, but he fully submitted 
himself to the Lord in meekness, in humility, and was 
therefore specially used of him as a type or picture of 

R4055 : page 268 

the still greater Prophet— the Christ of glory. (Acts 3:22,23.) 
Let us use the words of others in describing 
this great servant of God:— 

Moses, the Statesman: "Inspiration apart, Moses 
possessed all those endowments and qualities which 
form the consummate statesman and chief magistrate; 
an intellect of the highest order; perfect mastery of all 
the civil wisdom of the age; a penetrating, comprehensive 
and sagacious judgment; great promptness and 
energy in action; patriotism which neither ingratitude, 
ill treatment nor rebellion could quench or even cool; 
a commanding and persuasive eloquence; a hearty love 
of truth; an incorruptible virtue; an entire freedom 
from selfish ambition; an invincible hatred of tyranny 
and injustice; a patient endurance of toil; a courageous 
contempt of danger, and a greatness of soul in which 



he has never been surpassed by the most admired 
heroes of ancient or modern times. Comprehensiveness, 
grasp, force, sagacity, were the predominant 
characteristics of his mind; magnanimity, disinterestedness, 
an enthusiastic devotion to liberty and an 
ardent but rational piety, were the leading qualities of 
his heart." 

As a General: "Moses delivered his people from the 
most powerful nation on earth; maintained them 
amid the perils of the desert for forty years, and led 
them in confidence against a country settled by fierce 
tribes, which they conquered." 

As a Lawgiver: "However much may have been 
added by the development of the people, like the 
amendments to the Constitution and laws of the United 
States, yet through Moses was instituted the great 
system of civil and religious law." 

As a Poet: "The two songs in Deut. 32 and 33 and 
Psalm 90." 

As an Orator: "The great orations in Deuteronomy 
stand among the few greatest masterpieces of eloquence 
in the world's history, if not at their head." 

"WHOM THE LORD KNEW FACE TO FACE" 

To others of the prophets the Lord usually manifested 
himself through visions or dreams or by angels 
in human form, but seemingly Moses was granted a 
still closer approach to the divine presence. When 
thinking of the expression, "face to face," we should 
understand it to signify that Moses enjoyed a closeness 
of fellowship and favor with the Lord rather than 
that he really looked into the face of Jehovah, concerning 
which it is written, "No man can see my face and 
live" (Ex. 33:20); and again, "Whom no man hath seen 
or can see." (I Tim. 6:16.) It may be that our Lord 
Jesus as Michael especially represented the Father 
with Moses, as it was he who prevented the Adversary 
from having Moses' body after death. But in any event, 
applying the matter antitypically to the Christ, we see 
that in a special sense the antitypical Moses in the 
flesh throughout this Gospel Age has had a favor in 
connection with the divine presence not enjoyed by any 
others of previous times. 

We see the Lord's face with the eye of faith, for we 
have seen our Lord Jesus, who represents the Father, 
and who declares that whosoever hath seen him hath 
seen the Father— has enjoyed the best possible revelation 
of the Father whom no man hath seen. Again he 
declares respecting the Church, his Body, "Their 
angels [messengers] do always have access to the face 
of my Father," as though he would tell us that all of 
our interests and affairs are brought directly to the 
Father's attention, so that there is no danger of any 
delay and any peradventure that all things will work 
together for good to them who love him. Again we see 



the Father's face in the sense that we see his love, 
which is displayed to us through a knowledge of the 
Truth by the holy Spirit granted to us. Not merely divine 

R4055 : page 269 

power do we see, not merely divine wisdom do we 
see, not merely divine justice do we see— but God himself 
is love, and he has shown us his love. We who with 
the eyes of our understanding have seen our Redeemer 
and come to a knowledge of him have seen the Father 
and become acquainted with him proportionately, for 
all things are of the Father and all things are by the 
Son. "Let me die the death of the righteous— let my 
last end be like his."— Numbers 23:10. 

Our Lord Jesus was the Righteous One, and when 
we think of death we are to think of him and his death, 
and to remember that as he laid down his life we also 
ought to lay down our lives on behalf of the brethren. 
As he sacrificed earthly interests and advantages and 
privileges and pleasures that he might die the sacrificial 
death in accord with the divine plan, so let us remember 
that we have covenanted similarly to be "dead 
with him." For if we be dead with him we shall also 
live with him; if we suffer with him we shall also reign 
with him. Our hope of participation with him in his 
resurrection to glory, honor and immortality, is based 
upon our faithfulness in participating with him in his 
death, which means also a share with him in the sufferings 
of this present time. But standing as we do with 
the Pisgah prospect before us, strengthened by might 
in the inner-man, why should either death or its attendant 
sufferings deter us? Nay, in all these things 
we will rejoice and triumph through our Lord and Redeemer, 
our Head! 

"MEN OF LIKE PASSIONS WITH YOURSELVES" 

These were the words of the Apostle Paul, and his 
humble statement respecting himself and his companions 
is true also of Moses and all the Ancient Worthies, 
and is in full harmony with the Scriptural declaration, 
"There is none righteous [perfect], no not one." 
We here quote the words of another respecting the 
blemishes of Moses' career:— 

"Two or three items to his fault are attributed to 
Moses, as every saint has failed in some point at some 
time. There is no garden but has some weeds. But 
the most unjust thing we can do is to measure its value 
by its weeds and not by its fruits. 'By their fruits ye 
shall know them.' Moses' few faults are such as 
will never be noticed at all by a worldly man. They 
are like a broken limb on a tree loaded with magnificent 
fruit. All God's works through men are done by imperfect 
instruments." 



"There's a fleck of rust on a faultless blade— 
On the armor of price there is one. 

There's a mole on the cheek of the lovely maid; 
There are spots upon the sun." 



R4055 : page 269 

QUARTERLY REVIEW 

-SEPTEMBER 29.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord is merciful and gracious, 
slow to anger and plenteous in mercy."— Psalm 103:8. 

BEFORE starting the studies of a new quarter 

we are urged to take a glance back over what 

we have seen during the present one. It discloses 

an interesting panorama and a profitable one. 

Israel's history therein depicted is in sharp contrast 

with that of any other nation of earth. How consistent 

with the facts is the Scriptural declaration concerning 

Israel, "You only have I known of all the families 

of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) God, of course, knew of the 

other nations, and in a general way caused his sun to 

shine upon the just and the unjust, the evil and the 

good. He has supervised the affairs of the nations to 

the extent of hindering conditions which would be inimical 

to his gracious plans for the ultimate blessing 

of all the families of the earth; but, as declared, he revealed 

himself to and was in active cooperation with 

the nation of Israel alone, the seed of Abraham, up to 

the time that they were cast off, when they rejected 

Messiah. Since then, as we have seen, the divine care, 

blessing, promises, revelations, etc., have been turned 

to Spiritual Israel— the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, 

Christ and the Church, the new nation, the Royal 

Priesthood, the Holy People. 

We get the most good from the experiences of 
fleshly Israel by seeing through them as types, figures, 
illustrations, the Lord's providences toward Spiritual 
Israel. Thus Israel's deliverance from Egyptian bondage 
corresponds to our deliverance from the bondage 
of sin, condemnation and death. Their deliverer, 
Moses, corresponds to our deliverer, Jesus. Their trial 
and testing at the Red Sea correspond to the test of 
our full consecration to the Lord at the beginning of 
our journey— the entrance upon the narrow way. The 
springs and oases of their desert journey to Sinai correspond 
well with the times of refreshing of a spiritual 
kind granted to us in the midst of our trying experiences, 
resulting from our following our Leader and 
finding as a consequence the world against us. Their 
coming to Sinai corresponds in some measure with our 
growth in knowledge and our greater responsibility 



therefor, and our fuller realization of the greatness of 
our God and the responsibilities of the relationship to 
him into which we have entered. Their daily portion 
of manna, God's supply, but painstakingly received, 
corresponds well to our spiritual sustenance received 
of the Lord from his storehouse, the Bible. Although 
the supply is sufficient, time and patient perseverance 
are requisite for securing it, for gathering it. The fact 
that their manna came every day, and in the proportion 
necessary, well illustrates the fact that our spiritual 
food must be partaken of daily, must be gathered daily 
—"meat in due season." 

The short journey to Kadesh-Barnea, from whence 
spies went forth, indicates the short time which should 
elapse with us before we should enter into the riches of 
God's favor by faith. The viewing of the land enjoyed 
by Caleb and Joshua represents well the joyful experiences 
of those who fully trust in the Lord and fully 

R4056 : page 270 

consecrate to him and are already able even on this side 
the vail to enter into the joys of the Lord by faith. The 
evil report of the other spies, and the unwillingness of 
the Israelites to go forward in faith to possess the land, 
represent well the condition of the majority of the 
Lord's people— they cannot enjoy because they cannot 
believe, because they have not sufficient faith in the 
power of God and in the certainty of his promises. 

MERCIFUL AND GRACIOUS, SLOW TO ANGER 

Our Golden Text reminds us that the Lord is merciful 
and gracious, slow to anger and plenteous in 
mercy, and we see this well illustrated in the case of 
fleshly Israel in the wilderness experiences, in the history 
of the Lord's people of this Gospel Age, nominal 
spiritual Israel, and also in the cases of the faithful 
ones. Can we not all realize how patient and merciful 
the Lord has been to us in our various experiences in 
life? Can we not see how he would have been fully 
justified in canceling our Covenant long ago, and that 
only of his mercy and love have we been permitted to 
come thus far on the way toward the heavenly Kingdom? 
Surely a realization of these things should make 
us both humble and trustful. Moreover the Lord informs 
us that he has a still further requirement, namely, 
that if we would appreciate his greatness and mercy 
through Christ in our own cases we shall exercise similarly 
mercy and forbearance toward others who may 
transgress against us. Indeed, so earnest is the Lord 
in impressing this matter upon us that he positively 
declares that none of us can maintain relationship with 
him except as he shall develop this spirit, this character, 
in relationship to his brethren and fellow-servants. 
How generous, how considerate, how moderate, how 



forgiving, all this should lead us to be in our dealings 
with the brethren, especially with those who have in 
any measure wounded or injured us or our interests. 

Finally, let us remember Moses on Mount Nebo 
looking across Jordan into the promised land— and 
preparing for his burial. Let us more and more realize 
that this should be our attitude; that as the Body 
of Christ in the flesh we are soon to die, and that beyond 
the vail we will be New Creatures. Let us remember 
that the mountain-top of Christian experience 
should now be our portion, and that from thence the 
clear eye of faith should be able distinctly to discern 
the outlines of the glorious inheritance which the Lord 
hath in reservation for them that love him, the possession 
of which we are hoping so soon to share. 



R4056 : page 270 

THE CHATAUQUA SALUTE 

Question.— To our surprise a "Brother" found fault 
with our giving the Chatauqua salute when Brother 
Russell appeared at the Denver Convention. I ask 
for information whether or not any evil significance 
attaches to such a form of salute? 

Answer.— There is no evil significance to the "Chatauqua 
salute." It is one of the most decorous and civilized 
salutes known. It was started as an offset to hand-clapping, 
foot-stamping and cheering; and surely it 
is much more polite. An audience must have some 
method of expressing its greeting, and a less objectionable 
form surely could not be imagined by anybody. 
True, the Scriptures do not command or even mention 
the "Chatauqua salute"; but then neither do they commend 
handshaking, which is merely a private salutation 
as the other is a general one. However, let us 
recognize each other's right to shake the hand or the 
head or the handkerchief or not, as each may choose. 

Let us remember, too, that "Your Adversary the 
devil goeth about as a ferocious lion, seeking whom he 
may devour— whom resist," says the Apostle. We may 
be sure that he attends all the Conventions; and that 
his influence is continually exerted to sow discord, 
strife and every other work of the flesh and of the devil. 
He works upon our imperfect heads and hearts. "We 
are not ignorant of his devices," writes the Apostle, 
and we well know that wrong-heartedness is far more 
dangerous than wrong-headedness. The latter the Lord 
has promised to protect us from, but not from the former: 
we must be "pure in heart," else we will not long 
be reckoned amongst the branches of the True Vine, 
but be cut off; for Love is the fruit of the Spirit— the 
fruit of the Vine. And "herein is your Father glorified, 
that ye bear much fruit." Oh! then, how we should 



watch and pray against the spirit of envy, malice, 
wrath, strife, contention; and cultivate meekness, 
gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness, Love. Thus, 
as directed, let us keep our hearts in the love that is of 
God; keep them with all diligence, for out of them are 
the issues of life— the decision as to our everlasting future 
of Life or Death eternal. Let us all be on guard. 
And let those who have on the whole armor and who 
know how to use the sword of the Spirit assist the 
weaker to overcome the Tempter's snares and wiles. 



page 270 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am thinking of you all this morning as being at 
breakfast while I write— discussing the Heavenly Manna 
text for the day: "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace 
whose mind is stayed on thee," and I am sure the discussion 
going on is reminding all of the greatness of 
the privilege of that perfect peace. I am trying to the 
more thoroughly bring my own heart into that state of 
staying (fixing) upon the Lord that I might enjoy still 
more completely the perfect peace. 

I am having a great blessing in association with 
the dear ones here. The community is a country one, 
and great opposition is manifest by the people, but 
there is a gathering here which would shame many 
large cities— about fifty persons. The population is 
only about 8,000 persons. Bro. S , the leader, used to 

page 27 1 

be a chemist and druggist, but has recently given up 
his business entirely, so that both himself and wife 
might engage in the Colporteur work, which they are 
determined to make the best of, although some conditions 
here make the work far more difficult than in 
America. They are aided very much in reaching small 
towns by an automobile, capable of holding two, the 
expense of maintaining which is less than the railway 
fares of one person would be, and they are thus able to 
carry their books with them while canvassing, and to 
deliver at once. 

I am trying to get as accurate an idea of the Colporteur 
situation as I can while here, that I may give 
you an intelligible report of it when I get home, and 
have been out myself to do some canvassing, that I 
might know from actual experience the attitude of the 
people. I find that one of the greatest hindrances 
here is the absolute indifference of the great majority 
to any kind of religious matter, and the engagement to 
a remarkable degree in the pursuit of pleasure. I shall 



make some canvassing experiments in other parts 
where time will permit. 

The friends everywhere are longing to see you. 
Many of them have come into the Truth only recently, 
and they are very anxious to express personally their 
gratitude to God in bringing the knowledge of his plan 
to them through you. They love you most sincerely 
and when I have mentioned your hope to be able to 
come next year a wave of joy seemed to pass over them 
all. One dear sister here tells me she wanted to tell 
you her feelings of gratitude for what the Lord had 
given her through you, and she wrote seven letters, one 
after the other, in an attempt to put her thoughts into 
words, but she never sent you any of them, because 
she thought they weren't good enough. Doubtless in 
the Kingdom she will be able to express all she feels. 

The zeal and love of the friends is a constant lesson 
and reminder, and I feel that I am learning very 
much by my association with them all. I pray that I 
may have heavenly wisdom to apply the lessons 
learned. 

With much love to you, dear Brother Russell, and 
to every one of the dear ones at the Bible House, and 
asking that you will kindly remember me specially in 
prayer that I may use and not abuse my precious privileges 
in the Lord's glorious service, and assuring you 
that every day I remember yourself and the dear ones 
with you, 

Your brother and servant in our Lord, 

A. E. WILLIAMSON,-England. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is with pleasure I pen you these few lines, just 
to inform you of the blessings received in the service 
granted me in the harvest field, "not of merit but of 
grace," and never did I feel so weak in myself as of 
late, but the Apostle so clearly brings the matter to our 
view, saying, "When I am weak, then am I strong," etc. 

Knowing of your love toward all the Lord's people, 
I am glad to be able to express, on behalf of those 
whom it has been my privilege to meet, their love toward 
you, dear brother, which has been manifested in 
so many ways. 

I firmly believe that those who are having the greatest 
joys "in the Lord" at the present time are those 
who have first made a careful and prayerful study of 
the DAWNS, with Bible in hand, thereby putting on the 
armor, and having done so are active in service to the 
extent of their ability, in whatever position the Lord 
has placed them. These seem to be the clearest in 
Present Truth, and find the yoke easy, rejoicing that 
they have the privilege of suffering with him. 

I enclose a part of a letter received yesterday from 
a very dear Colporteur brother who has a family to 



support. It reads as follows:— 

"I often think what an opportunity there is for 
those of our single brothers of good ability and with 
no encumbrance. I would not think of using my time 
in secular employment, while the opportunity was afforded 
of doing "harvest" work, if I were single. I am 
glad that the dear Lord has given me the privilege of 
using a little time this way, and trust I will be able to 
put in a few more months. In the last seven days I 
have sold 250 books. 

'"Lord, if I may, 

I'll serve another day.'" 

A dear sister has also written me, saying: "Since 
you were here the Lord has opened the way, and now 
I am in the 'harvest field.' And oh, the blessings that 
come from day to day! How unworthy I am of such 
favors ! " 

And now, dear brother, may the Lord continue to 
bless you, as you endeavor to serve the household of 
faith. As ever, 

Your brother in our Redeemer, 

W. M. HERSEE, -Pilgrim. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I ask the prayers of the office household that I may 
be emptied of self and filled with the holy Spirit and 
wisdom of our Father for this work. 

I would like to tell you of the condition of the 

Church in A : I can say as a class they are growing 

in grace and knowledge, and from what I have seen 
and heard from other places I think that there is more 
of grace and peace than in many classes, and I 
attribute it to our being willing to partake of what 
is "meat in due season," as it is given to us from the 
"storehouse" by the appointed servant. 

There is none in our company who is pushing 
ahead for meat not yet due, so that all the little disturbances 
that come from differences of opinion on 
such points are avoided— that is, we might say, spiritual 
dyspepsia, cramps and pains from undigested food. 

Nearly all the class a short time ago started to reread 
the set of DAWNS, twelve pages a day, and are 
being blessed in it. We have three and sometimes four 
elders, so avoid strife on that line, and develop new 
material. 

Your brother and servant in the service of our Lord 
and Redeemer, J. H. HENIKA,— Georgia. 



page 273 



SEMI-MONTHLY 