VOL. XXXI NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

The Purification of the Sons of Levi 355 

He Will Thoroughly Purge His People 355 



He Shall Gird Himself and Serve Them 356 

Respecting "Things New and Old" 357 

Arraigned as a Blasphemer 357 

Self-Confidence Is Weakness 359 

"Before the Cock Crow" 360 

The Prince of Life Crucified 360 

Jesus Before King Herod 361 

Thou Art Not Caesar's Friend 361 

"Now is Christ Risen" 362 

His Death and Resurrection Needful 363 

"Glory to God in the Highest" 363 

"The Desire of All Nations" 363 

"A Savior and a Great One" 364 

This Is My Will for Thee (Poem) 364 

Questions and Answers 365 

How to Gain the Great Prize 365 

Some Interesting Letters 366 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



MEMPHIS, TENN, NOV. 25 

OKLAHOMA CITY, OKLA., NOV. 27 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10.00 
o'clock, and Discourse for the Interested at 1 1.00 o'clock. Discourse 
for the Public at 3.00 p.m., by Brother Russell. Topic, 
"Hereafter." All sessions will be held in the Auditorium, 
Cor. Walker and California Sts. 

SAN ANTONIO, TEX., NOV. 29 

HOUSTON, TEX., NOV. 30 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., DEC. 4 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10.30 o'clock 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle. The evening meeting, at 7.30 
o'clock, will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse for the 
Public at 3.00 p.m., in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 
Lafayette Av. and St. Felix St. Topic, "The Messenger of 
the Covenant." 

OMAHA, NEB., DEC. 11 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10.00 
o'clock. Discourse for the Public at 3.00 o'clock. Discourse 
for the Interested at 7.00 o'clock in the evening. All services 
in the Omaha Auditorium, Cor. 15th and Howard Sts. 

HARTFORD, CONN., DEC. 18 

CHATTANOOGA, TENN., DEC. 25 

MOBILE, ALA., DEC. 26 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JAN. 1 

ST. PETERSBURG, FLA., JAN. 8 

PHILADELPHIA, PA., JAN. 15 



191 1 --NEW MOTTO CARDS-191 1 

We have imported an extremely choice line of Motto 
Cards of entirely new design. We also have some of the 
good old standbys, which are difficult to improve upon. We 
again adopt the $1 packet (postage included) plan as every 
way the best and cheapest. Remember that our prices are 



about one-half the usual charge, and the very choicest. 

Packet M. A. —Nearly all old, but choice, medium sizes. 

Packet M.B.— Old and new designs, about equally assorted. 

Packet M.C.— All new, specially recommended to those 
who have already had our old standbys. 

Packet M.D.— Old and new, but all large. 

Packet M.E.— All new, all large. 



R4708 : page 355 

THE PURIFICATION OF THE SONS OF LEVI 

"Who may abide the day of his coming? And who shall 

stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire; and he 

shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall 

purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and 

silver, that they may offer unto the Lord 

an offering in righteousness."— Malachi 3:2,3. 

WE understand this statement to apply to our 

Lord's manifestation at the first advent and 

throughout the Gospel Age. He has been 

appearing, in the sense of making himself 

known to those in the right condition of 

heart, that he might assist them in walking 

in his steps. But he is particularly manifesting 

himself to them now. The Jews, at 

his first advent, had been expecting the 

greater Mediator than Moses, who was the 

Mediator of the old Law Covenant. Moses said to them, 

"A Prophet [a great Messiah] shall the Lord your God 

raise up unto you from amongst your brethren, like unto 

me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall 

say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every soul 

which will not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from 

among the people." (Acts 3:22,23.) So they were expecting 

this great Messiah, the greater Mediator of the 

New Covenant. 

Jehovah had said, "I will send my Messenger,... 
even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in." 
You are expecting a greater than Moses; but it will mean 
a severer trial and testing when the greater shall come. 
The text above does not signify that he will refine literal 
silver and literal gold, but that he will refine God's people. 
These will be relieved of the dross, that they may offer 
unto the Lord an acceptable sacrifice. These sons of 
Levi, in the antitypical sense, are the household of faith. 
And they have proposed that they will offer sacrifice to 
the Lord— will "present their bodies living sacrifices." 
Such as do thus fully present themselves will be the 
Priests, and the great Messiah will be the High Priest. 
They will offer unto the Lord an acceptable sacrifice in 
righteousness. This work has been in progress throughout 
this Age. And because we are now in the end of the 



Age, tests more crucial are being applied, and will continue 
to be applied until the Lord shall have completed the 
development of this spiritual house of Levi, the antitypical 
Priests and the antitypical Great Company. 

The text having reference to the entire appearance of 
Messiah, beginning at Jordan, his appearance will culminate 
in his glorious revelation at his second Advent. 
Messiah, the Head of this greater prophet than Moses, 
was raised up first. It requires the entire Gospel Age to 
raise up the Body of this greater Mediator and antitype 
of Moses. 

R4709 : page 355 

HE WILL THOROUGHLY PURGE HIS PEOPLE 

The statement, "Who shall stand when he appeareth?" 
should not be understood to imply that all would be standing 
at the time of his appearing. There would be some 
who would think that they were standing, but who would 
really not be in the Lord's favor at all. But the meaning 
of this text, to our mind, is, Who shall stand the test at 
the time of his appearing? As, for instance, at the first 
advent he came unto his own, the Jewish people; but they 
rejected him and crucified him. There were only a few 
who stood the test. John the Baptist said, "He will thoroughly 
purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his 
garner." (Matt. 3:12.) We understand this text to be a 
reference to this work of purification; similarly, today, in 
this harvest time, more fully than throughout the Age, 
there is a testing and trying and proving of the Lord's 
people. Who will stand the test to prove who are the 
people of God? The Lord is now determining who are 
the consecrated class. 

We see that at the first Advent only a remnant of the 
Jewish nation accepted Jesus as the antitypical Mediator 
of the New Covenant, when he began to test the Levite 
class— to prove them. Similarly, today, we find the nominal 
Church falling away, proving unworthy in many 
respects— not falling into everlasting torment, not into 
the Second Death, but rather manifesting that all are not 
worthy to be classed among either the Priests or the 
Levites. We are not to forget that the Gospel Age is 
for the purpose of finding the Priests and the Levites, to 
make them ready as ministers of the New Covenant, 
which is to be for all the people through them. 

We understand that in this picture the Lord quite 
probably used the two metals (both precious, but one more 
precious than the other) to represent the Priests and the 
Levites— the "Little Flock" and the "Great Company." 
We understand also that the New Covenant has been in 
process of inauguration all through this Gospel Age, but 
that this Covenant will not benefit Israel and the world 
until the Millennial Age. First, they must have a Mediator. 
This Mediator was, to begin with, the Lord Jesus 
Christ, the High Priest. Then, in God's arrangement, he 



R4709 : page 356 

was to add an under-priesthood, all these to be the antitypical 
Levites, ministers, servants of the New Covenant. 
The justified humanity of all these constitute the "better 
sacrifices" that are being offered, at the completion of 
which, in the end of this Gospel Age, everything will be 
ready— the Priesthood and the Levites, and the blood of 
the New Covenant— to apply to Justice, forthwith to bring 
the blessings of the Mediatorial Kingdom to Israel, and, 
through Israel, to all people. 

It may be asked, What is the "offering in righteousness" 
here mentioned? The offering now being made to 
God is the offering of the Church— "Present your bodies 
a living sacrifice." (Rom. 12:1.) The High Priest purifies 
these members of his Body by giving them the necessary 
experiences day by day, that they may more and 
more learn the will of God— may more fully lay down 
earthly things and attain to the character-likeness of our 
Lord Jesus. This purging does not come all at once and 
complete the offering; but, in our daily experiences the 
chastisements of the Lord are to the end that his will 
may be accomplished in us more perfectly. He is giving 
us these experiences day by day, so that, as we receive 
them, we may learn what is his will, that we may complete 
the offering in righteousness which has begun. 

If it be asked how we could be members of the great 
Refiner and, at the same time, be of this Levite Company 
whom he is refining, we answer that this is the picture 
uniformly set before us in the Scriptures— that Christ 
is the Head of the Body, in the official sense; and we are 
counted in as members of his Body, even before we have 
been fully and completely and finally accepted as such in 
the "First Resurrection." The Head has passed into 
glory and we are to be with him. From the time of our 
acceptance and begetting of the holy Spirit we are counted 
in as members of his Body in a prospective manner, on 
the supposition that we shall make our calling and election 
sure. Then again, in another sense of the word, the 
Lord uses these very ones whom he is refining as co-laborers 
with him and gives to them a part of the ministry 
of reconciliation; some of the refining work— amongst 
them being some who are instructors of the brethren— 
until, as the Apostle says, they all come to the full stature 
of a Man in Christ. (Eph. 4:13.) So now the refining 
work, the increasing of the Body of Christ, goes on— the 
use of the different members of the Body proceeds, all by 
reason of the fact that our Lord is the Head of the Body. 



R4709 : page 356 

HE SHALL GIRD HIMSELF AND SERVE THEM 



ALAS! how few realize what a dangerous 

thing is liberty; how carefully it must be 

used for our benefit, and how easily it might 

be misused to our eternal danger. Because 

God created us free agents; because this is 

part of his likeness, and because, additionally, 

ambition must be a part of every progressive 

individual, therefore this free 

agency and ambition in conjunction bring 

us all under tests of character. And the 

greater our abilities, the more our talents and the wider 

our influence, the stronger the power of ambition may 

become. Then comes the test. Will this laudable ambition 

be subject to the Divine Will— thoroughly consecrated 

to do the Lord's will even unto death? 

If our devotion to the Lord be absolute, fully in control 
of our thoughts and words and doings, our liberty 
and largest ambition will be rightly directed and eventuate 
in blessings to ourselves and to others. But if the Divine 
will be not first and absolutely in control of our wills, 
the more ambition and the more liberty we have the 
greater will be our danger. Where the Lord is not reverenced 
—obeyed with heart, mind, soul and strength- 
some one else has an influence in our hearts— husband 
or wife, parents or children, or, more than probably, self. 
We cannot be overcomers except as our hearts are absolutely 
loyal to the Lord, with self-will and every other 
will thoroughly subjected to the Divine Will. This is the 
lesson of life to those who would come off conquerors. 
How we rejoice, in every struggle, when finally, by God's 
grace, we recover balance! 

It is not to be wondered at that the more prominent 
brethren have the more severe trials along this line. Of 
this condition of things the Apostle forewarns us, saying, 
Be not many of you teachers, knowing that he who is a 
teacher will experience the more severe trials. The deflection 
of some recognized as teachers will cause special 
trials to others not teachers, and will prove to what extent 
they have a personal relationship to the Lord through 
his Word and through an individual consecration to him 
and through his instructions by his Word and the prophecies 
—in the School of Christ. We fear that too many are 
in an attitude of leaning upon others whose fall might 
bring them disaster. It is because we have long recognized 
this principle that, in our writings, we have presented 
the Lord's message as his message, and not as our 
own, giving the chapter and verse for every doctrine. 

PUTTING ON THE WHOLE ARMOR 

If any are leaning on anything but the Lord's Word for 
guidance, to these we say that we have striven to bring 
all of the members of the Body into direct personal contact 
with the Head, and, while not ignoring the value of 
books and sermons, we have, nevertheless, urged upon all 
the necessity of proving, to the extent of their ability, 



every item of truth which they receive. Notwithstanding 
this we fear that many lean upon us and upon others. 
We fully know that we are in the evil day, and that the 
armor that the Lord provides is to be put on by each one 
of his faithful soldiers of the cross. We will use our 
shield, breastplate, helmet, and sword in the defence, as 
much as possible, of all the Lord's people; but each must 
see to it that he put on this armament for himself. The 
great King of the Universe has provided it, the great 
Captain of our salvation, Jesus, has invited us to put it 
on, and we, as corporal, merely call attention to the Captain's 
order. Whoever is negligent will surely rue it. 

The time for adjusting this armor is very short. The 
battle is on. Many are falling at our side. What we do 
should be done energetically, systematically, thoroughly— 
at once. It is important that we help others to the extent 
of our ability, but still more important, according to the 
Divine Will, that we should take heed to ourselves and 
make our own calling and election sure. It has been our 
observation that some who have come into the Truth 
quite recently are much more clear in it, and have the 
armor better adjusted, and are able to use the Sword of 
the Spirit better, than some who have been in the Truth 
for five, ten, and even twenty years. Indeed, it is our 
observation that some who have been long in the Truth 
are less skillful today in the use of the armor than they 
were years ago. Why is this? And what is the remedy? 
The answer is a simple one, manifest to all. 

Divine Providence has furnished the people of God at 

R4709 : page 357 

this time an outline of the Divine Plan and a detail of 
Bible doctrines such as God's people never before had in 
their possession. Without claiming any inspiration for 
these STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, we surely may claim 
a Divine supervision in respect to the matter which they 
contain and the time of their presentation. Whoever 
admits that we are in the harvest time at all— that we 
have been in it since 1875— must acknowledge this also, 
that the Lord promised that at that time he would cause 

R4710 : page 357 

his people to sit down to a bountiful repast of spiritual 
food and that he would be their servant and bring forth to 
them "things new and old." (Luke 12:37.) All who 
recognize these things must recognize these STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES as being identified with the fulfillment 
of that promise. 

RESPECTING "THINGS NEW AND OLD" 

It would be giving too much honor to any man to 
suppose that the general elucidation of Divine Truth 
through these volumes should be merely one man's opinion. 



No one who understands these things can possibly 
believe that one man in our day could fabricate a theory 
which puts all other theories of this and every other day 
completely into the shadow, as a tallow dip in comparison 
to the most wonderful arc lights of our day. Neither is 
there reason or sense in the attempt of some to claim that 
these SCRIPTURE STUDIES are merely a rehash of what 
has been believed for centuries. True, they present the 
doctrines of Election, Free Grace, etc., but not as these 
subjects were presented nor as they are now presented by 
many. These books discuss the Bible texts and set them in 
order, as showing their relationship to each other. But 
while these presentations are harmonious, they are not 
accepted by Calvinism and Arminianism. Although they 
cannot refute them, they secretly oppose them— oppose 
the only presentation which shows the true significance of 
the Bible texts which they use in a private and isolated 
manner. We repeat, then, that STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
are either of the Lord's providence or else they 
are one of the greatest miracles. 

The secret of the clearness and power of some who 
have come recently into the Truth can be traced to the 
fact that they have been diligently using these Divinely 
provided helps for Bible study. On the contrary, many 
of those who today are less clear in the Truth than they 
were years ago owe their loss of spiritual vigor and clear 
perception of the Truth to the fact that they have neglected 
this Divine provision for their needs. They have 
followed the worldly thought— that, having digested what 
some other man has thought, believed and taught, they 
should break fresh ground for themselves, in hope of 
bringing forth still brighter jewels from the Divine Word. 
Some of these diggers have searched long and carefully, 
but have found nothing, brought forth nothing, that has 
specially sparkled as a gem of Truth for the eyes of the 
Lord's people. Some of them have sought far and near 
for other fruits and viands for the table of the Lord's 
family, but have added little, if anything, to that which 
the great Provider has set before us of "things new and 
old." Some of these would-be new dishes, new viands, 
set before the Church have proven to be unhealthful, indigestible, 
visionary, and calculated to give a fever, rather 
than real spiritual strength. Others, failing of their ambitions 
in these directions, have become destructive and 
have uttered what some of the friends have outlined a 
"Midnight Howl" against the food that the Lord has prepared, 
against his service of his people, etc. 

All these things are tests. The sooner we realize this 
fact, the better for us. We have no fear but that the 
great Shepherd, now present with his sheep and gathering 
out of all the various pens of Christendom those who 
know his voice, will not suffer the wolves to stampede his 
flock, nor to devour them. Has he not said, "The Father 
who gave them to me is greater than all, and none can 
pluck them out of my Father's hand." 

The lesson to us all is, "Humble yourselves under the 



mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." 
Be not heady, high-minded and worldly-wise, but humble, 
teachable and full of faith in the Divine promises, which 
are so rapidly fulfilling and culminating in this day of his 
preparation. 



R4710 : page 357 

ARRAIGNED AS A BLASPHEMER 

-MATTHEW 26:57-68.-NOVEMBER 27.- 

"Who when he was reviled, reviled not again."— I Pet. 2:23. 

WE cannot do better at the opening of this study 
than quote the words of Mr. Chandler. He 
said: "Many remarkable trials have characterized 
the judicial history of mankind. 
The trial of Socrates, before the dikastery 
of Athens, charged with corrupting the 
Athenian youth, with blaspheming the 
Olympic gods and seeking to destroy the 
constitution of the Athenian Republic, is 
still a sublime and thrilling chapter in the 
history of a wonderful people. 

"The trial of Alfred Dreyfus is still fresh in the memories 
of men. The French Republic is still rent by contending 
factions. His friends say that Dreyfus was a 
Prometheus who was chained to an ocean-girt rock while 
the vulture of exile preyed upon his heart. His enemies 
still assert that he was a Judas who betrayed, not God 
nor Christ, but France and the Fatherland. But these 
trials, one and all, were tame and commonplace compared 
with the trial and crucifixion of the Galilean peasant, 
Jesus of Nazareth." 

It is not for us to say that the Jews were wholly excusable 
in their course of injuries toward Jesus, in causing 
his crucifixion by the Romans. On the other hand, it is 
proper for us to consider everything that could be thought 
of calculated to mitigate the severity of our judgment regarding 
the injustices there practised. And it is proper 
also that we should consider what, from their standpoint, 
would seem to be extenuating circumstances. This is 
everywhere recognized as just treatment. The attorney, defending 
a criminal who has pleaded guilty to the charges 
against him, is considered to do only his duty by his criminal 
client when he presents whatever in the circumstances 
of the case would tend to prove that the culprit had cause, 
or thought that he had reason, for his misdemeanor. 

Viewing the Jewish people of nearly nineteen centuries 
ago from this standpoint, we get a more reasonable view 
of the situation than is otherwise possible. We hearken 
first to St. Peter's words respecting the transaction. He 
said, "I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also 



your rulers." Had they known, they would not have killed 
the Prince of life. --Acts 3:15-17. 

The Jews did not for one moment suppose that the 
great Messiah, foretold to be their Prophet, Priest and 
King— like unto Moses, but greater; like unto David and 
Solomon, but greater; like unto Melchisedec, but greater 

R4710 : page 358 

—would appear as "a man of sorrows and acquainted with 

grief." Although those very words were written of him 

by the Prophet, they were hidden from their eyes of understanding 

by the glorious things related of him in other 

prophecies. They saw the glories. They saw not, understandingly, 

the sufferings. To this day they interpret the 

sufferings of their nation as being those which will ultimately 

inure to their advantage. The prophetic descriptions 

are not concentrated nor collected, but scattered, 

"here a little and there a little," so written that they could 

not be understood at the time; nor were they understood 

even by the Lord's disciples until after his resurrection 

from the dead, when he explained them, and, subsequently, 

by the holy Spirit, enabled them still more fully to 

understand that thus it was written in the prophets, and 

thus it behooved the Son of Man to suffer before entering 

into his glory— before he began to bless Israel and all 

the world. 

Yea, today many Christians are as deeply confused 
on this matter as are the Jews. Many have rejected 
entirely the thought of Messiah's glorious Kingdom 
reign for the general blessing and uplifting of Israel 
and all humanity. From their standpoint, if "the sufferings 
of Christ" were intended to prepare the way and 
usher in his Kingdom of glory, then the programme must 
have failed, or else his Kingdom of glory is to be a 
heavenly Kingdom and completely in accord with the 
prayer taught by our Lord, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will 
be done on earth." The trouble is that they will not realize 
that where the sufferings of Christ, the Head, ended, the 
sufferings of the "Body of Christ" began— the sufferings 
of "the Church, which is his Body"— filling up the measure 
of the afflictions of Christ, which are behind. (Col. 1:24.) 
As soon as the "Church, the Body of Christ," 
shall have finished the bearing of the cross, after him, 
following in his steps to the end of the journey, then the 
Kingdom glories will be ushered in. Israel's blindness 
will be turned away, and the blessing of the Lord will 
begin to fill the whole earth. 

The Jews, who caused the crucifixion of Jesus, certainly 
did so in much of the same spirit which led St. 
Paul— then Saul of Tarsus— to cause the stoning of St. 
Stephen. As Saul was forgiven, so Israel is to be forgiven; 
as the Scriptures declare, "The Lord will pour upon 
them the spirit of prayer and supplication," and then they 
will see, with the eyes of their understanding, "him whom 
they pierced, and they will mourn for him" (Zech. 12:10), 



and their mourning will be turned into joy; for, 

as Joseph forgave his brethren, so will this great antitypical 

Joseph of the throne of earth freely forgive those 

who caused his crucifixion. 

POLITICS AND SELFISHNESS AS RELIGION 

The Jews are not so different from other people now, 
nor were they then. History indicates that some of their 
highest offices were held by irreligionists for their political 
influence; thus the chief-priest, at the first advent of our 
Lord, was a Sadducee, who wholly disbelieved in the 
promises of God to Israel, including a disbelief in the 
resurrection of the dead. Similarly today there are high-priests, 
both amongst Jews and Christians, who disbelieve, 
and yet hold high positions. Amongst Christians there 

R4711 : page 358 

are D.D.'s who are unbelievers; and many of the most 

notable rabbis amongst the Jews also declare themselves 

thorough unbelievers. We are not claiming that such unbelieving 

Christian and Jewish ministers would lightly 

espouse and support an unjust procedure against an innocent 

man. We do not know about this. It has yet to be 

tested, perhaps. We do know, however, that when faith 

in a Divine Revelation and in a Divine supervision of human 

affairs is lost the natural effect is that the losers of 

the faith become more and more policy-men and consider 

policy the extreme of human wisdom, particularly in the 

guidance of affairs of Church and State. 

Taking history for it, that the leaders of Judaism at 
the time of our Lord were Higher Critical unbelievers 
(Sadducees), we can readily see that their policy was to 
curry favor with the Roman Emperor and to seek to hold 
the common people in subjection to themselves. To these, 
then, it must have seemed almost a calamity that a poor 
man, although of noble birth, of the family of David and 
the Tribe of Judah, should gather about him a handful of 
nondescript fishermen, tax-gatherers, etc.; that he should 
pronounce himself a king and declare the setting up of 
his Kingdom to be near, and that by the exercise of some 
supernatural power for the healing of their diseases he 
should attract the "common people" to his standard, but 
not the learned. We can well imagine their reasoning 
that, if this thing, the popularity of Jesus, continued to 
increase, it would shortly reach the ears of the Roman 
Emperor, and then all their claims for imperial favors 
would be discounted, and they would be rated as a nation 
of rebels. 

The riding of Jesus into Jerusalem, just before the 
Passover, on an ass, after the manner of the kings of 
Israel and surrounded by a multitude shouting, "Hosanna 
to the Son of David who cometh in the name of the 
Lord," capped the climax, so to speak, and convinced these 
unbelieving Jews, politicians, occupying religious offices, 



that it would be far better that one innocent man should 

die than that the whole nation should be turned into turmoil 

and wrecked by the Romans in consequence. How 

many American preachers, judges, officials, etc., would, in 

this enlightened day, be inclined similarly to decide such 

a matter! And is not this the policy which always prevails 

in monarchies? Fancy such a commotion in the 

capital of Germany, Italy, France, Austria, Russia, Great 

Britain, the United States. Fancy that after such a parade, 

mimic though it might appear, the adored one should 

go to the temple and execute a long-neglected law, and, 

in thus exercising his religious rights, suppose that he 

should drive out the money-changers and merchants from 

the outer precincts of their chief religious Cathedral! 

What would be done to such a person today? Do we not 

know that in the most civilized lands he would be arrested 

and imprisoned, and in the more savage lands he would 

be beaten or executed? When, therefore, we view the situation 

from this standpoint we lose any spirit of antagonism 

which might have been ours; it turns to sympathy— 

that a religious nation should allow itself to get into the 

hands of politicians to such an extent. 

BROUGHT BEFORE CAIAPHAS 

It was very courageous on the part of St. Peter that, 
after having smitten off the ear of the High Priest's servant 
(though the wound was healed by Jesus), he followed 
his Master into the Court of that high-priest to see 
what would be done. The arraignment was at night, although 
it was contrary to Jewish Law to try a prisoner 
at night for any serious offense. But there was an excuse. 
This was a special case; haste was necessary, because 
whatever should be done must be done quickly; the 
very next day the unbelieving officials perceived that 
Jesus had great influence with the common people. They 
believed him to be a brilliant but harmless fraud. He had 
committed no crime, but he was a disturber of the peace, 
and they felt fully justified in taking his life. The Feast 
of Passover was at hand and would last a week, and it 

R4711 : page 359 

would be contrary to their Law that any execution should 
take place during that week. Besides, they feared the 
amount of influence which Jesus might exercise during 
the week, when there would be from one to two millions 
of people in and around Jerusalem from all over Palestine. 
They had already determined that their action must 
be short, sharp and decisive. This was decided before the 
arrest was made. They were ready and waiting at that 
midnight hour to carry out their murderous designs, for 
the good of their nation, as they thought. 

The examination was merely a preliminary one to get 
together such evidence as could be rushed through rapidly 
at a prearranged session the following morning. 



HE WAS CHARGED WITH BLASPHEMY 

They had difficulty in finding a charge; for what had 
Jesus ever done except acts of kindness and the uttering 
of words of wisdom and correction and hope? Blasphemy 
was a serious charge under the Jewish code. They 
would charge him with that as being the easiest to prove. 
He had said, when near the temple, "Destroy this Temple, 
and I will rear it up in three days." "But he spake of the 
Temple of his Body." Some of those who heard him 
understood him to speak of the literal temple. This they 
charged was blasphemy, because it took years to build the 
temple, and for Jesus to rebuild it in three days would 
mean a claim on his part of Divine power. But the charge 
did not seem sufficiently strong, even for those who had 
premeditated his murder. They wanted something to give a 
color of justice, at least, to their findings. So the chief -priest 
thought to get Jesus to commit himself in their 
presence and said, I adjure thee by the Living God to 
tell us whether thou be The Christ, the Son of God. 
Jesus replied that this was true, and that they would yet 
see him in heavenly glory and power at the right hand of 
Divine favor. This, the high priest declared, was sufficient 
proof of blasphemy. "Behold, now ye have heard 
his blasphemy, What reply ye?" And the council answered 
that he was worthy of death. The rabble in the 
Court, hearing the commotion, felt at liberty to abuse the 
prisoner, as they had done others. They showed their 
contempt of him by spitting upon him. They derided him 
by smiting him and saying, Prophesy, tell who smote thee. 
"He was reviled, yet reviled not again." 



R4711 : page 359 

SELF-CONFIDENCE IS WEAKNESS 

-MATTHEW 26:31-35,69-75. -DECEMBER 4.- 

"Let him that thinketh he standeth 
take heed least he fall."— I Cor. 10:12. 

ST. PETER has proven to be one of the most 

helpful of Christ's twelve Apostles, and the 

secret of his assistance lies in the Scriptural 

revelation of his human nature, its 

strength and its weaknesses. He was the 

first of the twelve Apostles to acknowledge 

the Master as the Messiah, the Sent of God; 

he was the first of the twelve to deny him. 

He was the only one of the twelve who 

drew his sword in the Master's defense and 

the only one who, later, swore that he never knew him. 

By Divine arrangement, to him were given the keys with 



which to open the door to the High Calling— to the Kingdom. 
At Pentecost he used one of the keys of power and 
boldly proclaimed to the Jews the opening of the way to 
glory, honor and immortality. A little later, at the appointed 
time, he opened the door to the same High Calling 
for the Gentiles when, by his preaching, Cornelius, 
the first Gentile acceptable to God, was received and begotten 
of the holy Spirit, this fact giving evidence that 
the middle-wall of partition, previously separating Jew 
and Gentile, had been broken down. Yet, after all this 
knowledge and special opportunity, this great man subsequently 
dissembled to the extent of ignoring God's grace 
to the Gentiles as being sufficient, discriminating between 
Jews and Gentiles and their equality before the Lord. 
But in all these experiences St. Peter displayed the 
fact that his heart, at its core, was loyal to God, to truth, 
to righteousness, and that the weaknesses, the faults, the 
blemishes of his character were of his flesh and not of 
his real heart intention. For his denial of the Master 
he wept bitterly. And for his failure to recognize the 
Gentiles he made full reparation most humbly. The same 
exhibition of human nature which makes St. Peter attractive 
is that which made David, the Prophet and king 
of Israel, attractive. He was not so saintly that he could 
not make a mistake. He was not so far above the remainder 
of humanity that they could not realize in him 
a fellow-creature. Yet withal he was not so debased 
as to make him abhorrent. His weaknesses were fully 
offset by the abundant evidence of his heart-loyalty to 
God and to righteousness. His very experiences in stumbling 
and recovery have so saturated his Psalms that 
they touch a responsive chord in nearly every heart which 
is loyal to God and which has had any degree of experience 
with sin and weakness— its own and those of others. 

HOW OTHERS SAW ST. PETER 

Peter remains even today the most fascinating of that 
band of men who surrounded our Lord in the days of 
his earthly pilgrimage. G. C. Morgan said of Peter: 
"Now I am convinced that in Peter we have the greatest 
human revealed in the New Testament. I do not say 
the greatest man in his achievement or in one particular 
capacity of his being, but the most wonderful revelation 

R4712: page 359 

of human nature. This man of intelligence was perpetually 
making blunders. This man of emotions was 
guilty of such impulse that he worked harm in the very 
cause he desired to help." 

Of St. Peter Southouse says: "Peter was an average 
man, and for this reason he comes nearer to us than some 
of his colleagues do. But average men have their splendid 
moments, such as when St. Peter tried to walk on 
the water, for in this action he tried to do a thing for 



which he seemed to have no abilities. He set out to do 
some thing of which he had no experience. A swift 
glance amongst the men and women whom we know will 
be enough to prove that it is never safe to prophesy the 
achievements of which they are capable, for extraordinary 
things have been done by the last man in the world." 

Dr. Davis said about St. Peter: "Peter was intellectual. 
He asked Jesus more questions than any other 
of the Apostles. The capacity for asking questions is a 
revelation of the intellectual. It may also be a revelation 
of ignorance; but the man who never asks a question 
is certainly deficient in his intellectuality. ...Peter 
was a man of heart, sobbing and impetuous. His virtues 
and his faults had their common root in his enthusiastic 
disposition. It is to his praise that, along with the weed 
of rash haste, there grew more strongly into his life the 

R4712: page 360 

fair plant of burning love and ready reception of Truth. 

"TAKE HEED TO YOURSELVES" 

One of the great lessons which the Master taught his 
followers, and which all in the School of Christ must 
learn, is that, with burning love and zeal for God and 
for righteousness, we should also have moderation— exercising 
the spirit of a sound mind. Christ's followers are 
exhorted to be "wise as serpents and harmless as doves." 
Their wisdom is not to be merely the selfish kind, which 
would look out for its own interests, but of the generous 
kind which looks out for the interests of all, and particularly 
for the interests of the Lord's cause and for 
any share therein which he may entrust to us. 

In the course of his instructions, Jesus had said to 
his disciples, in advance of the trying hour of his betrayal 
—"All ye shall be offended because of me this night; 
for it is written (in the Prophets), I will smite the 
Shepherd and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered 
abroad. But after I am risen again I will go before you 
into Galilee. "-Matt. 26:31,32. 

Then spoke the impulsive Peter, "Though all shall 
be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended." 
(V. 33) Alas! how little did this courageous man understand 
the nature of the trials and difficulties immediately 
before him, or realize the weak points of his own 
impulsive nature. Yet if we are grieved with his denial 
of the Master, we must rejoice to note his faith and love 
and zeal, as manifested in his acknowledgment of Jesus 
as the Messiah and his later declaration that nothing 
should ever shake his loyalty. 

However, it is the specially loyal and ardent that 
the Adversary seeks most persistently to entrap. Thus 
Jesus, on this very occasion, explained to St. Peter, 
"Satan hath desired to have thee that he might sift thee" 
(Luke 22:31); that he might separate you from your 



loyalty to Christ and discourage you from discipleship, 

overwhelming you with fear and with your own weaknesses. 

The Master added, "But I have prayed for thee 

that thy faith fail not." We may well understand that 

the same loving Master still assists all of his true, warmhearted 

followers, whatever their weaknesses of heredity. 

We may well understand, too, that he is able to develop 

all such into strong characters, if they abide in his love, 

continuing in their zeal. He is able to make all things 

work together for their good— even the weaknesses of 

heredity may work out for the faithful that "far more 

exceeding and eternal weight of glory" which the Lord 

has promised. 

"BEFORE THE COCK CROW" 

The Master discerned the danger of his loving but 
impetuous follower, and uttered a warning word, that 
before cock-crowing he would deny his Master. How 
improbable this seemed to St. Peter! How he courageously 
declared, "Though I should die with thee, yet 
will I not deny thee." And so said all of the eleven. 
Their hearts were good. And the Lord looketh upon the 
heart. Our study now passes to verse 69. The Master 
had been arrested. The scattered disciples had fled. St. 
John, because of an acquaintance with the high priest's 
family, penetrated further into the palace than St. Peter, 
who stood in the court-yard. A maid of the palace recognized 
St. Peter as one of Jesus' disciples and so declared 
publicly. Fearful that he might share the fate of 
the Master, St. Peter denied his identity, declaring that 
he knew nothing about the matter. A little later another 
declared the same. St. Peter emphasized his denial with 
an oath, declaring that he knew not Jesus. Later the 
word spread throughout the court-yard and many took 
it up, declaring that they believed what the maid said and 
that St. Peter had the Galilean dialect, anyway. To emphasize 
the denial St. Peter began to curse, and to swear 
that he knew not the man. Directly after, cock-crowing 
began. Then St. Peter remembered the words of his 
Master, "Before cock-crowing thou shalt deny me thrice." 

Alas! he had been too sure of his own stability, too 
confident of his loyalty. He was entrapped by the Adversary 
along the very line of his boasting. Another account 
says that Jesus turned and looked at Peter! That look 
was sufficient. It spoke volumes to St. Peter's loyal heart. 
It was not a look of disdain, nor one of anger, we may be 
sure. It was a look of loving sympathy. It melted St. 
Peter's heart. He went out and wept bitterly. The followers 
of the Master today, beset by weaknesses and frailties 
and temptations of the Adversary, have the lesson of St. 
Peter's experience as a warning to be confident in the 
Lord and to look to him for assistance, rather than to be 
self-confident. And those who fail today have St. Peter's 
experience as a lesson of the Lord's sympathy and pity. 
They, too, should weep bitterly for transgressions and 



repent and profit by their experiences. 

R4712: page 360 

THE PRINCE OF LIFE CRUCIFIED 

--MATTHEW 27:33-50.-DECEMBER 11.- 

"He was wounded for our transgressions; he 
was bruised for our iniquities."— Isa. 53:5. 

THE trial of Jesus really took place shortly after 

his arrest, but, on account of the Law requiring 

a death sentence to be passed in 

daylight, a morning meeting of the Sanhedrin 

was appointed, which, in a perfunctory 

manner, confirmed the high priest's 

decision of the night before, that Jesus had 

blasphemed the Creator when he claimed 

that he had come into the world in accord 

with the Creator's long-promised plan that 

he should redeem Israel and the world from the death sentence, 

that in God's due time he might establish the Messianic 

Kingdom for the blessing of Israel and all the 

families of the earth. The matter was rushed through 

lest the gathered multitudes, who had shouted, "Hosanna 

to the Son of David," when Jesus rode upon the ass five 

days before, should undertake again to proclaim him king. 

No execution could take place during the Passover week. 

And if Jesus were held a prisoner they knew not what 

might happen to him or to them. They had, therefore, 

but a few hours in which to carry out the plan which 

they believed would rid their country of a man whom 

they considered a deceiver and one likely to get them 

into trouble with the Government at Rome. 

The Sanhedrin had authority to judge the people along 
the lines of their religion, but was prohibited from 
executing the death penalty. Hence it was necessary, 
after the condemnation of the Sanhedrin, to take the case 
before Pilate, the Roman Governor. Realizing that Pilate 
would not recognize blasphemy as a cause for death, the 
charge against Jesus, before Pilate, was a totally different 
one, namely, that Jesus was a seditionist and raiser of 
disturbance; that he claimed to be a king and that his 
freedom was inimical to the interests of the Roman Empire. 

R4712: page 361 

The foolishness and the hypocrisy of such a charge 
were too transparent to need assertion. Pilate perceived 
that for envy they were delivering him— because he and 
his teachings were having more influence with the common 
people than could be exercised by the chief priests 
and scribes. Pilate relieved himself of responsibility by 



declaring that since the home of Jesus was in Galilee, 
King Herod, the Governor of Galilee, should have the 
jurisdiction of the case, which he was glad to get rid of. 

JESUS BEFORE KING HEROD 

This was an unexpected difficulty, but Herod's palace 
was not far distant. He was glad of the opportunity to 
see Jesus, of whose miracles he had heard much. As he 
looked at the Master's noble features and beheld in him 
purity and gentle dignity, it must have seemed ridiculous 
that such a person should be arraigned as a seditionist 
and a man dangerous to the interests of the peace of the 
country. After a few taunting words and jests, the palace 
guards took a hand with the one whom their master 
treated flippantly. They put upon him a purple robe and 
a crown of thorns and mocked at his unkingly appearance. 
Then Herod declined to act in the case and sent the 
prisoner back to Pilate, perhaps feeling that he had had 
a sufficiency of trouble in connection with the beheading 

R4713 : page 361 

of John the Baptist a year or so before. The matter was 
a joke between Herod and Pilate— dealing with the case 
of a man claimed to be so dangerous that he must die 
thus, when he manifestly was so pure and innocent that 
the weakest would be safe with him. 

PILATE'S PERPLEXITY INCREASED 

Pilate was disappointed when Jesus was brought back 
to his court. The case was an unpleasant one to settle. 
The prisoner manifestly was innocent of any crime, yet 
his accusers were the most prominent men in the nation 
and city over which he had charge. Their good will must 
be preserved, if possible, and they were evidently bent 
on the murder of their innocent captive under the form 
of legality. What a pity it is that religion has been so 
often misrepresented by her votaries in every age of 
the world! A lesson which we all should learn is to 
search the motives and intentions of our own hearts, 
that we be not led into the error of the wicked— into 
violating the rights of others and thus fighting against 
God. 

Pilate heard the accusations, realized that there was 
no truth in them, and then gave his decision: I find no 
fault in Jesus, but, seeing that such a commotion has been 
created, I consider it necessary in the interests of peace 
to satisfy the unrighteous demands of the clamoring multitude. 
I will therefore have the prisoner whipped, although 
I acknowledge he is not deserving of punishment. 
The whipping will be in his own interest, as well as in 
the interests of the peace of the city, for by satisfying 
the clamor of the multitude the life of Jesus will be 
spared. As political decisions go, this was a very fair 



decree. Magistrates recognize that absolute justice is 
not always possible in dealing with imperfect conditions. 

But the rulers would not be satisfied with anything 
short of Jesus' death. The rabble was exhorted to shout, 
Crucify him! Crucify him! It seemed impossible for 
Pilate to appreciate that such a frenzy could be aroused 
against so innocent a person. So he inquired, What evil 
hath he done? But the answer was, Crucify him! 
Alas, how human passion can ignore every principle of 
righteousness! To add to Pilate's perplexity, his wife 
now sent him word, Have nothing to do with this just 
person, for I have had a horrible dream which connects 
itself with him. 

As a last resort Pilate caused Jesus to be brought to 
a prominent place where the multitude could all see him 
and then he cried out to them, "Behold the Man!" See 
the character of the man you are willing to crucify. Note 
that he has most kingly features, such as none of your 
race possess— nor others. Would you crucify the very 
best sample of your race? Consider; be reasonable. 
Behold the Man! It has for years been a custom with 
you that the Government at this season release a prisoner. 
So, then, consider that Jesus has been condemned and 
that your conception of justice has been satisfied and 
that now I release him to you. But the multitude cried 
out so much the more, Crucify him! Release unto us 
Barabbas (a robber and dangerous character). 

Who will explain this strange perversity of fallen 
human nature— that a villain should be preferred to a 
saint? Thus, a few years ago, in the City of Vienna, a 
man who had just been released from serving a term in 
prison made a speech in which he declared that all Jews 
should be put to death. A frenzy seemed to seize the 
people. The bad man became the leader of sentiment. 
He was applauded and, as a mayoralty was impending, he 
was elected mayor of the city on the strength of his 
bravado. Oh, shame! How can we claim that the world 
is ready for liberty while such conditions stare us in the 
face and mark the pages of history? They prove, on 
the contrary, that the world needs just such a strong, 
imperial government as God purposes to give it— the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son, strong for the suppression 
of every wrong and strong for the uplifting of every 
right. 

THOU ART NOT CAESAR'S FRIEND 

The Jewish leaders were shrewd. They knew that 
treason to Rome was one of the most serious offenses 
and in the fact that Jesus had spoken of himself as a 
king they had the lever wherewith to compel his crucifixion. 
They used it, assuring Pilate that if he let the 
prisoner go they would report him to the Emperor. Pilate 
knew that he would have difficulty in explaining such a 
case and that the Roman Government would agree with 
the decision of Caiaphas that one man should die rather 



than have any commotion in their dominion. Thus compelled, 
Pilate finally acceded and wrote the papers of 
execution, but before doing so he took a pitcher of water 
and in the sight of the people washed his hands, saying, 
"I am guiltless of the blood of this just person." 

The execution proceeded. The soldiers already had 
two thieves to crucify and merely added another cross 
and the procession started for Golgotha, a hillside near 
where the face of the rock much resembles a skull- 
Golgotha signifying the place of a skull. It is just to 
the north of the city, outside the wall. New buildings 
and a wall recently erected hinder visitors at the present 
time from getting the skull effect as formerly. The crime 
of each culprit was, by Law, inscribed over his head. 
Above the Master's head was his crime— "Jesus, King 
of the Jews." 

Satan and his deluded dupes evidently thought that 
they had finally disposed of Jesus. The priests and elders 
mocked his declaration that he was the Son of God and 
demanded that, if he were such, he should demonstrate 
it by leaving the cross. They realized not the truth, that 
it was necessary for him to die for man's sin, in order 
that, by and by, he might have rightful authority, in his 
glorious Kingdom, to restore all mankind to full perfection 

R4713 : page 362 

and life under the terms of the New Covenant, of 
which he will be the Mediator. (Jer. 31:31.) At the 
sixth hour, noon, darkness settled down for three hours 
and then Jesus died, saying, "My God, my God, why hast 
thou forsaken me?" In order that he might fully experience 
the weight of Divine Justice which belonged to 
the sinner, it was necessary that the Father should hide 
himself from him, as though he had been the sinner. 
This temporary separation from the Father was evidently 
the severest blow in all of the Master's experience. 



R4713 : page 362 

"NOW IS CHRIST RISEN" 

-MATTHEW 28: 1-20. -DECEMBER 18. 

"Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the 
end of the world (age). "-Matt. 28:20. 

THE Scriptures give very particular details 
respecting the death of Jesus and his burial 
in Joseph's new tomb, wherein none had 
previously been buried and respecting the 
sealing of the tomb and the setting of a 
guard lest the body should be stolen at 
night. But while these matters are interesting 



to us, they probably do not now have 

the same importance that they had when 

they were written. From this distance we 

feel inclined to ask about the general character of Jesus' 

disciples who declared his resurrection, rather than to 

inquire particularly respecting all the details which they 

enumerated. In broad terms we say, If the characters 

of the Apostles prove themselves satisfactory to us, we 

are ready to take their word respecting the resurrection 

of Jesus and his subsequent appearances to them. On 

the other hand, if they were bad men or otherwise unworthy 

to be believed, no amount of details respecting 

the tomb, the watch, the seals, etc., would be satisfactory 

to us, because cunning and designing men could make 

up the story to suit their desires. 

But it was not so at the time of our Lord's death and 
resurrection. It was then very necessary that every little 
detail should be explicitly specified. The parts of three 
days and nights, for instance, were unimportant to them 
because of Jesus' words, which they remembered. He 
likened his period in death to the period in which Jonah 
was in the whale's belly. There are some today disposed 
to quibble over the matter and to claim that Jesus died 
on Thursday and not on Friday. Surely, however, all can 
concede that it matters nothing to us on which day of the 
week he died, nor the number of hours he was in the 
tomb, whether seventy-two hours to the minute or a less 
exact time. With us the important question is, Did he 
die? Did he arise from the dead? Was there a value in 
his sacrificial death, from the Divine standpoint, and how 
is that value or merit made applicable to mankind, and 
have we obtained our interest therein according to the 
Divine terms. 

"HE ROSE AGAIN ON THE THIRD DAY" 

With the majority of Christians for these many centuries 
we agree that Jesus was in the tomb parts of three 
days and nights; that he died on Friday afternoon, and 
that he arose from the dead early on Sunday morning. 
But we are not contentious. Let who likes believe that 
he died on Thursday or Wednesday or Tuesday or another 
day; this is a matter of no importance. The all-important 
matter is, "He ever liveth to make intercession for us." 
(Rom. 8:34.) The stone at the mouth of the sepulchre 
was not a large boulder, as many suppose, but was shaped 
like a wheel— like a large grindstone. It rolled in a 
groove, but, being heavy, would be cumbersome and 
difficult for the women, as suggested. 

The sorrowing friends of Jesus did not realize at the 
time what he had taught them respecting his crucifixion 
and subsequent resurrection. Hence they were surprised 
with every incident of their experience on that eventful 

R4714: page 362 



Sunday morning. The angel appeared in dazzling brightness, 
that he might not be mistaken for a man. He told 
the women who brought spices for the embalming of the 
Lord's body that their Master was risen from the dead— 
that he was no longer dead; that they would see him in 
Galilee; and to so tell his disciples. On the way Jesus 
met them and revealed himself to them. Another account 
tells us that Mary, separated from the others, met 
Jesus alone and, mistaking him for the gardener, asked 
whither the corpse had been removed. Then Jesus revealed 
himself to her. Recognizing her Master she 
clasped him by the feet as though afraid that he would 
leave her; but, different from his previous course, he 
declared, "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to 
my Father and your Father, to my God and to your God." 
Instead of delaying to commune with me, hasten at once 
to tell Peter and the others of my resurrection. How 
careful was the Master that Peter should be mentioned 
by name, lest he should feel that he was forever rejected 
because of having denied him! 

For forty days Jesus was with his disciples and during 
that time he appeared some seven or eight times, 
according to all the different accounts. Once he appeared 
as a gardener. Once he appeared as a traveler 
to two of the disciples going to Emmaus. Again he 
appeared on the shore of the Sea of Galilee to 
some of the disciples who were returning to the fishing 
business. They knew it was Jesus, yet he 
was different from formerly. But we read that they 
did not dare ask him respecting the matter. He 
appeared again to above five hundred believers in the 
mountains of Galilee, and finally, by appointment, he met 
the eleven at the top of the Mount of Olives and ascended 
out of their sight— a cloud receiving him. Only on two 
occasions are we informed that he appeared with nail-prints 
in his hands and the spear wound in his side. And 
on these two occasions we are distinctly told that he appeared 
in their midst, the doors being shut, and that he 
vanished again from their sight. 

Thus did Jesus demonstrate to his disciples the fact 
that he was no longer dead, but alive, and additionally, 
the other fact equally important, namely, that he was no 
longer alive as a man, but as a spirit being. As St. Paul 
declares, "He was put to death in flesh, but made alive in 
spirit." But every precaution was taken to permit their 
natural powers of observation to comprehend the spiritual 
truths revealed to them respecting Jesus' resurrection and 
ascension. It was ten days after his ascension, on the 
fiftieth day from his resurrection, that the holy Spirit 
came, and thus demonstrated at once that the Redeemer 
lived and that he had appeared in the presence of God 
on the spirit plane and that his sacrifice had been presented 
and was acceptable to God; and, on the basis of 
his sacrifice and the imputation of his merit to the disciples, 

R4714: page 363 



the sacrifices which they had presented in his name 
were accepted, and they were begotten of the holy Spirit, 
that they might also become New Creatures and share in 
his Kingdom and glory. 

HIS DEATH AND RESURRECTION NEEDFUL 

It is needless that we seek to dispute as to which was 
the more important event— the death of Jesus or his 
resurrection from the dead. Both were equally important. 
Had he not died there would be no basis for a reconciliation 
of Adam and his race condemned to death. Had he 
not risen there would have been no one to apply the merit 
of his sacrifice. Had he not risen there would have been 
no call of the Church during this Gospel Age to be the 
Bride of Christ. Neither would there have been use for 
the promised Mediatorial Kingdom to be established at 
his Second Coming for the blessing of Israel and the 
world. 

Thus Jesus explained to the two with whom he walked 
to Emmaus on the day of his resurrection, saying, O slow 
of heart to believe all that God hath spoken in the Law 
and in the Prophets! Was it not necessary that Messiah 
should die and should rise from the dead, that in his name 
repentance and remission of sins might be proclaimed? 
How could any be invited to come to God until a way 
had been opened, until the redemption price had been provided? 
Whoever can hear this message and accept it 
may properly be invited to repent of sin and to reform 
and to live contrary to the tendencies of his fallen nature, 
because, in so doing, through the Redeemer, he may attain 
unto eternal life. And if he ask, How about the 
things that are past, the answer would be the same. God's 
provision is for the remission of sins through the merit 
of the sacrifice of his only begotten Son. 

The eleven Apostles were commissioned, "Go ye, 
disciple all nations." (V. 19.) This did not signify, as 
some suppose, a command to convert the world. It meant 
that they should make disciples out of people of all nationalities 
—and not any longer, as formerly, of the Jews 
only. And the Master's injunction has been fulfilled. 
Disciples, followers of him, have been found in all nations. 
But, as Jesus did not say, Convert all nations, 
neither has the Gospel message done this. Those accepting 
discipleship were to be baptized with Christ's baptism 
in the name or authority of the Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit. In all, these have been but "a little flock." (Luke 12:32.) 
But theirs is the "high calling" to joint-heirship 
in his Kingdom, which is soon to bless the world. 

But even this permission to disciple people of all nations 
could not, and did not, begin at once. For three 
and a half years after the cross, in fulfillment of Divine 
prophecy, the Gospel message was kept from the Gentiles, 
until the door for them into this High Calling was opened 
by St. Peter— Cornelius being the first to enter it. 



All disciples of Jesus were instructed to follow him, 
to take him as their pattern and example. Any instructions 
contrary to these are contrary to the words of the 
Great Teacher. And the Master said, "Lo, I am with you 
alway, even unto the end of the Age." He has been with 
his faithful followers to bless them, to comfort them, 
to strengthen them, to fellowship them, to safeguard 
their highest interests, though often at the expense of 
their temporal interests. And this promise of his Word, 
of providential guidance, was to continue until the end 
of the Age— then he would come again in a personal and 
official sense to exalt his Church, to establish his Kingdom, 
to bless Israel with the New Covenant arrangements, 
and thus to bless the world of mankind. 



R4714: page 363 

"GLORY TO GOD IN THE HIGHEST" 

-DECEMBER 25.- 

"For unto you is born this day in the City of David 
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord."— Luke 2:11. 

GOD'S promise that the Seed of Abraham 

should ultimately bless all nations has influenced 

thought the world over, but particularly 

amongst those nations living contiguous 

to Abraham's home and northward 

and westward from there, in the directions 

in which the message of Divine favor has 

gone. At first the Jews thought of this 

promise as being fulfilled in them as a nation 

—that, without assistance from on High, 

they could approve themselves to God through obedience 

to the Law Covenant, and that then, as instructors of 

the world, they would teach all nations to keep that 

Divine Law, and thus bring the world to the blessed state 

of perfection, Divine favor and life everlasting. This 

hope was crushed out as they found themselves unable to 

keep the Law, going down into death, instead of attaining 

to perfection of life. Even Moses, the special servant 

of God, could not, and did not, attain the blessing of 

the Law. 

Then God made them the promise of some better thing 
—of a greater Mediator and of a more successful 
Covenant through that Mediator. The Mediator of the 
New Covenant (Jer. 31:31-34) was to be greater than 
Moses; as he himself declared, "A Prophet shall the Lord 
your God raise up unto you from amongst your brethren 
like unto me (but greater)— him shall ye hear in all 
things whatsoever he shall speak unto you. And it shall 
come to pass that the soul that will not obey that Prophet 
shall be destroyed from amongst the people." (Acts 3:22,23.) 



Thenceforth their hearts and hopes looked 

down through the stream of time to when the glorious 

things hoped for through this great Prophet should be 

accomplished. 

"THE DESIRE OF ALL NATIONS" 

As surrounding nations and those afar off heard of 
Israel's hopes— that to them would come a great Savior, 
Deliverer, who would bless them and exalt them in the 
world and through them bless all peoples, the beauty of 
the thought took root in every direction. Messiah was 
more or less looked for under various names, and the 
glories of his Kingdom were pictured by heathen poets 
as the Golden Age. 

Thus it happened that when our Lord was born, when 
he was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, "All men were 
in expectation of him"— not of Jesus, but of the promised 
Messiah, whom Jesus was. Thus it was that wise men 
in the East were attracted to see and to worship him that 
was born King of the Jews. Thus it was also that during 
Jesus' ministry certain Greeks came to the disciples 
saying, "Sirs, we would see Jesus." They had heard 
of him and recognized that in some respects his magic 
power implied a relationship with the long-expected Messiah. 

R4715 : page 364 

And so it was with the multitudes of Palestine. 
They heard; they listened. They said, Is this he? The 
rulers said, No, this is not the Messiah. Then the people 
asked, When Messiah cometh can he do greater works 
than this man? Never man spake like this man! 

Nevertheless, there were few ready to receive him, 
even amongst his own— only "Israelites indeed," to whom, 
because of worthiness of heart, God specially revealed 
his Son. This was in harmony with the prophecy of old, 
"The secret of the Lord is with them that reverence him 
and he will show them his Covenant." (Psa. 25:14.) 
As again it is written, "I will give him for a Covenant 
of the people." (Isa. 49:8.) Neither Jews nor Greeks 
nor Persian wise men knew to expect that Messiah would 
first appear to offer himself, through obedience to the 
Truth, a living sacrifice for sinners. None of them knew 
that a long period must elapse from the time when Messiah 
would be the man of sorrows and acquainted with 
grief, of whom the people would be ashamed, until he 
would appear in power and great glory to establish his 
Empire under the whole heavens, in fulfillment of the 
prophetic picture of Daniel 2:34; 7:13,14-27. 

Few understand God's great secret or "mystery" hidden 
during past ages and dispensations (Col. 1:26), that, 
during this long period of the Gospel Age a saintly "little 
flock" would be selected from amongst men to be Messiah's 
Bride, and joint-heir with him in his Messianic 
reign. Few see that this "little flock" has been selected 



during these nineteen centuries from every nation, people, 
kindred and tongue, and that they are all saints, in the 
spirit of their minds, at least, and follow the Lamb, 
whithersoever he goeth, walking in the footsteps of Jesus. 
Few understand that, as soon as these join t-sacrificers 
with the Master shall have filled up the measure of afflictions 
appointed, then the Kingdom of glory will be revealed 
and all flesh shall see it together and all shall be 
blessed by it, the Jew, Abraham's natural seed, first, 
and also the Gentile— all the families of the earth. 

A SAVIOR-CHRIST THE LORD 

It was prophetically, of course, that the Babe of Bethlehem 
was called a Savior— he was to be a Savior, The 
Christ, the Lord. But as the Babe he was none of these. 
He became The Christ before becoming the Savior and 
Lord. The word Christ signifies anointed. In the Divine 
purpose it was arranged that Messiah should be anointed 
High Priest of Israel on a higher plane than Aaron— after 
the order of Melchisedec. (Psalm 110:4.) And every 
priest must be anointed to his office before he could fill it. 
Similarly, it was prophesied that Christ would be the 
great King, greater than David and Solomon, who were 
his types and foreshadows. 

The anointing of Jesus was not with literal oil, but 
with that which the oil upon the head of the kings and 
priests of Israel typified— the holy Spirit. He received 
this holy Spirit at the time of his baptism, the Spirit falling 
upon him and abiding with him, anointing him for his 
great work of antitypical Priest and antitypical King of 
Israel, who, as the Messiah long-promised, would bless 
them, and through them, the world. But every priest was 
ordained to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins, and in 
this also they typified Jesus, who, under the Divine 
arrangement, must first offer up himself as a sacrifice 
acceptable to God for the sin of mankind— in order that he 
might be the Savior or Deliverer of men from the curse 
of sin and death— that he might restore them and their 
earthly home to the glorious condition of perfection 
represented in Adam and his Eden home. Hence it was 
necessary that Jesus should not only consecrate his life 
to the Divine service and be anointed with the holy Spirit, 
but that, sacrificially, he should lay down his life, even 
unto death— even the death of the cross. As a part of his 
reward he was raised to glory, honor and immortality, on 
the third day thereafter. 

As the glorified One he was now fully commissioned 
and empowered to establish the long-promised, Messianic 
Kingdom, but has been waiting while a "little flock" have 
walked in his footsteps— until the elect number shall be 
completed and shall share his glory. Then his Kingdom 
will take the control of earth. Satan shall be bound for 
a thousand years and all the wonderful blessings promised 
in the Law and the Prophets and Gospels and Epistles 
shall be fulfilled. 



"A SAVIOR AND A GREAT ONE" 

We have seen how the Son of God attained his Priestly 
Office, for the sacrifice of himself; how he was anointed 
thereto, and also anointed to be the great King, and how 
he has been merely waiting for the due time for his Kingdom 
to begin. Now we inquire as to the force and significance 
of the word Savior, and how he saves his people 
from their sins! 

In the Arabic, Savior signifies life-giver. The Redeemer, 
glorified as the antitypical Melchisedec, "a priest 
upon his throne," is to be the Savior or life-giver of the 
race, for whose sin and because of whose condemnation 
he died— "the Just for the unjust, to bring us back to 
God," some during this Age and some during the period 
of his Messianic reign. Gradually he, with his saintly 
Bride class, will uplift humanity from sin and death to 
righteousness and life eternal and will destroy all who 
refuse the blessing in the Second Death, from which there 
will be no hope of recovery. 

But the Christ, the Savior of Glory, Bride and Bridegroom, 
will, unitedly, be the world's Savior. The glorified 
Redeemer saves his Church first— by a special salvation 
and High Calling. These are the "elect," called to suffer 
with him and, if faithful, to reign with him on the 
Heavenly plane. These are dealt with now on the basis 
of faith: they pass from death unto life by the exercise 
of faith and their entering into a Covenant with God, of 
sacrifice, through the merit of the Redeemer. Their salvation 
will be made actual when they shall share in his 
resurrection, the "First Resurrection," and become kings 
and priests unto God, to reign with Christ a thousand 
years.— Rev. 20:6. 



R4718 : page 364 

THIS IS MY WILL FOR THEE 

Just to hear my dear Master say, 
"This is My will for thee;" 

Then to whisper the dark night through, 
"This is His will for me." 

Just to keep in the narrow way, 
Painful howe'er it be; 

Just to follow Him day by day- 
All shall be well with me. 

Just to joyfully bear the pain, 
All that He sendeth me; 

Just to suffer the scorn and shame- 
Trust where I cannot see. 



Just to hear, when the day is long, 
"This is My will for thee;" 

Then shall my faith and love grow strong- 
Knowing His will for me. 

Oh, to hear, when the work is done, 

"This is My will for thee— 
Faith and Patience and Love have won— 

Sit in my throne with Me!" G. W. S. 



R4715 : page 365 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

CONCERNING MESSIAH'S KINGDOM 

QUESTION.— Please give briefly your understanding 
of the expression, Messiah's Kingdom, 
and the work of that Kingdom. 

Answer.— Our understanding is that 
Messiah's Kingdom will be a spiritual one, 
invisible to mortals, yet all-powerful, for 
the accomplishment of the great things 
promised in the Law and in the Prophets. 
The Empire which he will establish, invisible 
to men, will take the place of the Empire 
of Satan, likewise invisible. The King of glory will 
replace the Prince of Darkness. Principal amongst Messiah's 
earthly agents and representatives will be Abraham, 
Isaac and all the Prophets, resurrected in full human 
perfection. Instead of their being, as heretofore, the 
fathers, they shall be the children of Messiah, whom he 
will make princes in all the earth. (Psalm 45:16.) With 
this Kingdom the nation of Israel will speedily unite, and 
eventually every nation will come into harmony with Messiah, 
and all people will be privileged to come in under 
Israel's New Covenant, then established by the great 
"Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in."— Jeremiah 31:31-34; 
Malachi 3:1-3. 

The glorious Messiah, whom the Jews identify with 
"Michael, the great Prince, which standeth for the children 
of thy people" (Dan. 12:1), the Mohammedans also 
expect and identify with Mahomet of the past. The 
Free Masons also expect the same glorious personage and, 
in their traditions, identify him with Hiram Abiff, the 
great Master-Mason. This same great Messiah, Michael, 
the archangel, the antitypical Melchisedec, Priest as well 
as King, we identify as "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave 
himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time." 
(I Tim. 2:5,6.) But when the great King shall appear 
in his glory and establish his Kingdom with Israel he will 
be, as promised by the Prophets, "the desire of all nations." 
(Hag. 2:7.) Then all the blinded eyes will be 
opened and all the deaf ears will be unstopped. Then who 



he is and how he should be identified with— Abraham's 

Seed and David's line— will be clearly known to all, in 

heaven and in earth. Not now, but when the King shall 

reign in righteousness, all shall fully understand the significance 

of Zechariah's prophecy (12:7-10) and Psalm 22:16. 

Content that Messiah shall show the Truth in his 

day of revealment, we are glad to point Jews, Mohammedans, 

Christians, all, to the glorious Messiah and the great 

work of blessing for all the nations which he will accomplish 

through the Seed of Abraham, according to God's 

Covenant and his Oath. 



HOW TO GAIN THE GREAT PRIZE 

Question.— Is it the spirit of obedience to the Lord's 
commands that will gain the great prize? 

Answer.— What the Lord is looking for at the present 
time is the spirit of sacrifice or self-denial— not merely 
the spirit of obedience to commands. Few, of course, 
would resist a Divine command, if thundered from heaven. 
Our test is more crucial than that. It is a test of obedience 
to what we understand to be the will of God or the 
privilege of service in his cause. Those who delight to 
do his will, those who delight to serve his cause, even at 
the cost of sacrifice to earthly interests, are the very ones 
he is now seeking. "He seeketh such to worship him as worship 
him in spirit and in Truth" ! "Now is the acceptable 
time"; now is the time for those to come forward who desire 
to offer themselves unreservedly, and who desire that 

R4716 : page 365 

the Lord shall accept their offering, which they know is 
not of great value. The more the sacrifice costs you, the 
more we may be sure it will be appreciated of the Lord. 
For any to give the Lord a thing which has no value in 
their own estimation would be in the nature of an insult, 
instead of sacrifice. 

Our experiences in life should draw us closer to the 
Lord, not only in the form of prayer; but moment by moment, 
in every little emergency of life, we should learn to 
expect heavenly guidance. 

Every accepted sacrificer who fails to carry out his 
sacrifice will surely miss the "high calling," and, if our 
expectations are correct, will share with the "great company" 
in the "destruction of the flesh," which, after consecration, 
they were unwilling to devote day by day. 



RE PHILOSOPHY OF COVENANTS AND RANSOM 

Question.— Is it possible to be both justified and sanctified 
without knowing the philosophy respecting the Covenants 



and the Ransom? 

Answer.— It is true that one might be both justified 
and sanctified through faith in the blood before learning 
anything about the Covenants or the philosophy of the 
Ransom. And one might retain equally justification and 
sanctification through faith in that blood, irrespective of 
philosophies respecting the Divine methods of the applications 
of Christ's merit. This was true in our own case. 
Subsequently, having obtained grace from the Lord and 
some knowledge of his Plan— the philosophies of the 
Atonement, etc.— we served it out to others in his name. 
He advised us through his Word that these things were 
"meat in due season," and that the path of the just would 
shine more and more. In harmony with these promises, 
we have clearer light, increasingly, which is ours to dispense 
to whomsoever has "an ear to hear." 

The Old Law Covenant was to the natural seed of 
Abraham, and similarly the New Law Covenant will be 
instituted with them, as taking the place of the old one 
and bringing them a blessing, which they failed to get 
under the one of which Moses was the mediator. Ours 
is the faith Covenant, the original Covenant, to which the 
old one was added, and to which the new one will be 
added in due time." 



SHOULD WE SELL ALL THAT WE HAVE? 

Question.— Please explain the following text: "Go 
and sell all that thou hast, and come and take up thy cross 
and follow me, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven." 
Should we go and do as the Master advised? 

Answer.— If that young man had assented to our 
Lord's proposition, and had made further inquiry as to 
the particulars, it is our opinion that the Lord would 
have modified his statement to the extent of suggesting 
that the selling and giving to the poor be not done all at 
once, but gradually, as the necessities might seem to open 
up. In the language of the Apostle, "Let your moderation 
be manifest to all." We are to use earthly things and 
earthly opportunities and temporalities with great moderation, 
self-denial, as the case may seem to make 
necessary. 

We are to have bowels of mercy, compassion, sympathy, 
love. Did not our Lord allow Mary to anoint his 
head and also his feet and were not these caresses and 
manifestations of love of an earthly sort? There are 
various items to intimate the Lord's special love for Lazarus, 
Martha and Mary, James and John, and for his 
mother. And this would seem to give us ground for a 
similar course. But as Jesus did not allow those earthly 
loves to hinder him from the Father's service, so we, 
also, must be on the alert about the Father's business. 



R4716 : page 366 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
page 366 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Please accept my apology for asking you for a little of 
your time; but I feel that I have been so greatly blessed by 
reading your sermons and Bible Studies that I have been 
quite a while wanting to write and tell you about it. 

I do not know whether it was just by chance, or accident, 
or whether by the hand of Providence, that a paper was 
handed to me that I might read a report of a surgical operation. 
In that paper I also read a sermon by C. T. Russell. 
I had never read anything of you or of your great work. 

I want to say that that happened last February; and I 
don't believe that a day has passed since then that I have 
not thought of the great work you are doing. I subscribed 
for THE WATCH TOWER, and have read the SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES and quite a number of the tracts and pamphlets. 

THE DIVINE PLAN opened my eyes. I had for a long 
time been looking for light in God's Word; and with the 
series of Bible studies I have taken my Bible and studied 
God's Word every day. I want to say that I have been enabled 
to appreciate God's Word and see his plans as I never 
had before. It is so grand, so sublime, so just! I would 
rather give up every volume in my library— except the Bible 
-than the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. 

I am distributing tracts and the DIVINE PLAN OF THE 
AGES and doing what I can to get people to read them. These 
helps induce me to read and study God's Word, and, thank 
God, they make it so plain to me. Of course, I do not understand 
it all; but it is so different from the plan I had been 
taught. The truth is, I am now reading and studying God's 
plan; before I had been taught man's plan. I am trying to 
see God's plan; and, O how beautiful, how sublime! 
J. D. COLE, M.D.-TENN. 



R4716 : page 366 

MY BELOVED BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

Herein please find my check to be used in the Lord's 
service. We regret that we are not in a position to send 
more. Any and all service we could render is in nowise commensurate 
with the rich blessings we have been enjoying for 
the past ten years. Present Truth has done more for my 
wife and myself than I can ever tell you. It is wonderful, 
marvelous, beautiful, how God's Word (which our parents, 
Sunday-school teachers and preachers so frequently told us 
was never meant to be understood) is now so plain, and has 
been opened up so clearly to our heads and hearts by the 
only key-THE WATCH TOWER publications and STUDIES IN 



THE SCRIPTURES. 

These books, dear Brother, are the real Keys to Holy 
Writ. What could we do without them in the present blinding 
mist and maze of human sophistries? If no others could 
be had, a million dollars could not buy mine. Thank God! 
we have been delivered from the nightmare of Satanic teachings, 
such as were inculcated in our minds by the creeds of 
Christendom, and the labyrinth of mere conjectures concerning 
God's Word; and by his grace, through your publications, 
we now stand in the blazing sunlight of a clarified 
understanding of his Word and his loving character, which 
we now see to be the embodiment of love and mercy. 

And as we rejoice with a joy unspeakable and full of 
glory because of the one hope of our high calling, we also 
rejoice to know that in "The Times of Restitution of all 
things" there will be a universal opportunity for salvation 
for the whole world of mankind— Nero included. 

May God continue to bless you and to use you as an instrument 
in his hands . W . B . SUTTON. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Just one year ago I came into the Truth. I was exceedingly 
rejoiced with the many wonderful truths entirely 
new to me, though I had been educated for the ministry, 
and preached for three years; and had passed normal school 
examinations and taught school for several years. 

My temporal surroundings, as well as my newly acquired 
desire to penetrate the new and unknown fields of the now 
unsealed Book, led me to long for a further unfolding of 
these new and surprising truths. I could wish that there 
were one hundred volumes of such studies, instead of six; 
and instead of contenting myself with a careful assimilation 
and application of that already learned, I sought rather for 
new conquests. 

I began with the help of Strong's concordance to delve 
into the meanings of words. I sought to make pictures and 
draw types from nearly every chapter in the Bible. I tried 
to fit the meaning of every proper name to some one, and 
usually concluded that it referred to Brother Russell. My 
faculty for seeing pictures and types became so developed 
that my eye would skim over a chapter, jumping at a chance 
picture here and there, and missing nearly all the original 
meaning and proper application of the text. 

The Bible I loved was thus becoming quite barren to me 
in respect to its intended use. Instead of using it to supply 
my much-needed armor, I was enjoying it more as one would 
enjoy a picture book or "Grimm's Fairy Tales." 

Since my speculations were unwarranted, they naturally 
contradicted each other. One picture would bring me to one 
conclusion, and another would seem to contradict it. It became 
quite confusing. 

Finally I came to the point where it became quite difficult 
for me to distinguish between Truth and error; and I was 
in danger of losing my appreciation of the Truth and devoting 



myself to the fanciful. Nor did I realize the great danger 

I was in until, a short time ago, the Lord used our dear 

Brother Saphore to point out to me my mistake. I cannot 

express to you what a blow it was to me to see that most 

of my Bible study for a whole year was not only of no account, 

but of a negative influence not only to myself, but to 

those I may have thus influenced. 

I deeply regret my mistake, and have vowed to my Lord 
that henceforth, trusting in his grace to help, I will to the 
best of my ability more zealously appreciate and pursue the 
study of the TRUTH, and cease all speculation and typemaking. 

I am endeavoring, dear Brother, to retrace my steps; to 
learn again to discern between fact and theory, and to make 
no positive statement except that which I know, and can 
prove by the Bible to be Truth— fully warranted and established. 
-Isaiah 8:20. 

The article in the Sept. 15 TOWER, page 297, entitled, "Is 
the reading of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES Bible Study?" has 
been of great help to me; and I am now reading at least 
twelve pages every day and seeking to keep all my Bible study 
within the bounds of that which is known, and given to us 
by the Lord as meat in due season. 

Now, brother, I fear that many are making a similar 
mistake of rash speculation to the end that perhaps many 
will stumble. I pray for such that they may see their mistake 
and the great danger thus impending over those who 
thus build upon speculation, and are sure to see their speculations 
fall. Oh! that our faith may be built upon nothing 
unstable as a part of its foundation, for "This is the victory 
that overcometh the world— even your faith." 

R. G. JOLLY. 

R4717 : page 366 



TO OUR BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the name of our blessed Savior! We are 
writing to tell you of some of the joys and strength received 
from "the Vow" and from the glorious light on the Covenants 
and the Sin-Offering. 

Before "the Vow" came out I had an intense hunger for 
knowledge and was just beginning to realize that the world's 
literature is full of the wisdom of "the god of this world"— 
Satan. When "the Vow" came, I realized my need of it. 
Now I can remain in a room full of books and not read one, 
but read only the Bible and the Keys which our present Lord 
and Master has provided. 

Sometimes I think of Ezekiel 3:21 as a fitting description 
of how the Lord has used the Vow "to warn the righteous." 
Certainly it was a warning to me. 

When thirteen years ago I came to a knowledge of "Present 
Truth," the fact that The Christ is composed of many 
members was the key to many mysteries; for instance, the 
delay of restitution blessings, etc. Daily the doctrines grow 
more precious to me. My heart is inspired to greater zeal 



and faithfulness, now when I need this very inspiration; 

and I feel more than ever willing to yield to the three burnings, 

just as our Master set the example. Oh, how thankful 

we are to our blessed Master for this wonderful truth 

on the Sin-Off ering! The truth on the Covenants has been 

such a help also. How I enjoy saying to the Jews whom I 

meet, "Have you ever thought of the blessings of the New 

Covenant? These are for your people." 

Now, dear Brother, I come to the object of this letter, 
which is to let you know of our Christian love and how glad 
we are that, like our Master, you have humility enough to 
do the Father's will by proclaiming these truths even though 
you know that you will be misunderstood by many. Would 
that, like John and Mary, we could be a comfort to you in 
the hour of trial. 

At present I am enjoying the Colporteur work more than 

R4717 : page 367 

ever before, due principally to the strength gained from 
"Present Truth." I voice the sentiment of every member 
of our class here when I say, God bless you, Brother Russell; 
for those who keep their consecration vow grow more 
precious to each other. 
Your sister in the "one Body," 

MRS. A. D. MILLER.-IND. 



MY DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

With the sincere hope of encouraging you and holding up 
your hands in this severe hour of trial and determined effort 
of the enemy to hinder the Lord's Harvest Work I have 
been, I trust, directed by our Heavenly Master to write you a 
few lines. I may tell you that I am utterly overwhelmed 
with admiration and thanks to our Heavenly Father for favoring 
me— one, as I feel, so utterly undeserving of being 
favored with an insight into his great scheme for the uplifting 
of the human race and, above all, for calling me to run 
in the good race of the high calling. 

Dear Brother, how especially honored you must be to be 
made God's instrument in presenting these wonderful truths 
to the Church! How I bless God for opening my eyes to 
see them and my heart to receive them, and how I bless him 
for his great love in preserving me from falling back, as some 
have done. Surely there will be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth with those who try to obstruct and hinder the Master's 
work. I am satisfied that they might as well try to keep 
back the waters of the Amazon. I rejoice exceedingly also 
in being favored so highly as to be permitted to do something 
in the way of presenting the message to others. I am happily 
in a position to do a lot of colporteuring and tract distributing, 
and I trust the Lord of the Harvest will give me 
grace sufficient to make the most of the few short remaining 
years of the harvest. 

Again assuring you, beloved Brother, of my loyalty to 



the glorious cause of Christ and to the blessed harvest truths 
as presented to us through THE TOWER, the STUDIES, etc., 
and which I would not exchange or give up for all else besides, 
believe me, my dear Brother, to remain 
Faithfully your co-worker and Brother, 

S. D. COLEMAN.-Australia. 



"MARRIAGE IS HONORABLE IN ALL" 

OUR BELOVED PASTOR IN THE LORD:- 

At this late date what do you think about marriage by those 
who claim to be fully consecrated? I think a timely piece in 
THE WATCH TOWER treating the propriety of marriage would 
do much good. It seems that many do not understand their 
privilege in sacrificing their little all. 

I have certainly enjoyed THE WATCH TOWER, especially of 
late. The expositions on the Great Company and what 
is meant by a full consecration have caused me to make some 
careful self-examinations and more earnest prayers, inquiring 
of the Lord whether or not I have made a full consecration 
of my little all, and am I being faithful in my stewardship. 

Yours in the Lord, 

IN REPLY 

We quite agree with your sentiments, dear Brother, that 
the time is short; that all the consecrated need every talent 
and every moment for the service of the King, to demonstrate 
to him their love and loyalty. We quite agree that many 
marriages have proved disadvantageous spiritually. We do 
not know that all have done so. 

Anyway, we have no option in the matter. The Lord's 
Word clearly declares that marriage is honorable in all. It is 
not, therefore, the province of anybody to forbid marriage, 
directly or indirectly. The most we are privileged to do is 
to call attention to the words of St. Paul, a Divinely inspired 
instructor for the Church, whose admonitions have 
brought blessing to us all many times. He says, "He that 
marrieth doeth well. He that marrieth not doeth better." 

For our part, therefore, we leave the matter in the hands 
of the dear friends, content to point out the Apostle's advice, 
not forgetting that there might be instances in which this 
general rule might not apply. It is for each of the Lord's 
people to decide this matter in harmony with his or her own 
judgment and convictions. "Let us not judge one another, 
but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block in 
his brother's way."— Rom. 14:13. 



VALUE OF BEREAN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

You might be interested in the result of some observations 



made concerning the relative development of members of 
Bible classes that I have been privileged to visit. The degree 
of progress seems to be largely influenced by the character 
of meetings and the method of study adopted. 

Some of the classes closely adhere to the Berean Studies, 
as set forth in THE WATCH TOWER. Other meetings are devoted 
to DAWN Studies, each member of the class taking part 
therein; and at least one meeting per week to prayer, praise 
and testimonies, with an occasional discourse. All such appear 
to be making progress in the development of knowledge 
and the graces of the Spirit. 

Other classes do not have Berean studies; do not use the 
DAWNS at the class meetings, seldom have a prayer, praise 
and testimony meeting, but instead largely depend upon the 
leader of the class, who prepares a lesson on some chapter in 
the Bible and at the meeting states his conclusions, and then 
calls upon the class for expressions of opinion. Such classes, 
it is quite evident, make little progress. 

Since all who have come to a knowledge of "present 
truth" concerning God's Plan, obtained it by the use of the 
six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and other WATCH 
TOWER publications, it would appear to be a serious mistake, 
in the class studies, to ignore these God-given helps. No member 
of the class can grow without an individual exercise of 
his faculties, and where the leader is depended upon to prepare 
a lesson and recite it at the meeting of the class, the 
benefit resulting to the class is reduced to the minimum. 

The Society now publishes, in pamphlet form, the Berean 
questions on TABERNACLE SHADOWS and on Vol. V., STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES, besides the current Berean questions on 
Vol. VI. appearing in THE TOWER. No better material can 
be had for three meetings each week. The majority of the 
friends are so situated that they can have four meetings per 
week. Some of the classes thus situated, and which have not 
used the Berean studies from their inception, are now having 
for one meeting the Berean questions on TABERNACLE 
SHADOWS, for another, Berean questions on Vol. V., and for 
another, the current Berean study on Vol. VI. In this manner 
the new members, as well as others of the class, get the 
benefit of all back lessons, at the same time keeping abreast 
with THE TOWER lessons. The fourth meeting of the week 
is devoted to praise, prayer and testimonies recounting the 
experiences and blessings of the week. The result shows it 
would be profitable for others to pursue a similar course. 

If you are in harmony with the thoughts herein expressed, 
you may be pleased to find some way of calling the attention 
of the friends thereto. 

In the love and service of our King, 

J. F. RUTHERFORD. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I know that you will rejoice with me when I tell you that 
after about two years waiting, the dear, loving heavenly 



R4718 : page 367 

Father has opened my eyes concerning the Vow. 

Sister Frances Thompson has written you in her letter 
about our experiences, so it will not be necessary for me to 
repeat them. I have made the Vow my own, and have been 
rejoicing in the blessings and help derived therefrom. 

It seemed such a foolish thing to think of taking a Vow 
like that. Why did I want to pledge myself, or tie myself 
up to a Vow? But thanks to the dear Father for his 
loving kindness and favor towards me. He has shown me 
that I was the foolish child, and that the Vow was just what 
I needed. 

To me it is just a line of suggestion of how to carry out 
our consecration. This is what I have needed for so long, 
but did not know it. It has made me more watchful of my 
words and thoughts and actions. It has been the means of 
pulling me back into line when this mean old self would 
come to the front and demand its rights. It has caused me 
to rely on the assistance of the promised grace to help in 
every time of need. SISTER SCHEIDLER. 

page 367 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR DECEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for December follow: (1) 30; 
(2) 37; (3) 6; (4) 152; (5) 230; (6) 32; (7) 226; (8) 
95; (9) 235; (10) 273; (11) 73; (12) 208; (13) 123; 
(14) 60; (15) 145; (16) 15; (17) 47; (18) 127; (19) 
283; (20) 279; (21) 4; (22) 112; (23) 258; (24) 327; 
(25) 222; (26) 7; (27) 5; (28) 178; (29) 62; (30) 
264; (31) 113. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY 