From Our Readers
School Harassment  I was so happy to receive the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Make Him Leave Me Alone?” (May 22, 1991) This is my first year in high school, and there are already lots of guys pressuring me into a relationship. One of them just won’t leave me alone. He has asked me to the prom, out to dinner, and even for a weekend in the mountains. “No” doesn’t stop him. But the article has strengthened my resolve to resist him.
P. B., United States
Although I am only 17 years old, I have already encountered situations like those described in the article. But being delighted with the attention, I never tried to stop it. Now I understand the need to reject such advances immediately.
L. A. R., Brazil
The article helped me handle the increasing immorality at my place of work. It pointed out the dangers and supported the arguments with Scriptural examples. It is clear that such articles help not only youths but single persons of all ages.
K. H., Germany
The article helped me to reinforce my determination, like the Shulammite girl, to be “a wall.”
E. S., Philippines
TMJ Syndrome  Thank you for the article, “Out Of the Jaws​—The Great Impostor.” (June 22, 1991) I have had a loud ringing in my ears for two years because of TMJ syndrome. Your article helped me decide what type of doctor I needed to consult. I feel that Jehovah provided this article for me and countless other TMJ sufferers.
R. B., United States
“Awake!” does not dispense medical advice, but we are pleased to make helpful information available to our readers. Not surprisingly, the article on TMJ drew an unusually heavy response from readers around the world.​—ED.
Smoking  Having read the two “Young People Ask . . .” articles on smoking (August 8 and 22, 1991), I can only confirm what was written. I started to smoke at age 13, being talked into it by friends at school. But when I became a Christian at age 15 and stopped smoking, I found myself abandoned by my “friends.” Later on, I was again put under pressure to smoke by workmates. Fortunately, I now work for a fellow Christian, and the air around me is now clean​—literally and spiritually.
B. S., Germany
Rehabilitation  Thank you for the article “The Power of the Truth to Rehabilitate.” (July 22, 1991) I am currently serving time in prison and am encouraged to hear of someone else turning his life around. The authorities try to rehabilitate criminals, only to send them right back into Satan’s world to offend again. I have found, with the help of some very understanding ministers of Jehovah’s Witnesses, that the only lasting rehabilitation involves searching for and serving God.
J. S., United States
Living Space  I want to thank you for the article “Win the Battle of Living Space!” (April 22, 1991) We live in a miniapartment, and it always seems that we have too many things. This article was of much benefit to us because we decided to get rid of everything we do not use. This has not been an easy thing to do, and we are still working at it. Thank you very much, as it seems this article was written especially for us.
L. C., Guatemala

