Why I Crashed and Flew Again
OUR single-engined, six-seater Cessna 210 had just taken off from an airport in Sweden. We were flying through low morning fog when suddenly a dark object appeared a few yards ahead. In a split second, our right wing, full of fuel, was torn away and blew up. Next, the door on my side flew off. The burning aircraft nose-dived, hit the ground, bounced, and plowed a hundred yards into the brushwood before stopping.
Although dazed and completely disoriented, I had but one thing in mind​—to get away from this burning wreck. Flames licked the left wing, which was also full of gasoline. I groped for my safety belt and loosened it. Headfirst, I plunged through a gasoline fire and landed in the mud a few yards away. Only then did I notice that the lower part of my left leg was crushed.
My colleague, who had piloted the plane, was in shock but almost unhurt. I shouted to him to help me move another few yards. After doing so, he ran off to get help. I crawled yet farther away. Just as I almost collapsed from fatigue, the left wing rocketed into the air and exploded. Burning pieces rained all around me. Then there was silence, except for the crackling of small fires started by the gasoline.
While waiting for an ambulance, lying on my back in the mud, I realized that both of us could have been dead. I knew then more than ever that life should never be taken for granted but should be cared for and used wisely.
However, would I ever fly again? Many people are already quite nervous about flying in small planes, and reports of accidents such as this one tend to worsen their fears. Perhaps an accurate understanding of the risks involved and how such threats can be effectively countered will help allay any unwarranted fears you may have about flying in a small aircraft.
Why We Crashed
I first flew in a private plane 20 years ago. I was pleasantly surprised. ‘This is an excellent way to travel,’ I thought. ‘It could save me much time in my work as a sales manager.’ I soon learned to fly, and to date I have flown about 2,000 hours. My certificate shows that I am also qualified to fly on instruments, which is required when visibility is poor.
However, on that dramatic morning, I was flying as a passenger some 300 miles [500 km] from the town of Eslöv in southern Sweden to the capital, Stockholm. I was supposed to pick up a new plane and fly it back to Eslöv. But the trip ended 27 seconds after takeoff. Why? Human error​—the pilot misjudged our position in the fog and retracted the wing flaps too soon. Therefore, we lost lift, dived, and collided with a tower.
Air safety mainly depends on three factors​—the plane’s reliability and the pilot’s judgment and experience. Nevertheless, numerous procedures have been developed that, when applied, make air travel quite safe.
Before Takeoff
Before ever leaving the ground, a conscientious pilot will carefully consider such factors as his or her own qualifications and physical condition, the plane, the weather, the passengers, and the state of airfields being used.
Today’s modern airplanes seldom crash because of physical or mechanical defects. Nevertheless, there is a logbook in every plane in which the pilot must keep a record of all flights and any defects he detects. These defects must be corrected by authorized mechanics before the next flight. Moreover, aircraft components, such as engines, propellers, and most instruments, can be used only for a set period of time before maintenance is required. When their period of use is up, flight regulations usually demand that they be replaced or fully overhauled​—even if they are still working perfectly! Before each day’s first flight, the pilot must inspect the plane following a defined checklist. Most pilots are very careful about holding to these safety procedures. After all, their lives are also at stake.
Interestingly, several aircraft components, such as the engine magnetos and ignition system, the altimeter, and the landing gear, have backups. If the primary system fails, the backup takes over, and the plane can still land safely. Granted, a pilot cannot anticipate every possible failure that may occur in the plane, but with sufficient skill he can avert disaster if some mechanical device fails.
Before the flight the pilot will also decide if he is going to fly according to VFR (visual flight rules) or IFR (instrument flight rules). Planes flying IFR are supervised by air-traffic control using radar. Many small-plane pilots, though, are not licensed for such instrument flying.
Overcoming the Perils of Flying by Sight
Flying VFR is possible only when visibility is satisfactory. What, then, if the weather turns bad? The pilot may gradually descend and stay below the clouds. This calls for real discipline and caution on the part of the pilot. It might be better to turn back and land at an alternative airfield. If he decides to continue, he may run into greater problems since a plane’s radio and navigational equipment are usually ineffective at low altitudes.
If it is impossible to fly low, the pilot can quickly get assistance from air-traffic control. First, though, he may have to climb to a safer altitude. Flying in clouds may be confusing to a pilot who is not instrument trained. Therefore, he must keep calm and concentrate on the most important things. He should climb straight ahead at the proper speed and angle; soon radio and navigational contact will be reestablished. The plane can then be identified by radar and assistance given to land at a suitable airfield.
There are other dangers during unassisted visual flight. Flying in areas having much uncontrolled traffic requires keeping constant watch in every direction. Collisions in such areas have become more numerous because of increased traffic and higher speeds. Navigational mistakes and strong head winds may lead to a fuel shortage.
Most of these problems, though, are avoided by careful planning. A good pilot will check his position every 15 or 20 minutes and make necessary course corrections. If unable to determine his position, he can contact air-traffic control. From there his bearing can be taken by radar or by locating his radio transmission. If this fails, he can head toward a big lake, a river, or any other easily identified place. (An unskilled pilot may try to circle to find a missed landmark. This is usually in vain and consumes vital fuel.)
Icing Problems
Under certain atmospheric conditions, there may be a problem with icing. Most private planes have limited deicing equipment or none at all. And when ice builds up on various parts of the aircraft, speed may gradually decrease until the plane loses its ability to fly. In flight in the upper layers of clouds, icing is a potential threat even on warm summer days!
However, when icing does occur, a pilot can easily get out of trouble simply by descending to a warmer level. What, though, if the temperature is near freezing on the ground? This may be a serious situation, and a pilot should carefully weigh the advisability of flying. But if the air is dry and clear, there is usually little risk of icing in spite of low temperature.
Flying in Thunderclouds
Flying in thunderclouds (cumulonimbus) involves yet another potential danger. Some small planes as well as large commercial aircraft have been severely damaged in such clouds. The great threat here is not lightning but the enormous wind forces and the sometimes fist-sized hailstones that may be encountered. Usually the pilot can see these clouds and avoid them. However, if there is no way to fly safely through such conditions, what is the solution? A wise pilot knows the adage​—never try to beat bad weather. Stay on the ground.
These are some of the risks of flying small private planes. And to be honest, you cannot fly a private plane without any risk at all. But is this not true of all modes of conveyance? Properly equipped and handled, however, a private plane is comparatively safe and convenient. So if you travel as a passenger, make sure that you know that the pilot is not only qualified but also wise and reliable, a person who respects life.
Because I am conscious of safety factors, I continue to fly. As a pilot, I always ask myself if there is anything more I can do for safety and if I have planned for enough alternative measures should something happen. Being responsible for the lives of others is a serious matter. Therefore, flying must never become a reckless adventure. It should be used for one’s benefit and pleasure. And above all, it should be done safely!​—Contributed.
[Pictures on page 15]
Not every crash results in destruction and injury as mine did (above). Three walked away from this crash landing (inset)

