Announcements
SHARING IN THE FINAL WITNESS
Shortly before he was impaled Jesus counseled his apostles, “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for the purpose of a witness to all the nations, and then the accomplished end will come.” The time for the accomplished end of this wicked system of things is very near, and the servants of God are giving the final witness in every corner of the earth. What a privilege it is to have a share in this momentous work! Since you have now learned something of God’s gracious provisions for those who act in harmony with his will, wouldn’t you like to share in spreading this good news? For January Jehovah’s witnesses have as their service theme, Sharing in the Final Witness (Matt. 24:14, NW). During this month they will offer a year’s subscription for this Christian journal, The Watchtower, on a contribution of $1.00. Why not share in the final witness by calling the attention of your neighbors to the significance of the times in which we live and offer them a subscription for The Watchtower to aid them further to learn of God’s requirements? The local company of Jehovah’s witnesses will be glad to assist you; or write to us and we will furnish you with additional instructions and forms for reporting your activity.
1951 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
Of the increase of God’s government and peace there will be no end. This Scriptural truth is convincingly proved by the report of the 1950 service year as presented by the president of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society in the 1951 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In addition to this annual report covering more than 100 regions, the Yearbook contains the president’s comment on the yeartext for 1951 and a daily text and comment for each day of the coming year. Those associated with a group should send in combined orders, as through the servant of a company, to save time and expense. A remittance of 50c per copy should accompany each order. Your 1951 Calendar may be ordered at the same time; price: 25 cents each or five to one address for $1.00.
1951 ASSEMBLIES
The big convention of the year 1951 is planned for London, England, August 1 to 5 inclusive. Brethren in America and other countries can now make plans for vacation periods and traveling to England to attend this gathering of Jehovah’s witnesses.
If possible, other assemblies will be held in France from August 9 to 12 inclusive and in The Netherlands from August 17 to 19 inclusive. Other European assemblies will be announced later.
The principal convention will be at London. Details and travel announcements for American brethren will be published soon. Please do not write the Society until you read these.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 7: Parable of the Sower, ¶1-19.
Week of January 14: Parable of the Sower, ¶20-39.

