A Testimony to Faith!
 1. What disturbing events were foretold by Jesus?
1 The apostles listened intently as Jesus spoke about his presence and the conclusion of the system of things. Disturbing events were to befall mankind​—wars, food shortages, earthquakes, pestilence. Next, Jesus said that his followers would be hated, delivered up to tribulation, and killed. False prophets would arise and mislead many. The love of the greater number would cool off.
 2. Why is it remarkable that the good news is being preached worldwide?
2 Against that backdrop, it must have been startling to the apostles when Jesus then said that the good news of God’s Kingdom would be preached in all the inhabited earth. (Matt. 24:3-14) Today we see the remarkable fulfillment of that exciting prophecy. Though we live in perilous times, Jehovah’s Witnesses zealously proclaim the good news. As the love of the world cools, our love burns ever brighter. Despite being hated by “all the nations,” we preach in virtually every nation.
 3. What encouraging figures do you see in the worldwide report?
3 How encouraging it is to review the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses during the past service year as shown on the chart on pages 3 through 6! For the 16th year in a row, over one billion hours were spent in the preaching and disciple-making work. What a testimony to faith that is! There were increases of 5.8 percent in the number of pioneers, 3.1 percent in publishers, and 4.4 percent in Bible studies. Baptisms were up 20.1 percent over the last service year. It is thrilling to see that nearly seven million people are faithfully serving Jehovah​—more now than at any other time in human history! As you examine the chart, what do you see that especially encourages you?
 4. What problems did one man overcome while working toward baptism?
4 Though the figures are impressive in themselves, we should never forget that they represent people who have proved their faith. Consider an example. Guillermo grew up in Bolivia. Born in 1935, he worked on a coca plantation from the age of nine. From childhood on, he chewed coca leaves to relieve the misery of doing hard physical labor. He later abused alcohol and smoked cigarettes. As he began to learn about what Jehovah requires of him, Guillermo quit smoking and then stopped abusing alcohol. The biggest challenge was to quit his lifelong practice of chewing coca leaves. He prayed without letup and overcame this habit. His vices behind him, he was baptized. “Now,” he says, “I feel clean and very happy.”
 5. What is your desire?
5 Jehovah is truly interested in people. It is his desire that all attain to repentance. (2 Pet. 3:9) That is our desire too. May our hearts move us to do all we can to continue to help honesthearted ones come to know and love Jehovah as we do.

