Remembering the Ransom With Appreciation
1, 2. What reasons do we have to remember the ransom with appreciation?
1 In obedience to Jesus’ command, Christians around the world will meet after sundown on Saturday, March 22, 2008, to commemorate the death of Jesus Christ. (Luke 22:19; 1 Cor. 11:23-26) We are moved to do so out of deep appreciation for all that was accomplished on that date 1,975 years ago. By maintaining perfect integrity through a painful death on a torture stake, Jesus sanctified his Father’s name, providing the ultimate answer to Satan’s taunts.​—Job 1:11; Prov. 27:11.
2 Jesus’ shed blood validated the new covenant, enabling imperfect humans to be adopted as God’s sons with the prospect of ruling with Christ in his heavenly Kingdom. (Jer. 31:31-34; Mark 14:24) Furthermore, the depth of God’s love for mankind was clearly manifested in the giving of his dearly loved Son in sacrifice, as Jesus himself had explained to Nicodemus.​—John 3:16.
 3. How will those attending the Memorial benefit?
3 Invite Others: The January issue of Our Kingdom Ministry suggested making a list of acquaintances and extending personal invitations. Have you started inviting those on your list? Are you making arrangements to share fully in the campaign that will begin on March 1 to invite people to the Memorial? Those attending will hear Scriptural information that can build faith in the ransom, which in turn leads to everlasting life.​—Rom. 10:17.
 4. Why should we arrive early for the Memorial?
4 All who are able should plan to arrive early to extend a warm welcome to those who respond to the special invitation. The large Memorial attendance makes it vital for us to be particularly attentive to the new ones as well as to others who attend meetings from time to time.
 5. How may you prepare your heart for this occasion?
5 Prepare Your Heart: Examining the Scriptures Daily​—2008 and the 2008 Calendar contain a schedule for the special Memorial Bible reading beginning on March 17. Considering the important events that occurred during the final days of Jesus’ earthly life will help you to prepare your heart for the Memorial observance. (Ezra 7:10) Prayerfully meditating on these Bible accounts will deepen your appreciation for the love of Jehovah and his Son in providing the ransom.​—Ps. 143:5.
 6. How will building appreciation for the ransom affect us?
6 As the Memorial approaches, may we carefully prepare ourselves and others for this important occasion. Remembering the ransom with appreciation will strengthen our relationship with Jehovah and his Son. (2 Cor. 5:14, 15) It will also move us to imitate them in showing self-sacrificing love for others.​—1 John 4:11.

