Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting February 11
Song 168
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the February 1 Watchtower and the February Awake!
15 min: Can You Serve Where the Need Is Greater? Talk and audience discussion based on the July 15, 2003, Watchtower, page 20. Include comments on the Organized book, page 111, paragraph 1, to page 112, paragraph 1. Briefly interview any who have moved where the need is greater. What challenges did they encounter, and how did they overcome them? What blessings did they enjoy?
20 min: Help New Ones to Progress as Ministers. Following an introduction of less than one minute, conduct a question-and-answer discussion of the December 1, 2005, Watchtower, page 31, using the study questions that are provided. After discussing paragraph 18, have a demonstration showing a householder raising an objection to a new publisher who is working with an experienced publisher. The new publisher’s response is not effective, and the householder ends the conversation. After leaving the door, the experienced publisher warmly commends the newer one for his effort and then shows him how he might use the Reasoning book to reply to that potential conversation stopper in the future.
Song 50
Week Starting February 18
Song 17
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
10 min: Local needs.
25 min: “A Testimony to Faith!”a To be handled by the service overseer. Conclude with a positive review of what the congregation has accomplished during the past service year.
Song 194
Week Starting February 25
Song 81
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for February. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Demonstrate how to use the Memorial invitation to invite a family member or a neighbor.
20 min: “Remembering the Ransom With Appreciation.”b As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
15 min: Prepare to Offer the Current Magazines. Audience discussion. After giving a brief overview of the March 1 Watchtower and the March Awake! ask the audience which articles may appeal to people in the territory and why. Invite audience to mention specific points in articles they plan to feature. What question could be asked to start a conversation? Which scripture in the article could then be read? Using the suggestions, demonstrate how to offer the March 1 Watchtower and the March Awake!
Song 119
Week Starting March 3
Song 223
10 min: Local announcements. Review main points from the box “Memorial Reminders.”
20 min: Can You Start a Bible Study in March? Audience discussion. During March we will offer the Bible Teach book with the goal of starting Bible studies. Review some of the book’s outstanding features. Discuss how it may be presented when returning to visit someone who showed interest at the time we left him a Memorial invitation, when returning on a magazine placement, and when offering it in the door-to-door ministry after March 22. (See km 8/07 p. 3; km 3/06 p. 1, par. 3; km 1/06 pp. 3-6.) Have one or two presentations demonstrated.
15 min: Use the Bible When Answering Questions. Talk and audience discussion based on the Ministry School book, pages 143-4. Include a brief demonstration of a publisher being asked a question commonly heard in the local territory and then using the Bible to give an answer.
Song 145
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

