
LESSON 5
What Will You Experience at Our Christian Meetings?









Argentina









Sierra Leone









Belgium









Malaysia




Many people have stopped attending religious services because they find no spiritual guidance or comfort. Why, then, should you attend the Christian meetings organized by Jehovah’s Witnesses? What will you find there?
The joy of being among loving and caring people. In the first century, Christians were organized into congregations, and they held meetings to worship God, to study the Scriptures, and to encourage one another. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) Gathered in a loving atmosphere, they felt that they were among true friends​—their spiritual brothers. (2 Thessalonians 1:3; 3 John 14) We follow the same pattern and experience similar joy.
The benefit of learning how to apply Bible principles. As was true in Bible times, men, women, and children all meet together. Qualified teachers use the Bible to help us discern how to apply its principles in our daily life. (Deuteronomy 31:12; Nehemiah 8:8) All may participate in audience discussions and in singing, allowing us to express our Christian hope.​—Hebrews 10:23.
The blessing of having your faith in God strengthened. The apostle Paul told one of the congregations in his day: “I am longing to see you, . . . that we may have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith, both yours and mine.” (Romans 1:11, 12) At meetings, our regular contact with fellow believers strengthens our faith and determination to live a Christian life.
Why not accept this invitation to attend our congregation’s next meeting and experience these things for yourself? You will be warmly welcomed. All meetings are free​—no collections are ever taken.
  On what pattern are our congregation meetings based?

  How can we benefit ourselves by attending Christian meetings?





FIND OUT MORE
If you would like to see inside the local Kingdom Hall before you attend one of our meetings, ask one of Jehovah’s Witnesses to take you there and show you around.


