
LESSON 28
What Can Be Found on Our Website?









France









Poland









Russia




Jesus Christ told his followers: “Let your light shine before men, so that they may see your fine works and give glory to your Father who is in the heavens.” (Matthew 5:16) To that end, we are making good use of modern technology, including the Internet. Our website, jw.org, is the official online source of information about the beliefs and activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses. What does it feature?
The Bible’s answers to commonly asked questions. You can find the answers to some of the most important questions that people have ever asked. For example, the tracts Will Suffering Ever End? and Can the Dead Really Live Again? are available online in over 600 languages. You can also find the New World Translation in over 130 languages and a number of Bible study aids, including the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? and the current issues of The Watchtower and Awake! Many of these publications can be read or listened to online or downloaded in such popular formats as MP3, PDF, or EPUB. You can even print out a few pages to share with an interested person in his own language! Video publications are available in scores of sign languages. You can download dramatic Bible readings, Bible dramas, and beautiful music to enjoy at your leisure.
Factual information about Jehovah’s Witnesses. Also posted are the latest news and video clips about our worldwide work, events affecting Jehovah’s Witnesses, and our humanitarian relief efforts. You can find notices of upcoming conventions and contact information for our branch offices.
By these means, we are shining the light of truth into the remotest parts of the earth. People from every continent, including Antarctica, are benefiting. We pray that “the word of Jehovah may keep spreading rapidly” into all the earth, to God’s glory.​—2 Thessalonians 3:1.
  How is jw.org helping more people to learn Bible truth?

  What would you like to explore on our website?





A NOTE OF CAUTION:
Some Internet sites have been set up by opposers to spread false information about our organization. Their intent is to draw people away from serving Jehovah. We should avoid those sites.​—Psalm 1:1; 26:4; Romans 16:17.


