
LESSON 10
What Is Family Worship?









South Korea









Brazil









Australia









Guinea




Since ancient times, Jehovah has wanted each family to spend time together, fortifying their spirituality and strengthening their household. (Deuteronomy 6:6, 7) That is why Jehovah’s Witnesses set aside a period each week for the family to worship together​—discussing, in a relaxed setting, spiritual matters that are tailored to their needs. Even if you live alone, such time can be well-spent with God on a Bible study project of your choosing.
It is a time to draw closer to Jehovah. “Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.” (James 4:8) We get to know Jehovah better when we learn details about his personality and his actions through the pages of his written Word. An easy way to begin your family worship is to spend some of the time reading the Bible aloud together, perhaps following the weekly schedule for the Life and Ministry Meeting. A portion of the reading could be assigned to each family member, and then all can discuss what was learned from the Scriptures.
It is a time to draw closer to family members. Husbands and wives, as well as parents and children, strengthen their bonds with one another when they study the Bible as a family. It should be a happy, peaceful time and a highlight of the week. Depending on the ages of their children, parents can choose practical topics to discuss, perhaps using features from The Watchtower and Awake! or from our website, jw.org. You could talk about a problem that your children encountered at school and how to deal with it. Why not watch a program televised on JW Broadcasting (tv.jw.org) and discuss it together afterward? You may enjoy practicing the songs that will be sung at the meetings and having some refreshments after family worship.
This special time spent every week worshipping Jehovah together will help all in the family to find delight in God’s Word, and he will richly bless your efforts.​—Psalm 1:1-3.
  Why do we set aside time for family worship?

  How can parents make this occasion enjoyable for all in the family?





FIND OUT MORE
Get some ideas from others in the congregation about what they do for their family worship. Also, find out what publications are available at the Kingdom Hall to use in teaching your children about Jehovah.


