1926 Ushers In a Time of Great Happiness
“Happy is he who waits till he reaches the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days!”—Dan. 12:12, AT.
 1. In order to get the force of the great happiness that came upon Jehovah’s people in 1926 what must we do?
UNDERSTANDING and appreciation of Jehovah’s ways are deepened in his dedicated servants who thoughtfully compare present and past tests from him, mighty deeds of his, and revelations of his purposes and of his majesty. To sense the force of the great happiness that began among the theocratic people of Jehovah in 1926 (A.D.) we must contrast their condition at that time with their former condition. Then we must compare such conditions with the blessings promised by Jehovah to his people who successfully meet tests he applies and who uncompromisingly continue following in his appointed ways, faithfully forging ahead regardless of consequences. In Jehovah’s great time schedule such tests have a definite purpose. He applies the tests in the working out of his perfect purposes. With these thoughts let us first consider the things endured by Jehovah’s willing servants between the time of his commencing to rule as King (A.D. 1914) and the year 1926, tracing Jehovah’s purpose in permitting such things.
 2. What must we fully realize and retain in order to be greatly aided in our Christian course?
2 With Jehovah there is no confusion. He leaves nothing to chance or haphazardness. “We know that God makes all his works cooperate together for the good of those who love God, those who are the ones called according to his purpose.” (Rom. 8:28, NW) If we always try to realize this fact, it will be of invaluable help to us in our God-given assignment as followers of and diligent workers with his enthroned King, Christ Jesus. In fact, we must come to realize this fully in order to withstand the onslaughts of the enemy.
 3. What great work did Jehovah foreknow and foretell would be accomplished by his people?
3 Jehovah foreknew and made record of his purpose to bring his organized people before kings and judges of this old world to testify before them concerning his kingdom when that perfect government is being erected to displace theirs permanently. Neither the invisible nor the visible rulers of Satan’s world took kindly to that idea, and they determined to fight it with everything in their power.—Matt. 24:14; Dan. 2:44; Ps. 2:2, 3; Rev. 12:17.
 4. (a) Were his servants equipped for this work in 1914? (b) What had to be done among them before they would become equipped?
4 It required great courage, faith and confidence in Jehovah to stand up and declare fearlessly the judgments of Jehovah against the Devil’s visible organizations which had held sway during the 2,520 years. This degree of faith and courage Jehovah’s people as a whole did not have at that time. The organization was not wholly clean. Many were there to serve their own selfish purposes and draw followers after themselves. (Matt. 7:15; Acts 20:29, 30; 2 Pet. 2:1-3) Such conditions could not be tolerated by Jehovah. Once he had set his King upon his throne, these people must be cleaned out. Obstructionists could not be permitted in any degree to interfere with the high and lofty purposes of our God. To try, test and prove his servants Jehovah decreed that his servants must do a mighty witness work; this they were required to do and at the same time the life and actions of the witnesses must be on the same lofty plane as the message they were bearing. They must never lose sight of the fact that they were being called to reflect the glory of Jehovah.—Isa. 60:1, 2, AS; 1 Pet. 2:9.
 5. To what were Jehovah’s servants blind at that time?
5 Did Jehovah realize all that was involved when he issued that decree? Did he foreknow the vicious attacks the Devil and his agents, visible and invisible, would make against the people of the living God, who were called upon to give the witness? Yes, he foreknew these facts in every minute detail and recorded them in the Bible for our enlightenment and comfort: “Look! the Devil will keep on throwing some of you into prison that you may be fully put to the test, and that you may have tribulation ten days.” (Rev. 2:10; Rom. 8:28, NW) But his people were unmindful of such predictions. They did not realize either their own unclean condition or all that was required in order to cleanse them and equip them for the glorious service Jehovah had in store for them.
“DAYS” TO BE ENDURED TILL HAPPINESS
 6. What did Daniel say, in Daniel 12:1-3, must take place among Jehovah’s people before their great privileges of theocratic service would be extended?
6 In Daniel the twelfth chapter, verses 1, 2 and 3, Jehovah foretold centuries ago just what his people would have to experience in carrying out this commission. He tells us of Michael’s standing up. He then tells of a great time of trouble and of the ultimate deliverance of his servants from it. It would then occur that their great privilege of theocratic service would be extended.
 7. What was to happen to the holy people during the 1,260 days and the 1,290 days, and what was promised to follow the 1,335 days?
7 In Da 12 verse 7 he tells of the 1,260 days during which the power of these “holy people” would be destroyed. Following this, in Da 12 verse 11, he describes a period of 1,290 days that would follow from the time of the taking away of the daily sacrifice and the setting up of the “abomination that maketh desolate.” A third period, described as a 1,335-day period, would follow, after which an era of happiness would be ushered in. The meaning and understanding of all these periods were locked up and sealed until the “time of the end.” Now we are at that very time and, true to his promise, Jehovah has unlocked his prophecies and made them plain.
 8. When did these three periods of 1,260, 1,290 and 1,335 days find their fulfillment?
8 The 1,260-day period, with its destructive effect on the power of Jehovah’s people, found its fulfillment from October, 1914, to April, 1918. The 1,290-day period ran from January, 1919, to September, 1922, and the 1,335-day period extended from September, 1922, to May, 1926. A full Scriptural treatise of these dates and their application will be found in the Watchtower issues of July 1 and 15, 1951.
 9. What is our purpose in here considering these time periods?
9 Here our purpose is not to go into a consideration of the correctness and the understanding of these dates and to prove them. That has already been done in our aforementioned issues. Rather, we purpose now to establish the fact that Jehovah did foreknow the vicious opposition his people would encounter and this, as well as its effect upon his people, he clearly outlined in detail, in order that they might be strengthened to meet such emergencies. He likewise outlined their subsequent period of blessedness, happiness, after this period of test.
10. (a) Looking back, what advantages do we see in those trials? (b) What did those trials accomplish?
10 Looking back from this time, we do not have much difficulty in appreciating the cleansing work that had to be done among the professed people of Jehovah in those days; but back there they did not see the need as we do today. It was a great trial upon the faithful. But were they forsaken by Jehovah? What did it all mean? The effect of these tests was to drive the unfaithful and ungodly out of the organization and into the Devil’s camp, where they belonged all the time, and to reveal to all discerning, intelligent observers just who were the faithful servants of the Most High.
11. What Scriptural grounds do we have for believing that Jehovah was fully aware of the power and influence of Satan?
11 Jehovah was fully aware of the power and influence of the Devil’s organization, visible and invisible. Just as he was fully aware of the desperate fight put up by the invisible demon prince of the kingdom of Persia to stop its visible ruler, Cyrus, from restoring the Jewish remnant in 537 B.C. (Dan. 10:1, 13, 20), so Jehovah knew that this same Devil and his demon princes would viciously fight a thousandfold harder to oppose the deliverance of the Israelites indeed, the Christian congregation, to prevent their proclaiming the Kingdom’s establishment and its blessings for mankind of good will toward God. Nevertheless, he permitted it, being always master of any situation, always ready to accomplish his good pleasure.
12. What evidence have we that Jehovah’s King would be able to cope with the situation?
12 This foreknowledge of the demon efforts that would be put forth by Satan and his hordes did not in any way disturb Jehovah and his chief prince Michael, who then was standing for the children of his people. Things would go according to the predetermined purposes of Jehovah, whereby he would cleanse his organization and expose the enemy. That same Michael, who came to the aid of Jehovah’s angel and directed the deliverance of Jehovah’s typical people in 537 B.C., is he who now stands for the children of Jehovah’s people. By Jehovah he, Michael, now has been sent forth to ‘rule in the midst of his enemies’ and for our deliverance. (Ps. 110:1, 2, AS; Rev. 12:7, 8) He can be relied upon. Jehovah has implicit confidence in him, and so can we have. He now is clothed with authority as King and Judge to execute Jehovah’s judgments upon his enemies. (Rev. 19:11-16) He knows all the machinations of the Devil and his invisible princes. He defeated them on earth while standing as the deliverer of Jehovah’s angel and the nation of Israel, and he already has defeated them in heaven, just lately having hurled them out of heaven and down to our earth. These great truths we now know. But the delivered remnant did not know them then. This lack of accurate knowledge constituted a real trial of their faith, but those who endured under that test were greatly blessed, happified.
13. Do we have any good reason now for laying these great truths to heart?
13 Clearly seeing Jehovah’s flashing truths, understanding them and acting upon them bring the greatest happiness that can come to any people. And each dedicated slave of Jehovah should now be quick to lay them to heart, since there is much possibility of our being put to a similar or even a more severe test in the future. Our sure protection will be in knowing our God and his Christ and trusting them regardless of what takes place.
14. Why have we given so much time and consideration to the opposition to Jehovah’s people?
14 Up to this point we have given consideration mainly to the opposition and persecution that Jehovah’s witnesses encountered during the period between 1914 and 1926. Not because this is the important thing by any means, but because it serves well to establish, even as Jesus predicted, that Jehovah foreknew all the hatred and malicious persecution his people would encounter from the enemy. (Luke 21:12, 13, NW) Yet he still permitted it, knowing it would serve his glorious purposes and be for the eternal good of his dedicated servants.
VINDICATION AND EXPANSION
15, 16. What are some great things Jehovah accomplished in the past through faithful endurance of tests by his servants?
15 Now note other important things accomplished by Jehovah in the past, in the present, and undoubtedly to be accomplished in the future, through the endurance of his servants under such persecution. First of all, faithfulness under test contributes to the vindication of Jehovah’s name and Word. This was true in the case of Jesus and all others of Jehovah’s slaves, past and present. And it can be seen that this is true when you consider experiences that Jehovah’s people endured from 1914 to 1926. Obedience is learned and perfected under such endurance. This was true in Jesus’ case and is likewise true regarding his followers, for he left us an example that we should follow in his steps. (Heb. 5:8-10; 1 Pet. 2:20-25, NW) Jehovah through Jesus’ faithful endurance also provided a ransom for obedient mankind and qualified his faithful Son to present that ransom at the throne of justice in heaven.
16 Even the dastardly and vicious persecution brought upon Jesus, resulting in his being impaled on the tree on Calvary, was entirely overshadowed in his life by the grandeur and blessing of his resurrection and the acknowledgment of him by Jehovah, and eventually his ascension to glory beside his Father in heaven in the throne. (Acts 13:32, 33; Heb. 1:3;1 Pet. 3:22; Rev. 3:21) Not even a shadow of a scar was left of all the persecution Jesus endured.
17. How has expansion of the congregation of Jehovah been effected by such trials?
17 The trials of Jesus’ apostles and their associates resulted in their being scattered abroad. So the gospel message within them was carried into many lands. As a result, too, many congregations sprang up in all parts of Israel, as well as in Italy, Greece, Macedonia, Egypt and other lands. (Matt. 10:23; Acts 8:1; 11:19) That very result Jesus had foretold. (Acts 1:8, NW) This same manner of dealing with his dedicated servants Jehovah has applied all down through the Christian era. (John 15:18-21; 2 Tim. 3:12, 13) This actually has resulted in the widespread distribution of Christian knowledge throughout the earth. Having, then, this godly and practical viewpoint as to such testings from Jehovah, the apostle Paul reasons: “Consequently I reckon that the sufferings of the present season do not amount to anything in comparison with the glory that is going to be revealed in us.”—Rom. 8:18, NW.
18. What further purposes of Jehovah have been served by tests he has applied to his witnesses of the past and present?
18 In all ages, under all conditions, Jehovah has not left himself without faithful witnesses upon earth. They were all to display before men and angels, as well as before the Devil, their faithfulness under test. The tests upon Jehovah’s people during the trialsome period between 1914 and 1926 contributed to that line of witness. After enumerating the faithful acts of Jehovah’s witnesses from Abel to John the Baptist (Heb. 11), Paul urges: “So, then, because we have so great a cloud of witnesses surrounding us, let us also put off every weight and the sin that easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us.” (Heb. 12:1, NW) Those ancient faithful witnesses can be a great stimulus to us today. In every case these tests did a refining and purifying work among the servants themselves, cleansing and equipping them for some grander work Jehovah had in store for them afterward. Jesus qualified to be Jehovah’s High Priest and King, able to consider our weaknesses sympathetically after undergoing such trying human experiences.—Heb. 2:17, 18; 4:15, 16.
19, 20. (a) What comforting assurance to the faithful is contained in Zechariah 14:1, 2? (b) In Malachi 3:1-4?
19 In our day tests also bring a cleansing of Jehovah’s organization. The persecution that came upon Jehovah’s people following the Kingdom’s establishment in 1914, and as described in Zechariah 14:1, 2 (AS), shows that in this manner Jehovah brought all nations to battle against heavenly Jerusalem, represented by his name-people on earth. “Behold, a day of Jehovah cometh, when thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee. For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.” This forecasts a cleansing of the organization from stem to stern, purging it entirely of what needed to be removed; but the residue or remnant of the people would not be cut off from the city or organization of Jehovah.
20 Another picture of this cleansing test upon Jehovah’s people will be found in Malachi 3:1-4 (AS): “Behold, I send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, will suddenly come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant, whom ye desire, behold, he cometh, saith Jehovah of hosts. But who can abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap: and he will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he will purify the sons of Levi, and refine them as gold and silver; and they shall offer unto Jehovah offerings in righteousness. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto Jehovah, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.” In this we our returned Lord and King supervising the purifying and refining of the “silver” (truth) and the purifying and refining of the “sons of Levi” (his faithful temple servants).
21. Does permanent harm to Jehovah’s servants ever result from such tests?
21 Never at any time do these tests get out of hand, nor are Jehovah’s people left at the mercy of the Devil and his hordes. Throughout the tests that same Michael is ever on the alert to see to it that the fire is well within the bounds of his control.
22, 23. Who directs and maneuvers the issue described in Ezekiel 38:4, 12, and for what purpose?
22 Now looking ahead we see the final cleansing attack at Armageddon, described in Ezekiel 38:4, 12, as Jehovah’s putting hooks into the jaws of Gog, or Satan, and forcing him to come forth and display himself and his opposition to Jehovah and Jehovah’s people. This attack will reveal who are the integrity-maintaining and devoted people of Jehovah, and who, on the other hand, are unfit, corrupt, unfaithful, faithless and wicked within that organization. These fiery trials will not permanently harm Jehovah’s faithful people. On the contrary, rather they will work to their ultimate blessing and the glory of Jehovah.
23 Mature consideration of all these dealings of Jehovah with his name-people leaves us comforted and assured. Clearly we discern that the only ones permanently harmed by Satan’s persecution are the corrupt, unfaithful and faithless creatures who choose to capitulate to him. His works lead to his own destruction and the destruction of all who follow him, while Jehovah preserves those who put their trust in Him.—Ps. 145:18-20, AS.
APPRECIATION OF PRESENT HAPPINESS
24. What does the proper understanding of the part played in the preparation of Jehovah’s people for the blessings to follow do for us?
24 By now you may be wondering what all this has to do with 1926 as ushering in a time of happiness. Only when we see and appreciate in their proper light these events that took place before 1926, and the part they played in preparing Jehovah’s people for the blessings in 1926 and beyond, until now—only then can we appreciate the depth of our happiness. Only then can we reflect from the heart the sentiments expressed at Revelation 15:2-4 (NW): “And I saw . . . those who come off victorious from the wild beast and from its image and from the number of its name standing by the glassy sea, having harps of God. And they are singing the song of Moses the slave of God and the song of the Lamb, saying: ‘Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your ways, King of eternity. Who will not really fear you, Jehovah, and glorify your name, because you alone are one of loving-kindness? For all the nations will come and worship before you, because your righteous decrees have been made manifest.’”
25. How did Jehovah cleanse and bless his people in their experiences between 1914 and 1919?
25 Only as we view the 1,260 days of endurance, the witnessing in sackcloth and ashes, the taking away of the daily sacrifice (permitted by Jehovah), and the maneuvering of his name-people to serve his holy purposes, and finally his blessing of his people with the grand opportunity of representing him and his King—only then can we exult, exalting and praising him in our tribulation. It is only as we see the grand purpose in Jehovah’s permitting his ‘two witnesses to lie dead in the streets of the great city which is in a spiritual sense called Sodom and Egypt,’ and then after three and a half days permitting his spirit of life to enter into them and stand them upon their feet again, to the great fear and chagrin of their enemies—only as we see these things can we in humility say, “Your will be done.” (Rev. 11:7-13, NW) It is only then that we can appreciate the tender, discriminating care Jehovah exercised in seeing that the organization he had been forming was first properly humbled and cleansed before he set about to establish it and equip it for his holy purpose. At the same time his great wisdom and economy were displayed by using his servants’ plight to expose Satan and his nefarious schemes against Jehovah’s name-people.
26. (a) After they were humbled, cleansed and set upon their feet, what did Jehovah then do for them? (b) What effect did this vision have upon them?
26 After this series of experiences and tests Jehovah poured out upon this organized “slave” class a double portion of his spirit. He enlightened them to see that their former idea of preparing themselves for heaven by so-called “character developing” was entirely wrong. That they might now be rejuvenated and enlightened for his holy service, step by step Jehovah led them along the way, illuminating their pathway as they became able to absorb the brilliance. In 1919 and 1922 he led them to the Cedar Point, Ohio, conventions, there giving them an understanding of fearless preaching, continuous preaching. (Isa. 6:11, 12, AS; Luke 12:32) There Jehovah also revealed to them that he is in his holy temple with heavenly hosts praising him, but that the remnant of his people, despite all the work that he had done for and in them, still were comparatively dumb, silent. Yes, silent when they should already have been declaring the glory of Jehovah and announcing his King and kingdom. Realizing this deficiency of theirs greatly humbled and frightened them. “Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of hosts. Then flew one of the seraphim unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar: and he touched my mouth with it, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin forgiven.”—Isa. 6:5-7, AS.
27. Was there any evidence that the happiness mentioned in Daniel 12:12 was now within the reach of the Kingdom slaves?
27 Jehovah thus led them along, toward the beginning of the 1,335-day period, the completion of which period is described in these words, at Daniel 12:12 (AT): “Happy is he who waits till he reaches [the end of] the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days.” (Also Ro) Those days were, in themselves, a blessed time. Step by step Jehovah continued to lead them through those years of 1922, 1923, 1924 and 1925, culminating with the revelation, in March, 1925, of the birth of the Kingdom.
28, 29. What tangible evidences were there that a new sense of Kingdom responsibility was coming upon the congregations of Jehovah’s people?
28 During this period Jehovah’s presence in his holy temple and the cleansed-lip condition of his witnesses and the great work of praise that they must do were coming home to the individuals and permeating the entire organization. Consciousness of their need of that time came over them more and more. Before this, with exception of a little follow-up work done by congregation publishers after public talks by so-called “pilgrim” brothers, all audible witnessing from house to house was done by a small band of “colporteurs,” as pioneer or full-time publishers were then designated. Activity of congregation servants and some other appreciative ones was confined generally to regular distribution of tracts, from house to house. But after the 1919 Cedar Point convention many began to become more active as congregation publishers, taking hold of the distribution of the “ZG” (Volume 7 of Studies in the Scriptures, in self-covered magazine form).
29 Then, too, Golden Age magazine subscriptions were solicited; and, following that house-to-house activity, the book The Harp of God, with its question cards, was similarly distributed. Thus house-to-house witnessing gradually came to the fore among congregation (or part-time) publishers. But from the 1922 Cedar Point convention they became more awake to the urgent need of everyone’s witnessing. Conscious of all that was involved, they publicly declared before Jehovah and in the presence of one another that they would do as commanded, “Advertise, advertise, advertise the King and the Kingdom.” They awoke to the significance of the vision called to their attention at that 1922 Cedar Point convention. With expanding zeal, in each passing month, they responded to the advertising work. This ever-increasing activity was, in substance, saying, “Here am I; send me.”—Isa. 6:8.
30. How was the idea of going immediately to heaven eradicated from the minds of the remnant?
30 Hence, when at first they heard the call from on high, “Who will go for us?” the response, “Here am I; send me,” was feeble. But as days and months passed it gained in force and magnitude. The old idea of soon going to heaven still remained in mind and somewhat impatiently the inquiry ascended to Jehovah, “How long?” He replied: “Until cities be waste without inhabitant, and houses without man, and the land become utterly waste.” (Isa. 6:11, AS) Thus he dispelled the idea of any immediate “going home” (to heaven) and focused attention upon the magnitude of the great work to be done under his direction on earth.
31. What great event was called to the attention of Jehovah’s servants in the March 1, 1925, Watch Tower?
31 Then came the great event for that time. On March 1, 1925, The Watch Tower came forth with the article “Birth of the Nation,” explaining as clearly as then could be discerned the significance of the birth pains that came upon Jehovah’s woman, the birth that followed and then the bringing forth of her children. This vision from the throne electrified the faithful slaves, and greatly upset the complainers still left in Zion. Now there was to be no stopping of the onward surge of the vitalized Kingdom servants. Now, forward, onward, into brilliance of their understanding of the Kingdom’s establishment in heaven and their happy relationship to it here on earth.—Isa. 66:10-14; Rev. 14:1-3.
32. What was the major work accomplished in Jehovah’s people between 1914 and 1926?
32 Seeing it from this viewpoint, we discern that the greater part of the work done between 1914 and 1926 was preparatory, preparing Jehovah’s organization and his name-people for the mighty earth-wide preaching work remaining to be done before this old world’s end.—Matt. 24:14; Ps. 110:3, AS; Ro.
A CLIMACTIC YEAR
33. What did proper understanding of the issue of character or covenant do for the earnest witness of Jehovah?
33 In May, 1926, another climactic event for Jehovah’s volunteers came with appearance in The Watch Tower of the article “Character or Covenant—Which?” Very happifying this also was to honest servants of Jehovah who had been trying to “develop character” for years and who within themselves knew that they were not succeeding. Now they began to see their covenant obligations, faithfulness to which would bring Jehovah’s approval. This they came to understand and appreciate. This enlightenment made happy warriors of those who before had been, at least to some extent, apologetic “character developers.” No more was their goal just trying to appear sweet! Now they saw themselves as dedicated, obligated servants with a God-given job to do, a theocratic assignment. But they required something to work with.
34. What equipment was available to Kingdom announcers for declaring the great truths revealed between 1922 and 1926?
34 Prior to 1926 Jehovah’s people had very little in the way of equipment to work with. The seven volumes of Studies in the Scriptures had served their purpose and were going out of stock. Booklets on “Hell” and “Our Lord’s Return” also had served their purpose and were obsolete as far as requirements for Kingdom-announcing work were concerned. The later booklets Talking with the Dead? and Millions Now Living Will Never Die! served their purpose. The booklet Talking with the Dead? was a fine instrument to defend people from the attack of spiritism, then flooding the earth and causing many to try to communicate with their dead at the close of World War I; while the booklet Millions Now Living Will Never Die! vividly presented the Kingdom as a reality yet to come, with its grand possibilities of living forever on earth under that glorious government.
35. What very effective work was accomplished with the book The Harp of God?
35 Thereafter, until 1926, the books Comfort for the Jews and The Harp of God, the latter of which contained the fundamental doctrines of the Bible, were for nearly half a decade the chief instruments for house-to-house witnessing. True, in that day The Harp of God did a mighty work. But as far as an up-to-date knowledge of Jehovah’s purposes was concerned, all the world were children, needing education in fundamental Bible doctrines. Men of good will became as little children and absorbed Bible instruction, were blessed and enlightened, and progressed as a result. However, there was nothing announcing the established Kingdom, its reigning King and the written judgments Jehovah required to be declared. There was nothing adequately reflecting the great light that had dawned upon Jehovah’s people since 1922.
TIME FOR WITNESS AND WARNING
36, 37. (a) What type of message was required for that time? (b) How did Jehovah provide it just in time?
36 This was a time of judgment. A more dynamic proclamation was due and necessary. The time had come; the organization was at a point where it could undertake these heavier obligations. His people were enlightened to serve their Maker’s holy cause. (Isa. 43:21) So in 1926 Jehovah, in his discriminating oversight, at the right time brought forth the book Deliverance, dedicated to God’s holy name with the words, “Ye are my witnesses . . . that I am God.”—Isaiah 43:12. This, as it were, now commissioned his prepared people to go forward as free, delivered heralds of his new world. A superlatively happy occasion this was!
37 Commenting on the book Deliverance, the then president of the Watch Tower Society said: “The time has come that a strenuous witness must be given to the people on the earth that Jehovah is the great God of the universe, and that he has set his King, Christ Jesus, upon his throne.” Almost simultaneously The Watch Tower (July 15, 1926, page 210) announced: “It has seemed fitting to arrange for another world-wide witness . . . and therefore Sunday, August 1st, has been appointed for that purpose. The topic to be used on this occasion is: ‘THE NEW WORLD BEGINNING.’ The classes are preparing to hold many public services on this date, that the people may be given a further special opportunity to hear about the King and his kingdom, now in our midst.” The time of deliverance, long awaited and greatly desired, was now seen to be here. Now Jehovah’s visible organization was even more eagerly and vigorously moving forward, equipped and commissioned for its glorious work.
38. (a) What fiery judgments of Jehovah were declared prior to 1926? (b) How did they lack as educational instruments?
38 But here we do not want to leave the impression that no fiery judgments of Jehovah had been declared by his organization prior to 1926. That would not be correct. Some very forceful and enlightening messages had been delivered all the way from 1922 on, but they were in tract form, very brief and limited in their field of education. To enumerate some of them: In 1922 “The Resolution” exposing Devil religion, over 10,000,000 of which were distributed in that year and over 13,000,000 more in 1923; “The Message of Hope” in 1925 had a great distribution; also the Watch Tower magazine in its columns kept on fearlessly exposing the League of Nations. But most of this material was suitable only to leave with people as enlightening information. House-to-house workers had nothing to place with people for permanent study and discussion until the book Deliverance provided all this and more.
39. What are some evidences of how the Watch Tower articles for 1926 reflected the enlightened progress necessary for that day?
39 The Watch Tower for 1926 also reflected this rejuvenated and enlightened progress of the theocratic organization, with such subjects as “Who Will Honor Jehovah?” “Obedience Leads to Life,” “Holiness unto the Lord,” “Sacrifice and Service,” “Sacrifice and Obedience,” “The Winepress,” “The Prince of Peace,” “The Stone of Zion,” “A Stone of Stumbling,” “Liberty of the Prisoners,” and “Earth’s Rightful Governor.” Wider and wider the floodgates of heaven were opening, and the expanding torrent of Kingdom truth kept gushing forth, first upon the ministers of Jehovah and then unto the whole inhabited earth.—Zech. 14:8, AS.
40. What significant events took place in London during the midsummer convention of 1926?
40 Add to this the 1926 midsummer convention at London, England, where “A Testimony to the Rulers of the World” was presented, then later printed and distributed to millions. And, too, the public talk there, “Why World Powers Are Tottering—The Remedy,” boldly declaring and emphasizing the fact that Christendom’s nations, having now chosen its disgusting League of Nations instead of Jehovah’s established kingdom by Christ Jesus, were falling to their final and total destruction; but that the rejected, permanently set Kingdom actually would prove to be the only light, the only remedy for all persons of good will.—The Watch Tower, July 15, 1926.
41. What effect did the culminating of all these events have upon Jehovah’s people?
41 Occurring in 1926, all those arresting events fixed that year as one of extraordinary happiness for Jehovah’s gathered name-people. That year marked the end of the 1,335-day waiting period. It ushered in a new era, a never-ending season of orderly service, of systematic, definite education as to established-Kingdom realities. Small beginning, yes, to compare with what we now see, but, nonetheless, for its time, mighty, unparalleled.—Zech. 4:9, 10, AS.
42, 43. How did the years 1927 and 1928 show continuance of the work’s expansion?
42 In the following year, 1927, Jehovah’s advancing Kingdom proclaimers happily took to themselves for study and worldwide distribution the book Creation. In that year they also seized the suddenly and greatly widening use of radio for earth-wide publication of the Kingdom message.
43 Then in 1928 came more happifying equipment for the irresistibly forward moving Kingdom heralds: the books Reconciliation and Government. And so on and on, with each successive year, with increase after increase of the growing crowd of Kingdom announcers, their working tools and their manner of work have been grandly continuing to expand. Today, in retrospect, we mark 1926 as the starting time of this ever-deepening special happiness of those who, having endured, finally came to the end of the foretold 1,335 days in that marked year.
COMPARISONS
44. How was growth in number of Kingdom publishers affected by the progressing light of truth?
44 In conclusion, let us of today’s hundreds and hundreds of thousands of regular readers of this journal’s present issue of 1,825,000 copies—let us here pause and reflect upon the overflowing happiness that most of us shared in spirit while other scores of thousands of us of the same one fold under the One Shepherd were sharing that boundless happiness both in spirit and by our personal presence at the New World Society Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses during those golden days of July, 1953, at and near the Yankee Stadium in New York, culminating on that high eighth day in the public talk for not only the listening 165,829 but the many more, uncounted, who at the same hour had their dials set for and were hearing “After Armageddon—God’s New World” being broadcast by the New World station WBBR!
45, 46. (a) What relationship did the happy year 1926 have to the far-flung and steadily expanding organization of the present? (b) Upon what does any individual’s continuing share in Jehovah’s New World society depend?
45 Of that great crowd here in and near New York comparatively few, perhaps five or ten thousand, then could recall that in 1914, in the United States, only about three hundred full-time “colporteurs” (now pioneers) regularly disseminated Bible truths under Watch Tower Society direction. Then no record at all was being kept of occasional or regular preaching from house to house by any part-time (congregation) publishers. Eight years later (1922) the little band of both full-time and part-time house-to-house Kingdom preachers numbered 2,814. Until 1926 that number was not exceeded. But in 1927, immediately following the foretold beginning of the great happiness, due to begin at the end of the 1,335-day period (in 1926), 3,357 pioneer and congregation house-to-house publishers were joyously sharing in telling of Jehovah’s kingdom. Then the next year (1928), almost doubling again in the United States, that happy host comprised 6,040. But in the world there were 23,988 ministers preaching. And so during the ensuing twenty-five years until now, throughout all earth’s lands and in isles afar, this endlessly expanding visible host (numbering in 1953 over 519,982) zealously and joyously continues “announcing Jehovah’s kingdom”!
46 Truly 1926 ushered in a time of happiness that will prove endless. Happy indeed is the lot of all who now willingly place themselves within Jehovah’s clean organization, there heartily sharing in its progressing activity. For all diligent, happy talkers of the happy God’s New World society, his protection, preservation and final deliverance into his everlasting new world depend upon our gratefully abiding in and being obedient to his established kingdom under his unconquerable King, Christ Jesus. Unitedly let us therefore continue to subject ourselves to this divine Authority, for the growing praise of Jehovah’s name.—Rom. 13:1, NW.
And it shall come to pass in the latter days, that the mountain of Jehovah’s house shall be established on the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many peoples shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths.—Isa. 2:2, 3, AS.
[Picture on page 345]
Deliverance—1926

