Announcements
GREAT THINGS AT HAND!
Before the month of June is over three of Jehovah’s witnesses’ 1954 district assemblies will already be history—but what history they will make! New World society gatherings are always outstanding, and this year’s district assemblies can be looked forward to with keen anticipation by all who put God first.
While the New World society’s tremendous international gatherings impress the world, its smaller district assemblies, held throughout the land, make provision for an even greater number of new ones to personally witness the unity and godliness of this working Christian organization. So, whether newly acquainted with the truth, or many years in its service, do not fail to carry out your plans to attend this mighty spiritual feast to be held in twenty-one major cities of the United States and Canada between now and August 22. Cities where these assemblies will be held on June 24-27 are listed below:
Boston, Mass., Fenway Park. Cincinnati, Ohio, Cincinnati Gardens, 2250 Seymour Ave. Richmond, Va., Mooers Field, 1700 Roseneath Rd.
WORK WITHOUT LOITERING OR COMPLAINING
“Do not loiter at your business” of preaching, is Jehovah’s wise counsel. Rather, he tells us at Romans 12:11 (NW) to “be aglow with the spirit. Be slaves to Jehovah.” That is the attitude of all Jehovah’s witnesses rejoicing in the grand Kingdom hope. They serve God without any desire to loiter or complain as they present the good news to all they can reach. You also can serve. During June present the book “New Heavens and a New Earth”, together with the booklet After Armageddon—God’s New World, on a contribution of only 50 cents. Ask any of Jehovah’s witnesses about this activity, or write to the Society.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
The Society’s offices, factory and Bethel home in Brooklyn, New York, will be closed from July 31 to August 15, inclusive. Orders and correspondence sent in during that period will not be handled until some time after the reopening of the offices. Please anticipate your needs and place your orders in ample time for attention before the vacation period.
ARE YOU SURE?
Everyone desiring to worship God in spirit and in truth must make sure his thoughts are in accord with those contained in the Bible. To the point is this apostolic counsel, “Make sure of all things; hold fast to what is right.” The handy reference book “Make Sure of All Things” has been especially prepared so that one can ascertain, in a matter of minutes, what the Bible says on a subject. In its 416 pages Scripture texts are topically arranged without comment. Get your copy now for 75 cents.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 27: 1926 Ushers In a Time of Great Happiness, ¶1-23.
Week of July 4: 1926 Ushers In a Time of Great Happiness, ¶24-46.

