Work Without Loitering or Complaining
AS Christians we have dedicated ourselves to the doing of God’s will as exemplified by Christ Jesus. Doing that will, of course, means work. What kind of work? Making disciples of people of all nations, preaching the good news of Jehovah’s kingdom. And how shall we do this work? Without loitering: “Do not loiter at your business.” And without complaining: “Why should a living son of earth complain, . . . ? Let us search out our ways and examine them well, and let us return unto Yahweh.”—Rom. 12:11, NW; Lam. 3:39, 40, Ro.a
No work is more important than that which we as Christians have been given to do, and the time in which to accomplish it is very limited. In Sheol we certainly cannot do any work. Besides, faith without works is dead. Good reasons why we should not loiter at our business, are they not?—Eccl. 9:10; Jas. 2:26.
To be able to do our work diligently and without complaining we must form the right mental habits, train our thoughts. We must take delight in Jehovah’s law and meditate on it day and night. In fact, we cannot do our work effectively unless we are contented, unless we find happiness and joy therein. Complaining on the part of the slaves reflects unfavorably upon their Master. Dare we find fault with Jehovah God?—Ps. 1:2.
By feeding our minds with the right kind of spiritual food we shall become forward-looking, strong in hope and faith, like Joshua and Caleb, and not like the other ten spies. We want to enter the promised new world, but we shall not if we complain, any more than the complaining Israelites entered the land of promise.—Deut. 1:34-40.
Further, let us be content with wherever Jehovah is pleased to place us in his organization, not grumbling as did Aaron and Miriam against Moses, because of his greater privileges. It is not what we have or whom we know that counts, but what we are doing with what we have. The thing to do is to be content with our place while seeking to improve our efficiency. Advancement and responsibility come only to the mature ones. And once given the burdens that go with responsibility, let us not complain because of their weight, as Moses once did, but, with Jehovah’s help, joyfully bear them.
Nor have we any valid grounds for complaining because we may be corrected or chastened through Jehovah’s organization. True, it may hurt at the time, but if we learn by it we are happy, for all correction helps us to keep in line for eternal life. And should we have a difference or misunderstanding with another, rather than complain, why not go to that one, be willing to yield a little and thus win our brother?—Heb. 12:11.
Not even persecution offers a just cause for complaining. Jehovah is all-wise, all-loving and all-powerful. He is directing the work and he has not asked us to advise him. If we have the freedom to preach publicly, let us make the most of our opportunities, and should we suffer persecution or be restrained behind prison walls, we can still be happy, for it is a privilege to suffer for righteousness. And even there we can witness, for the Word of God is not bound.—Matt. 5:10-12; 2 Tim. 2:9.
Having a happy God, a happy King, a happy message, let us neither loiter nor complain, but rather likewise be happy, ever content with what Jehovah has given us to do and looking well to the responsibilities laid upon us.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, January 15, April 1, 1953.

