How to Get More Joy From Meetings
1 Meetings are vital to our spiritual well-being. The joy that we derive from them is directly related to what we do before, during, and after meetings. How can we help ourselves and others to keep the joy in attending meetings at a high level?
2 Before Meetings: Preparation has a direct bearing on the enjoyment we get from meetings. When we are well prepared, we are more inclined to pay attention and to participate. Additionally, any meeting assignment that we receive should be prepared well, with the objectives of conveying the information accurately according to instructions and of holding the interest of the audience. We should rehearse thoroughly. When we contribute to lively and upbuilding meetings that benefit everyone, our personal progress becomes evident and we have greater joy.​—1 Tim. 4:15, 16.
3 During Meetings: Commenting at meetings can help us enjoy them more. Parts that call for audience participation should be viewed as personal assignments for everyone in the congregation. Comments that are concise and to the point usually achieve the most good. Briefly relating upbuilding experiences can be very encouraging and invigorating, and we should be alert to include these whenever the program calls for them. (Prov. 15:23; Acts 15:3) When presenting a part on the meeting, we should speak with enthusiasm and conviction, making it interesting, realistic, and practical.
4 After Meetings: Sharing with others a kind word, a friendly greeting, and a few key points that were considered at meetings will benefit us all. Expressing our joy at seeing the young, the old, and the new ones participate deepens the love of the brotherhood. Instead of speaking negatively of some who may miss meetings, we should share with them our joy from attending, thereby encouraging them to attend.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
5 Let us not deprive ourselves of this essential provision for having an interchange of encouragement. (Rom. 1:11, 12) By conscientiously contributing every earnest effort, we can all maintain joy in attending Christian meetings.

