Service Meetings for October
Week Starting October 4
Song 147
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
17 min: “God’s Prophetic Word Will All Come True!” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Point out a few details from the new book that highlight the significance of our times.
18 min: Be Magazine Conscious! State the total number of magazines placed by the congregation last month. How does this compare with the number received from the Society? If there is a large difference, what needs to be done? Invite the audience to comment on the following: (1) Each publisher should order an adequate but appropriate supply. (2) View every Saturday as Magazine Day. (3) Arrange your personal service schedule to include some magazine activity every month. (4) Plan to do more informal witnessing using magazines to start conversations. (5) Take specialized articles to business and professional people who are most likely to be interested in them. (6) Keep an accurate record of placements, and build up a magazine route, returning regularly with the latest issues. (7) Make good use of any older copies of the magazines so that none accumulate. Display the current magazines, and point out articles that are likely to stir interest. Have an adult and a youngster each demonstrate a brief magazine presentation.​—See the September 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry insert.
Song 105 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 11
Song 194
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “How to Get More Joy From Meetings.” Questions and answers. Cite specific examples of how we can show consideration and be encouraging to one another at the meetings. Invite audience to relate examples from their own experiences.
Song 152 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 18
Song 196
10 min: Local announcements and field service experiences.
13 min: “Are You Moving?” An encouraging talk by the secretary. When publishers find it necessary to move to another congregation, it is important that they get well established in their new surroundings so as to avoid any spiritual setbacks. Stress the need to let the elders know about such plans and to request their assistance in contacting the new congregation.
22 min: “What Will You Say to a Jewish Person?” Questions and answers. Explain the differences between Orthodox, Reform, and Conservative Judaism. (See Mankind’s Search for God, pages 226-7.) Point out areas where we are likely to establish common ground with a Jewish person. Demonstrate a well-prepared presentation. For more information on Judaism, see February 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry insert; Reasoning book, pages 22-3; and Mankind’s Search for God, chapter 9.
Song 142 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 25
Song 179
15 min: Local announcements. Help all to prepare to offer the Require brochure or the Knowledge book during November. Explain how to put together a presentation that focuses on the question, “Does God answer prayers?” Use points from lesson 7 in the brochure or chapter 16, paragraphs 12-14, in the book. Demonstrate a simple presentation that incorporates one scripture.
15 min: Finding Answers to Bible Questions. A ministerial servant is approached by a publisher who has encountered an interested person with a Bible question. Rather than giving the answer, the ministerial servant explains how to find it. First, he reviews the suggestions found in the School Guidebook, study 7, paragraphs 8-9. Then, together they research a question commonly raised in the local territory. They look up specific references that deal with the subject and find convincing points that clarify the underlying reason for the Bible’s answer. Encourage the audience to do this kind of rewarding study to research Bible questions.
15 min: Goals We Might Set. Talk and audience discussion. Review the practical goals outlined in the box on page 11 of the March 15, 1997, Watchtower. Include encouragement to share in auxiliary or regular pioneer service. Explain how achieving these goals can personally benefit us. Invite audience to relate some of the joys experienced when they were able to reach certain theocratic goals.
Song 151 and concluding prayer.

