What Will You Say to a Jewish Person?
1 In the first century, many of “the sons of Israel” responded appreciatively to the preaching of Jesus and his apostles. (Acts 10:36) As was true then, a number of sincere Jews today are wholeheartedly embracing the truth​—not only in Israel but also in Russia, the United States, and other countries. Would you like to be more successful in reaching out to Jewish people? The following suggestions will help you give a tactful witness both to religious and to secular Jews.
2 Witnessing to Religious Jews: It should be realized that religious Jews are often more concerned with observing the traditions of the rabbis than with defining specific doctrines. Indeed, they generally view tradition as having authority equal to the Scriptures. Hence, they are not necessarily interested in discussing deep Bible subjects. They also tend to think of the Bible as a Christian book. For that reason, it is usually best when referring to the Bible to use the terms “the Hebrew Scriptures,” “the Torah,” or “the Scriptures.” An excellent publication prepared especially for the Jewish population is the brochure Will There Ever Be a World Without War?
3 What topics might interest religious Jews? Well, they believe that there is one God, who is keenly interested in man. They also believe that God does intervene in human affairs. You might use these points to establish common ground. In addition, most Jews are keenly aware of the suffering of their people during World War II. They wonder why God permitted such injustice and when wickedness will come to an end. We are well equipped to answer such questions, referring, for example, to what our brothers experienced during the Holocaust.
4 Of course, to avoid alienating the householder, it is best not to bring up the matter of the identity of the Messiah too soon in the conversation. Instead, you might discuss the role that Moses played in Israel’s history and ask the householder if he believes that Moses’ teachings are relevant today. When it seems appropriate to discuss the identity of the Messiah, you might first read Deuteronomy 18:15, which states: “A prophet from your own midst, from your brothers, like me, is what Jehovah your God will raise up for you​—to him you people should listen.” Ask the householder who it was that Moses had in mind when he spoke of a prophet like himself. Then cover a few points in the World Without War brochure, page 14, paragraphs 17 and 18.
5 Secular Jews View Matters Differently: Not everyone who identifies himself as Jewish accepts the teachings of Judaism. Many Jews are secular in their outlook. They are more interested in promoting a separate Jewish identity, with its culture, tradition, and education, than in practicing the Jewish religion. Some secular Jews are agnostics​—a few are even atheists. Initially, little would be gained by quoting extensively from the Hebrew Scriptures. It would be more beneficial to approach the conversation as you would any discussion with a person who is not religious. You might explain, for example, how the Bible is practical for our day. If the householder does not believe that the Bible is inspired, some points in the World Without War brochure may be helpful, particularly those found in the section on page 3 entitled “The Bible​—Inspired by God?”
6 When witnessing to a Jewish person, you might say:
▪ “Most of us have had the sad experience of losing a loved one in death. What do you think happens to us when we die?” Allow for a response. Then direct the householder to the box entitled “Death and the Soul​—What Are They?” on page 22 of the World Without War brochure. The box compares what the Scriptures say about life after death with what the rabbis teach. Then turn to paragraph 17 on page 23, and show that according to the Scriptures, the dead will be resurrected to life on a paradise earth. Offer the brochure. In preparation for the return visit, you might mention that the patriarch Job entertained the resurrection hope. Refer to the scriptures cited at the end of paragraph 17, and offer to return and discuss them.
7 The books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, and Acts record experiences of Jews who listened to and acted on the truth. Jehovah is still holding the way to everlasting life open. Many sincere Jews may yet learn about Jehovah, the true God, so that they too can live forever in God’s new world.​—Mic. 4:1-4.

