A Recognizable Difference
PEOPLE in general earth wide are becoming more and more interested in the “emerging nations” of Africa. It is not surprising, then, that a question arises as to the extent to which this progress is to be credited to church missionaries in the past who were intent on making “Christians” out of African natives. A sociologist, Stanislav Andreski, writes in The African Predicament:
“There are millions of devout Christians who find the religious tepidity of the European residents deeply upsetting and are shocked by the sight of the Europeans drinking and lounging scantily dressed around the swimming pools when they should be going to church. Nonetheless, it cannot be said that the Christian faith has made much impact on the tenor of human relations in Africa. As in other parts of the world, for the great majority the religion is a matter of the ritual and a few taboos​—mostly without any ethical significance. The missionaries have succeeded in making people ashamed of nakedness (which, incidentally, was one of the reasons why in the early days they got financial support from the cotton manufacturers) but not of polygamy. And as for honesty and veracity towards non-kinsmen or dedication to work, the missionaries might not have been there at all.”​—P. 83.
This is not to say, though, that real Christianity is not in evidence, the kind of Christianity that in the first century aided individuals to make over their moral habits, outlook on life and attitudes toward work. This same genuine Christianity based on God’s Word is still producing such good results and the difference is quite noticeable.
Dr. Norman Long discusses in his book Social Change and the Individual (1968) what he observed in a careful study of the social and religious situation in one African rural community, a community where there are many of Jehovah’s witnesses living and practicing Christianity. Note the difference in regard to honesty and trust. The Foreword of the book observes: “Put bluntly, while non-Witnesses can trust only their kin (and not always them), Witnesses can trust both kin and fellow Witnesses.” What about polygamous marriages? Dr. Long writes: “I cannot here discuss in detail the content of the social ethic preached by Jehovah’s Witnesses . . . But the ethic places important emphasis on the nuclear family as a Christian grouping, . . . and puts a ban on polygynous marriage.”​—P. 78.
Is the difference to be noted also in other aspects of life, such as willingness to work? Dr. Long points out: “It appears that Jehovah’s Witnesses commend a certain style of life. A Witness should be well dressed (which for men means wearing a jacket and tie, especially when out preaching or attending religious meetings) and clean in his habits. He should be attentive to the needs of his family, both spiritually and materially. . . . Jehovah’s Witnesses do not see their secular style of life as separate from their religious ways. To them it is rather an extension of their religious approach: to be a member of the New World Society means spiritual advancement and promise of a new life, but this also implies a certain practical orientation towards life in this world. . . . Time and money are valued and should not be wasted; they should be spent improving oneself spiritually, socially and economically. Throughout there is an emphasis on individualism and industriousness, and church organization and discipline work to uphold the values of the group.”​—Pp. 215, 216.
What about applying oneself to the task of learning to read and write? The author observes: “Every member must be well versed in the Bible and must acquire the ability to teach others, and to do this he has to be able to read the scriptures. Hence all congregations run literacy classes and special Bible study sessions.” What is the result? “If we compare Witnesses with non-Witnesses in the parish in terms of literacy and level of education, we find that 87.2 per cent of male Witnesses and 31.9 per cent of female Witnesses are literate as against 51 per cent male and 11.7 per cent female non-Witnesses.”​—Pp. 157, 216.
So the more that attention is focused on Africa, the more it becomes apparent: The vast difference resulting from the presence of true Christianity!

