
Peace and Happiness Soon!









Sanath and Vasana were thrilled to know that one day the earth would be filled with good and honest people who would treat one another in a loving way. They thought about how wonderful life would be in a world without hunger, sickness, or death, a world in which peace and happiness would be everyone’s lot. How they wished all of this could come immediately!
“When will all these things happen?” Sanath wanted to know.
“It is interesting that you should ask that question,” Buddhika told Sanath. “Let me ask you, Sanath, do you remember hearing about the man named Jesus?”
“Yes, I have heard of him,” Sanath replied. “I understand that he said some very wise things. But what does that have to do with my question?”
“Well, some 2,000 years ago, when Jesus was on earth, his followers, or disciples, asked the same question that you did,” Buddhika explained. “In answer, Jesus gave them a ‘sign’ that would be made up of many events. He told them that when all the events making up the sign should appear together, that would be the time the promised change is near.”​—Matthew 24:3.




Features of “the sign” showing that changes will soon come. Do you see them?




“A sign?” inquired Sanath. “That’s interesting. Tell us about it.”
“The various aspects of this sign are all written down in the Bible,” Buddhika told Sanath. Opening the Bible, he said: “Here are a few of them.”
“Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom.”​—Matthew 24:7.

“There will be food shortages.”​—Matthew 24:7.

“Increasing of lawlessness.”​—Matthew 24:12.

“Great earthquakes.”​—Luke 21:11.

“In one place after another pestilences.”​—Luke 21:11.


Right away, Sanath and Vasana said that all these things seemed to be happening today. In fact, for that very reason, they felt troubled and anxious about the future.
“The fulfillment of this sign means that Jehovah God’s rulership over the earth will soon take effect,” Buddhika said. “The Bible calls this new rulership, or government, God’s Kingdom.” Buddhika then read a Bible verse that shows what this Kingdom will shortly do:
“In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”​—Daniel 2:44.


“When God’s Kingdom asserts its rulership over the earth,” Buddhika continued, “all wickedness, injustice, and corruption will be gone forever. What a wonderful thing to contemplate!”





All of this was very exciting to Sanath and Vasana, and they very much wanted to be a part of this peaceful new world.
“Is there something that Vasana and I must do so that we can have that wonderful future?” Sanath asked.
“You know very well, Sanath and Vasana, that anything worthwhile has its price,” Buddhika replied. “Think of Adam and Eve and what they lost. What can you learn from the way they acted?”
“They lost perfect life in Paradise because they did not live in harmony with God’s requirements,” said Sanath.
“In much the same way, Jehovah God has requirements for us today,” Buddhika explained. “If we want to enjoy life in the Paradise that he will soon bring about on earth, we need to learn about him and his requirements and strive to live in harmony with them.”
Sanath agreed that all of that was very reasonable, but he wondered how he and Vasana could possibly do so.




Jehovah invites us to walk on the path to peace and happiness




“To obey Jehovah God is not a burden because, as our loving Father, he asks us to do only what is in our best interests,” Buddhika assured him. “He not only shows us the pathway to a peaceful new world but also invites us to be guided by him along the way. Notice this loving invitation found in the Bible.”
“I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself, the One causing you to tread in the way in which you should walk. O if only you would actually pay attention to my commandments! Then your peace would become just like a river, and your righteousness like the waves of the sea. And your offspring would become just like the sand, and the descendants from your inward parts like the grains of it. One’s name would not be cut off or be annihilated from before me.”​—Isaiah 48:17-19.







Sanath and Vasana both felt the warmth of those beautiful words. They really wanted a way of life that would benefit them and their family. In fact, they could think of nothing better than to live with all their children in a righteous and peaceful world.
“All these wonderful blessings can be yours if you learn what Jehovah God is teaching us and try your best to follow it,” Buddhika told them.
“How do we go about learning all these things?” Sanath asked eagerly. “Could you and Anushka help us?”
“We would be delighted to do so. In fact, we have just what you need to help you find and pursue the pathway to peace and happiness!”



Review Box
  What question similar to Sanath’s did Jesus’ disciples ask?​—Matthew 24:3.

  What “sign” did Jesus give?​—Matthew 24:7, 12; Luke 21:11.

  Do you see this “sign” being fulfilled today?

  What help did Sanath and Vasana want from Buddhika and Anushka?




