
Promises That We Can Trust









Sanath thought a lot about what Buddhika had told him. Of course, it was not the first time that Sanath had heard about the Bible. He had always known that it is a holy book, but now he began to think that if the Bible really contains true prophecies, perhaps it is more than just an ancient holy book. Yet, he wondered how those men who wrote down the words in the Bible could have known those scientific facts and historical events so far in advance. Where did their knowledge come from?
Sanath and Vasana went to visit Buddhika and Anushka the next day, and Sanath asked Buddhika that very question: “How could the writers have known all those things so far in advance?”




God directed men to write down his promises for our benefit




Buddhika explained: “The men who wrote those things were not the originators, or authors, of what they wrote. They were like secretaries who wrote down information given them by someone else. The real Author was actually our original Father.”
“Our original Father?” asked Sanath. “Who is he?”
“He is the One who gave us life originally,” Buddhika explained. “And, like any real father, He also has a name.” Turning in his Bible to Psalm 83:18, Buddhika read to Sanath:





“That people may know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.”


Buddhika showed Sanath another text in the Bible. It described Jehovah as “the One telling from the beginning the finale, and from long ago the things that have not been done.” (Isaiah 46:10) To explain this verse, Buddhika said: “Just as our natural father has more experience in life and often knows much more than we do, Jehovah, our original Father, is greater in knowledge and wisdom than all of us and can even foretell the future. For this reason, he was able to let the Bible writers know what to write about the future.”
“Does Jehovah know what future Vasana and I will have?” Sanath wanted to know.





“Well,” Buddhika explained, “Jehovah does not determine in advance the outcome of each person’s life individually. But like a father, he knows our problems, and he wants to help us.”
Buddhika told Sanath that from the Bible, they could find out what Jehovah would do to help them have a happy and peaceful life. They could also learn how the decisions they make could affect them now and in the future.
Sanath thought that all of this was very logical because he too was a father, and he would do all that he could to help his children to have a happy future. Buddhika was happy to show Sanath and Vasana some of the promises that are contained in the Bible. These are a few of the things he showed them:
“He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.”​—Psalm 46:9.

“They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating. For like the days of a tree will the days of my people be.”​—Isaiah 65:21, 22.

“There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.”​—Psalm 72:16.

“He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Revelation 21:4.






The Bible tells about the wonderful future that awaits us




Sanath was touched by all these wonderful promises in the Bible. He really liked the idea of a world where everyone would be treated justly, where sickness and death would be no more, and where there would be plenty of food for everyone. Vasana was impressed too, but she thought it was all too good to be true.
“I can well understand how you feel, Vasana,” said Buddhika. “But think about this: Just as we have seen, many other prophecies in the Bible have been accurately fulfilled. Does that not assure us that these promises will also be fulfilled? Actually, the Author of the Bible guarantees their fulfillment with these words: ‘Write, because these words are faithful and true.’”​—Revelation 21:5.



Review Box
  How did the men who wrote down the words in the Bible know what to write?

  Who actually is the Author of the Bible?

  What future does the Bible promise for mankind?

  Why are the promises in the Bible trustworthy?




