
The Search for Practical Guidance









Vasana noticed that her neighbors, Buddhika and his wife, Anushka, always seemed so contented and peaceful. She told Sanath that she was going to ask Anushka what their secret was. So the next time she saw Anushka, she asked her.
“Well, Vasana, we really have the same sort of problems and worries that you and Sanath have,” Anushka said. “But not too long ago, I found a book that gives some very practical guidance for me and my family. This book shows us the pathway to peace and happiness. It helps us to be happy despite the pressures and worries that we face every day.”





Vasana was intrigued. Anushka explained more about this book. “It is an ancient book from the Middle East and the Orient. Yet, the book is for all people because it transcends all religious and sectarian divisions. In fact, it has been translated into hundreds of languages, so that practically everyone can read it.” Anushka also said that the book has often been quoted by educators and that it has even been the basis for the legal systems of many nations.
Vasana was really interested in seeing this book. That afternoon, she went to Anushka’s home. There Anushka showed her the practical guidance that this book offers on these topics:



Raising children






“Train up a boy according to the way for him; even when he grows old he will not turn aside from it.”

“Fathers, do not be irritating your children.”





Work and money management






“Let the stealer steal no more, but rather let him do hard work, doing with his hands what is good work, that he may have something to distribute to someone in need.”

“If anyone does not want to work, neither let him eat.”





Drugs and alcohol






“Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit.”

“Wine is a ridiculer, intoxicating liquor is boisterous, and everyone going astray by it is not wise.”





Moral values






“Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be without defilement.”

“Abstain from fornication.”

“Everyone that keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.”





Respect in family life






“Honor your father and your mother.”

“Listen to your father who caused your birth, and do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.”

“Let each one of you individually so love his wife as he does himself; on the other hand, the wife should have deep respect for her husband.”





For those who have a Bible, we list here the source of the quotations above.
Proverbs 22:6; Ephesians 6:4
Ephesians 4:28; 2 Thessalonians 3:10
2 Corinthians 7:1; Proverbs 20:1
Hebrews 13:4; 1 Thessalonians 4:3; Matthew 5:28
Ephesians 6:2; Proverbs 23:22; Ephesians 5:33

Review Box
  What did Vasana notice about her neighbors?

  What are some of the things that Anushka showed Vasana?

  Which points of guidance do you find valuable to you?




