
We All Need Guidance and Direction









Sanath was very worried.a Many things were troubling him. For a long time, he had been trying to find stable employment in order to care for his family. He wanted his children to have a good education and a better future. But all of this seemed beyond reach. The best that he could hope for was to remain healthy and keep on working so that he could earn enough to provide food for his family and pay the rent. But he was really concerned​—should something happen to him, who would look after his family?
Vasana, Sanath’s wife, was also worried. Lately, their relationship had become very tense. Sanath was always tired when he got home from work. Vasana really wanted him to help her teach the children proper manners and respect, but he had no time for them. Vasana was sad that she and Sanath often argued, and it was not really good for their children to see that. Then, what if one of their children should get sick? Where would they find the money for medicine and hospital care? Vasana did not even want to think about the possibility!





Sanath and Vasana also noticed that conditions in their community were no longer what they used to be. People had little time for one another, and the community spirit that the couple so fondly remembered did not seem to exist any longer. They could see that all their friends and relatives had problems similar to theirs and were worried about the future. It appeared that no one had real peace of mind anymore. Vasana often thought about how nice it would be to find a solution to these problems and thus have some peace and contentment. Even though Sanath and Vasana tried very hard, it seemed that everything they were striving for was just out of reach.
One day, Sanath and Vasana talked about their troubles.
“Wouldn’t it be wonderful if we could just find the pathway to peace and happiness?” asked Sanath.
“Oh, yes!” Vasana responded. “I have been thinking about that too. It would surely be the answer to all our problems.”





“But there are so many religious ideas and philosophies of life,” Sanath replied. “How can we possibly find out which one is the pathway to happiness? We can’t examine them all! Besides, just about every one of them claims to have the answer to life’s problems; yet, you have to admit that not one of them has really made much difference in people’s life. To me, it seems futile even to try.”
Although Vasana agreed with Sanath, deep down she wanted to find some help for her family. She felt that there had to be a way somehow.
Perhaps you too are concerned about some of the things that Sanath and Vasana were facing. Their problems are common around the world. People everywhere long for good health, peace of mind, and a happy family life. But it all seems so difficult to attain. Is there any hope of finding the pathway to peace and happiness?



The information in this publication is presented in the form of a series of imagined conversations between two couples.

