From Our Readers
Teenage Marriages
I thoroughly enjoyed the articles on teenage marriages. (September 22, 1983) It brought back thoughts from when I was married two years ago. I am 19 now. Personally I don’t recommend marrying that young, because it takes a lot of maturity physically, mentally and emotionally to make a marriage work. Our marriage has been a success due to our putting a high value on spiritual guidance. Daily we try to apply the scripture: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”​—Acts 20:35.
A. D., Canada
TV as Robbery Prevention
In “There Are Ways to Avoid Robbery” (January 22, 1983) you advised “A television set playing in the living room or den may also serve as a deterrent.” This makes sense, but I feel it is a heavy drain on earth’s limited and diminishing resources. This drain on power adds to pollution. I believe we must begin in the home to conserve energy and avoid pollution. Please include articles in your magazine that will awaken people to their responsibility of caring for and saving the earth. Burglary is a heavy loss, but I feel there can be more wholesome ways to fight it.
R. K., Trinidad
We agree that people should work to conserve resources and avoid pollution, and we will have articles on these subjects in the future, as we have had in the past. However, the benefits from the expenditure of resources, yes, even the need for it, must be weighed against any harm done. For example, a person may travel by means of an energy-consuming and polluting automobile to get to work. He may view doing so as a legitimate need. Similarly, a person living in an area where burglaries are common may view leaving the TV on for a few hours in an evening as justifiable to protect his property, even though a little energy is consumed and there may also be a slight risk of fire involved.​—ED.
Help With Ulcers
I have been a subscriber to Awake! since 1979 and want to congratulate you on the thorough and comprehensive articles published. Just a few days ago my wife consulted her doctor because of stomach pains. He said it could be an ulcer, but that in order to make sure it would be necessary to use a modern technique. I remembered reading the article “So You Think You Have an Ulcer?” (September 8, 1982) and asked him if he was referring to endoscopy. He replied yes and added that it was rather expensive. I then asked about the screening test whereby the patient drinks a milklike substance that outlines the esophagus, stomach and duodenum. He was very surprised and asked where I, a factory hand, had obtained the information. I was happy to tell him it was from Awake! At the hospital where our children were born I have had similar experiences with our dentist and our pediatrician in connection with other articles. Thank you for publishing helpful and useful information.
R. S., Brazil

