From Our Readers
The Homosexual Life-Style
I was interested in your article “The Homosexual Life-Style​—Just How Gay Is It?” (March 22, 1986) However, you imply that AIDS is Jehovah’s judgment on homosexuals. Do you believe that sickle-cell anemia, which affects primarily blacks, is Jehovah’s punishment of blacks? Also, AIDS has left lesbians unaffected. Does this mean that Jehovah dislikes gay males but smiles on lesbians? It is convenient for those who dislike homosexuals to draw a link between homosexuality and AIDS, but it is massively irresponsible.
M. D., United States
We neither stated nor implied that AIDS was God’s judgment on homosexuals. Sickness is part of sin and imperfection that all of us have inherited from Adam. (Romans 5:12) But it cannot be denied that certain actions bring certain unavoidable consequences. The tobacco smoker exposes himself to greater risk of lung cancer. The misuser of alcohol exposes himself to a greater risk of liver disease. The glutton exposes himself to dangers related to obesity. The link between homosexuality and AIDS has not been drawn by us but is a fact established by medical science. Though not expressions of God’s judgment, the specific consequences are linked to violations of God’s laws. At Galatians 6:7 it is stated: “Do not be misled: God is not one to be mocked. For whatever a man is sowing, this he will also reap.”​—ED.
Resisting Rape
Thank you for your article “Now You Are Going to Die!” (May 22, 1986) I might note some concerns about the advice given, however. Some rapists are very angry and sadistic in their approach and come armed with weapons and the intent to use them if there is the least provocation. Our Metropolitan Organization to Counter Sexual Assault suggests resistance, but if the woman is paralyzed by fear or her instincts tell her not to resist, we recognize that as appropriate. We would rather have someone live through the experience than be killed or seriously mutilated.
P. R., United States
The Bible does support the thought that a woman attacked by a rapist should scream and resist. True, the woman has to respond according to her assessment of the danger to her life, and we believe that is covered in the advice given in the box on page 23 (May 22, 1986). It should be kept in mind that submitting to rape gives no guarantee that the victim will not be beaten or killed afterward. See the article “They Resisted Rapists” in our issue of February 22, 1984.​—ED.
The Bomb and Man’s Future
I enjoyed very much reading your articles on “The Bomb and Man’s Future.” (May 22, 1986) However, I don’t believe that the article went far enough, such as urging readers (Christians) to oppose nuclear weapons by voting and letter writing to their lawmakers. Aloha.
J. G. B., Hawaii
Voting and writing to lawmakers suggests that there is a human solution to the problem. Our articles made very clear that only God’s Kingdom will bring lasting peace and security to lovers of peace everywhere. Jehovah’s Witnesses pray for that Kingdom, they live in harmony with its principles of peace, and they spend their time telling others about it.​—ED.

