God’s Word​—The Best Defense!
IF someone tried to rob you, what would you do? Quickly hand over your possessions or fight back in an effort to protect what is yours? In today’s violent world, many people believe that the use of force to protect one’s property is justified. Owning a gun or training in some form of martial arts is viewed as a safeguard against attack. But do they really bring the best results? Often, people who have used weapons have regretted it afterward. In contrast, however, wise King Solomon said: “Do not say: ‘I will pay back evil!’ Hope in Jehovah, and he will save you.”​—Proverbs 20:22.
Recently, a staff member of the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Brooklyn, New York, went to the home of some friends in Brooklyn. “As I arrived in front of the building, a man in an army jacket came charging at me with a knife, demanding: ‘I want your money! Give me all your money!’
“Seeing that I was not rattled by his attack, he ordered: ‘Get inside the building! I don’t want anyone to hear! Get in!’ Once inside, he demanded my wallet. He found only $2.00. As he sorted through the rest of its contents, I explained to him that I was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
“Pretending not to hear, he insisted on more money. Then, sticking his free hand in the pockets of my trousers while the other hand clutched the knife, he discovered a 20-dollar bill I had tucked away. Hoping to find more, he continued his search, tossing whatever he found in my pockets onto the floor. ‘What are you using the money for?’ I asked. ‘For drugs?’ ‘Yes,’ he replied. I then explained: ‘Do you know that if I was not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, you would be a dead man? I have been trained in karate. More than once you have been careless with that knife.’
“As I referred to the Bible to clarify my position as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, he reached into his front pocket and withdrew a small book and exclaimed, ‘Look, I have a Bible!’ It was a miniature pocket-size Bible.
“‘Fine help that is to you,’ I said. ‘You’re not even applying what it says there.’ I took his Bible and read to him Matthew 6:33 and John 17:3 and emphasized the importance not only of taking in Bible knowledge but also of applying it in his life.
“He confessed that two months earlier he had been released from prison. Out of a job and in need of money, he took up stealing. Reading 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10, I showed him that thieves will not inherit God’s Kingdom. I added: ‘One day you might just come across someone who is foolish enough to fight over his money, and you may end up killing him, or he may end up killing you, or you will eventually get caught and end up going back to prison!’ ‘Don’t say that!’ he exclaimed fearfully. I reminded him that ‘those who live by the sword will perish by the sword.’​—Matthew 26:52.
“Apparently moved by the Scriptures, he apologized. Hanging his head, he noticed what he had thrown to the floor while emptying my pockets. Sheepishly, he picked up everything and handed it to me, but he kept the money. Moving toward the door, he asked if I would pray for him. I explained, ‘What you did to me was wrong, but most of all, you sinned against Jehovah. It is between you and him.’
“On leaving, he asked if I would do him a favor. Stretching out his palm, which held the knife, he asked, ‘Could you throw this away for me? I am through robbing people.’ I took the knife and replaced it with an Awake! magazine.”​—As reported by Ricky Hanagami.

