Announcements
▪ Literature offer for April and May: Feature individual copies of both The Watchtower and Awake! When making return visits on interested people, which may include calling on those who attended the Memorial and/or other theocratic events but who are not actively associated with the organization, concentrate on placing the Worship God book. Every effort should be made to start a home Bible study, especially if some individuals have already studied the Knowledge book and the Require brochure. June: Learn From the Great Teacher. If individuals say that they have no children, offer the Require brochure. When using the brochure, concentrate on starting home Bible studies. July and August: Offer the Knowledge book or the Require brochure. When householders already have these publications, use another appropriate brochure that the congregation has in stock.
▪ Beginning in April, district convention badge cards for 2004 will automatically be included with literature shipments. It will not be necessary to request these unless you have a foreign-language group associated with your congregation. Based on the size of each congregation, cards will be shipped in lots of 25. If the congregation needs additional badge cards, these should be requested on the Literature Request Form (S-14). Plastic badge holders must be requested for any in the congregation who desire them.
▪ DISTRICT CONVENTION PARKING: At all convention sites where we have secured control of the parking facilities, the spaces will be made available at no charge on a first-come, first-served basis. No parking tickets will be used, but convention badge cards will serve as identification for parking. Only those who have a state-approved disabled license plate or placard will be allowed to park in the parking reserved for the disabled. Being aware that considerable expense is involved, we can show our appreciation by making voluntary contributions to the worldwide work at our Kingdom Hall or at the convention. Any checks contributed at the convention should be made payable to “Watch Tower.” Since parking space is usually limited, carpooling should be done to the extent possible rather than having only one or two persons per car.

