Be Holy in All Your Conduct
 1. Why is it important to be holy in all our conduct?
1 As servants of the holy God, Jehovah, we strive to be holy in all our conduct. (1 Pet. 1:15, 16) This means that we endeavor to uphold Jehovah’s standards in all aspects of our lives. The district convention this year will provide us with a special opportunity to display holy conduct.
 2. How can we manifest fine conduct at hotels?
2 At Hotels: One manager of a hotel used by convention delegates last year said: “Jehovah’s Witnesses were such nice people to have here. . . . You are the type of people we want.” Observing the following reminders will help us to maintain our good reputation: (1) Do not reserve more rooms than will actually be needed, and do not have more people stay in your room than allowed. (2) If you must cancel your reservation, notify the hotel immediately. (3) Take a luggage cart only when you are ready to use it. (4) Do not cook in noncooking rooms. (5) Leave a tip for the housekeeper each day. (6) Do not abuse any complimentary breakfast, coffee, and ice provisions that are made available for guests to use while they are at the hotel. (7) Display the fruitage of the spirit in dealing with the hotel staff, especially during very busy check-in and checkout times.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.
 3. How may the conduct of younger Witnesses impress others?
3 Our good manners can give a powerful witness. Last year a young Witness politely asked a hotel desk clerk for some stationery and then thanked her. This touched the clerk, and she was heard to remark: “You just don’t see young ones with such polite manners anymore.” However, in a few cases, unsupervised children have been observed swimming, playing in elevators, talking loudly, and running in hallways. Parents should not allow their children to be let on the loose but should monitor them to ensure that their conduct brings praise to Jehovah.​—Prov. 29:15.
 4. How can we show consideration for others when dining out?
4 At Restaurants: A waiter in a restaurant near one convention commented: “Witnesses are different. They show respect for others.” Good conduct includes avoiding loud speech and laughter that may disturb others who are dining. We should also remember that in many places it is customary to leave a 15 to 20 percent tip, depending on the service. Even when eating and drinking, we seek to do all things for God’s glory.​—1 Cor. 10:31.
 5. What does good conduct include at the convention site?
5 At the Convention: Especially should our fine conduct be in evidence at the convention site. Please cooperate with the attendants’ direction, both in the parking lot and in the auditorium. (Heb. 13:17) Families should sit together rather than allow their children, including teenagers, to sit with groups of other young people. Recorders of any type should not be connected to the facility’s electrical or sound system and may only be used in a way that does not disturb others. If you intend to take pictures, no flash should be used during sessions. Pagers and cell phones should be set so as not to cause a distraction. If you observe an accident in the facility, instead of calling 911, please inform an attendant or the First Aid Department. Qualified medical assistance is available on site.
 6. How does our conduct at conventions glorify God?
6 Our conduct sets us apart from others and glorifies our God. (1 Pet. 2:12) At the convention, the actions of Jehovah’s Witnesses will be on display. Therefore, be determined to be holy in all your conduct.
[Box on page 5]
Display Holy Conduct
▪ Observe all hotel rules
▪ Monitor children closely
▪ Be considerate of others

