Chaste, Praiseworthy Personal Appearance
 1. In preparation for the district convention, why should we give consideration to our appearance?
1 “Jehovah’s Witnesses are the best! Your people are kind and well dressed, and they exhibit deep respect.” So said a hotel representative about the brothers and sisters at one district convention last year. At another convention, a hotel worker commented: “It is evident that your people dress for God.” Yes, convention delegates are noticed by others. We therefore want to dress “in a manner worthy of the good news,” and this often moves outsiders to compliment us and makes it obvious that we are ministers of God. (Phil. 1:27) As we prepare for the district convention, it is appropriate to give advance thought to our appearance.
 2. Why is it a challenge to dress and groom oneself in a chaste manner?
2 “The wisdom from above is first of all chaste,” wrote the disciple James. (Jas. 3:17) Reflecting chasteness in our appearance can be a challenge. Satan’s immoral world influences people to adopt immodest, sensual, and outlandish styles that are not befitting. (1 John 2:15-17) Hence, when making decisions regarding dress and grooming, we need to heed the Bible’s admonition to “repudiate ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind . . . amid this present system of things.” (Titus 2:12) Never would we want to disturb others by our appearance, be they our brothers, hotel and restaurant personnel, or other observers.​—1 Cor. 10:32, 33.
 3. What questions will help us to examine our personal appearance?
3 Modest, Well-Arranged Dress: When preparing for the convention, ask yourself: ‘Is my clothing modest, or does it draw undue attention to me? Does it show respect for the feelings of others? Are my blouses too low at the neckline or too short? Are my dresses revealing or tight? Is my clothing clean and free of offensive odors? When obtaining complimentary breakfast provisions at the hotel or relaxing after the program, will I have the neat, clean appearance of a minister, or will my clothing be sloppy, faddish, overly casual, and inappropriate for a convention delegate wearing a badge card? Would the clothing I wear during leisure time make me embarrassed to witness informally?’​—Rom. 15:2, 3; 1 Tim. 2:9.
 4. How can others help us to present a chaste appearance?
4 We can benefit from the observations of mature Christians. Wives should ask their husbands how their clothing might appear to others. Godly parents can help their teenage children in this regard. Moreover, reverent older sisters can “recall the young women to their senses . . . to be sound in mind, chaste” in their appearance “so that the word of God may not be spoken of abusively.” (Titus 2:3-5) Our publications provide helpful illustrations depicting modest, well-arranged dress.
 5. How can all of us bring praise to Jehovah during the convention?
5 Bring Praise to Jehovah: District conventions provide an excellent opportunity for all of us, not just program participants, to praise Jehovah. Of course, our Christian conduct and speech will honor him. But the first thing many observers notice about us is our dress and grooming. May all of us bring praise to Jehovah by our chaste, praiseworthy personal appearance.​—Ps. 148:12, 13.
[Box on page 6]
Aids to Praiseworthy Appearance
▪ God’s Word
▪ Self-examination
▪ Observations of others
▪ Christian publications

