Service Meeting Schedule
Note: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer months. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the “Walk With God” District Convention. Where appropriate, use 15 minutes on the last Service Meeting before attending the convention to repeat pointed counsel from this month’s insert that applies locally. During the month of October, an entire Service Meeting will be arranged to review highlights of the convention program. In preparation for that discussion, all of us can take meaningful notes at the convention, including a list of specific points that we wish to apply personally in our own life and in the field ministry. Then we can encourage others by explaining how we have applied the suggestions.
Week Starting April 12
Song 93
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 8, demonstrate how to present the April 15 Watchtower and the April 22 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. In each demonstration, show a different way to handle the conversation stopper “I’m busy.”​—See Reasoning book, pages 19-20.
15 min: “Offering Jehovah Our Best.”a When discussing paragraph 4, invite audience to comment on specific ways we can show love for people when carrying out our ministry.
20 min: “Let Us Exalt His Name Together.”b To be handled by the congregation secretary, using the questions that are provided. Mention the convention to which the congregation is assigned. The program times are listed in the December 2003 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Other points from that insert may be highlighted as needed. Conclude by posing two or three questions from the article “Spiritual Food at the Proper Time,” which will be discussed at next week’s Service Meeting.
Song 91 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 19
Song 55
 8 min: Local announcements.
17 min: “Imitate Jesus’ Mental Attitude.”c Use the questions that are provided. When discussing paragraph 4, invite those who are auxiliary pioneering to comment on the blessings they have experienced as a result of doing so.
20 min: “Spiritual Food at the Proper Time.”d Use the questions that are provided. When discussing paragraph 2, have one or two in the audience briefly comment on a memorable convention that they attended. Conclude by posing two or three questions from the article “Be Holy in All Your Conduct,” which will be discussed at next week’s Service Meeting.
Song 80 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 26
Song 46
12 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for April. Mention literature offer for May. Using the suggestions on page 8, demonstrate how to present the May 1 Watchtower and the May 8 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. In one of the presentations, demonstrate witnessing to a workmate or a schoolmate.
15 min: Local needs.
18 min: “Be Holy in All Your Conduct.”e Use the questions that are provided. Invite audience to comment on how they have observed that fine conduct at conventions brings praise to Jehovah. Conclude by posing two or three questions from the article “Chaste, Praiseworthy Personal Appearance,” which will be discussed at next week’s Service Meeting.
Song 38 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 3
Song 48
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly comment on activities usually planned for summer: attending the district convention, auxiliary pioneering, making improvements around the house, and perhaps enjoying some recreation. If the congregation has seldom-worked territory, announce what arrangements are being made for thorough coverage. Diligent planning is needed to ensure that family study, congregation meetings, and field service are not neglected if travel or other summer activities take us out of our usual routine. (Prov. 21:5) Remind all to turn in their field service reports, regardless of whether they are at home or away.
15 min: “Young People​—Read God’s Word!”f Arrange in advance for one or two youths to comment on their program of Bible reading and how they are benefiting from it. Encourage youths to make it their goal to read the entire Bible. Include comments on the Ministry School book, page 10, paragraph 4.
20 min: “Chaste, Praiseworthy Personal Appearance.”g Use the questions that are provided. As time permits, read and discuss the cited scriptures.
Song 164 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

