Spiritual Food at the Proper Time
 1. How is Ezekiel 36:29 being fulfilled today?
1 “I will . . . call to the grain and make it abound, and I shall put upon you no famine,” is the utterance of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. (Ezek. 36:29) Those prophetic words apply to God’s people today. Figuratively speaking, Jehovah has caused life-sustaining grain to sprout up abundantly for his people. The timely spiritual food provided through our district conventions well illustrates this fact.
 2. How has Jehovah used district conventions to dispense spiritual food at the proper time?
2 At the convention held at Columbus, Ohio, in 1931, Jehovah directed his worshipers to take on a new name​—Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Isa. 43:10-12) In 1935 the great crowd of Revelation 7:9-17 was correctly identified. In 1942, Brother Knorr delivered the discourse “Peace​—Can It Last?” That talk gave impetus to the global preaching work and led to the formation of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. Although some conventions are especially memorable, each one has proved to be a well-laden table of nourishing spiritual food served at the right time.​—Ps. 23:5; Matt. 24:45.
 3. What must we do to benefit from the spiritual banquet at our district convention?
3 How Well Are You Eating? It is possible to be surrounded by food and yet be malnourished if we do not put forth the effort to eat. (Prov. 26:15) The same is true in a spiritual sense. At a few conventions, it has been observed that many are needlessly walking around or talking with others during the program. While upbuilding association is an important aspect of the convention, the time for this is before and after each session. (Eccl. 3:1, 7) If we are not in our seats paying close attention, we may miss a vital point. Convention department overseers and brothers with assignments may occasionally find it necessary to discuss convention matters while the sessions are in progress. Otherwise, they should set an example by their attentiveness to the program. None of us can afford to miss any of the spiritual food provided.​—1 Cor. 10:12; Phil. 2:12.
 4. How can we show ourselves thankful for the bounty Jehovah provides?
4 How we rejoice in the rich spiritual truths Jehovah provides, as contrasted with the dried-out false doctrines of Christendom! (Isa. 65:13, 14) One way we can ‘show ourselves thankful’ is by viewing the convention as an opportunity to be taught by Jehovah. (Col. 3:15) Look beyond the brother giving the talk, and view the message as coming from our “Grand Instructor.” (Isa. 30:20, 21; 54:13) Pay rapt attention. Take brief notes of key points. Review program highlights each evening. Apply what you learn.
 5. What reasons for rejoicing do district conventions give us?
5 Every convention on this side of Armageddon, whether it is held in a refugee camp, in a war-torn land, or in a larger more peaceful setting, is a victory over Satan! As a united brotherhood, we cherish our opportunities to flock together at district conventions. (Ezek. 36:38) We are confident that once again Jehovah will lovingly provide us with “food supplies at the proper time.”​—Luke 12:42.
[Box on page 4]
Show Appreciation for Jehovah’s Table
▪ Pay close attention
▪ Note key points
▪ Review program highlights each evening
▪ Apply what you learn

