Young People​—Read God’s Word!
1 Youth is a time of challenges and weighty decisions. Many of you Christian youths are daily confronted with pressure to violate divine standards of conduct. As you begin to make personal decisions regarding education, employment, and marriage, you should already have set your spiritual goals. Only in that way can you make other decisions that will shape the rest of your life for good. Well-defined spiritual goals will help you to act wisely and make your way successful. By reading and meditating on God’s Word regularly, you will be moved to live in harmony with its inspired counsel, and your right endeavors will meet with success.​—Josh. 1:8; Ps. 1:2, 3.
2 How Will It Benefit You? Satan’s world is full of enticements to engage in wrongdoing. (1 John 2:15, 16) You may know of classmates or others your age who have experienced calamity because of yielding to peer pressure. Adhering to Bible counsel will give you the moral and spiritual strength to reject a sinful course. Further, the counsel of God’s Word can help you to avoid Satan’s subtle snares. (2 Cor. 2:11; Heb. 5:14) Walking in God’s ways will bring you true happiness​—personal satisfaction with your course in life.​—Ps. 119:1, 9, 11.
3 The timeless principles of God’s Word surpass human wisdom. (Ps. 119:98-100) Familiarity with Bible principles and meditation on Jehovah’s revealed purposes along with heartfelt prayer can help you to build a close relationship with the Bible’s all-wise Author, Jehovah God. He promises: “I shall make you have insight and instruct you in the way you should go. I will give advice with my eye upon you.”​—Ps. 32:8.
4 Make Time to Read It: One young Christian made it her goal to read the entire Bible, and she finished within a year. How did she benefit? She recalls: “I learned so much about Jehovah​—things that drew me closer to him and made me want to fear him for the rest of my life.” (Jas. 4:8) Have you read the entire Bible? If not, why not make it your goal to do so? Jehovah will certainly bless your efforts, and you will reap great rewards.

