“Let Us Exalt His Name Together”
 1. What opportunity will we have to exalt God’s name together, and what can we do now in preparation?
1 “O magnify Jehovah with me, . . . and let us exalt his name together,” sang the psalmist. (Ps. 34:3) Our upcoming “Walk With God” District Convention will give us the opportunity to exalt Jehovah’s name together with our brothers and sisters from many congregations. Have you made your arrangements for accommodations, transportation, and time off from secular work? We are wise to care for these well in advance.​—Prov. 21:5.
 2. Why is it beneficial to plan to arrive at the convention site early?
2 Arriving at the Convention Site: There are many matters to care for when we attend a convention. Getting an early start will help us to cope with unexpected delays and will enable us to be settled in our seats in time to share wholeheartedly in the opening song and prayer. (Ps. 69:30) A few minutes before the start of the session, the chairman will be seated on the platform while introductory Kingdom music is played. All of us should take our seats at that time so that the program can begin in a dignified manner.​—1 Cor. 14:33, 40.
 3. How can we show consideration for others when finding seats?
3 God’s Word admonishes us to ‘let all our affairs take place with love.’ (1 Cor. 16:14) When the doors open at 8:00 a.m., consideration for others will restrain us from running, rushing, pushing, or shoving in an effort to get to the seats we prefer before others do. Seats may be saved only for those traveling with you in the same vehicle or living with you in the same home.​—1 Cor. 13:5; Phil. 2:4.
 4. What are the arrangements for the noon break, and how is this beneficial?
4 Please bring a lunch rather than leave the convention site to obtain a meal during the noon break. This will allow all to enjoy upbuilding association and be present from the very start of the afternoon session. If necessary, a small cooler that can be placed under a seat may be used. Large family-size picnic coolers, glass containers, and alcoholic beverages are not permitted in the convention facility.
 5. What provision has been made for those with impaired hearing?
5 For the benefit of those with impaired hearing, the program will be broadcast in the vicinity of the auditorium on an FM radio frequency. An announcement regarding this will be made at the beginning of the first session. To make use of this provision, you will need to bring a small FM receiver with earphones.
 6. How can we prepare our hearts for the instruction we will receive?
6 A Spiritual Banquet Awaits Us: King Jehoshaphat was one who “prepared [his] heart to search for the true God.” (2 Chron. 19:3) How can we prepare our heart before the convention? The articles on the back page of the May 22 and June 8 issues of Awake! provide a preview of the spiritual banquet that will be served. Why not take time to reflect on those articles, building anticipation for what Jehovah has in store for us? Preparing our heart also involves asking Jehovah to help us get the sense of the instruction we will receive and apply it.​—Ps. 25:4, 5.
 7. What is our desire, and why?
7 We all long to learn more from the Word of God, realizing that by means of it we can grow to salvation. (1 Pet. 2:2) Hence, let us be in attendance for our “Walk With God” District Convention and ‘exalt Jehovah’s name together.’​—Ps. 34:3.
[Box on page 3]
Ways to Exalt God’s Name
▪ Advance planning
▪ Show love for others
▪ Prepare your heart

