VOL. XXXI APRIL 15 No. 8 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

To What Degree Should We Confess Faults? 131 

Were the Ancient Worthies on Trial for Life? 132 

More Tolerable for Sodom 132 

"I Will Have Mercy and Not Sacrifice" 133 

Birthday Greetings (Poem) 134 

Be Temperate in All Things 135 

"Professing Themselves to Be Wise" 135 

Some Interesting Questions 136 

Woman the Glory of Man 136 



Significance of Coals from the Altar 137 

Some Types of the Resurrection 137 

Joyful in Tribulations (Poem) 138 

The Privilege and Power of Prayer 138 

The Redemption Price and Its Application 141 

The Memorial Supper 142 

Some Interesting Letters 142 

page 130 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



THE "SPECTATOR" AND "THE WORLD" 

The Hamilton Spectator will resume publication of the sermons 
if sufficiently encouraged. Rate for daily, additional to 
WATCH TOWER subscription, $1.80 per year; $1.13 for six 
months, or 68 cents for three months; 75 cents for the semi-weekly 
per year or 38 cents for six months. Send orders to 
us. The Toronto World also will continue the sermons in 
full if sufficiently encouraged. Price, additional to WATCH 



TOWER, 50 cents per year for Monday issue. Do not forget 
to encourage the publishers by complimentary letters and 
cards. 



IMMERSION SERVICE 

Arrangements for Water Baptism have been made in 
Brooklyn for those who desire to symbolize their baptism 
into Christ's death. The service will be conducted immediately 
after the afternoon service of Sunday, April 17. Those 
desiring to avail themselves of this privilege will, if possible, 
kindly advise us in advance. 



R4598 : page 130 

SERMONS IN THE NEWSPAPERS 

How about renewing your subscriptions for newspapers 
publishing Brother Russell's sermons? Do your part! Be 
prompt! If a few narrow souls hating the good tidings of 
God's love try to discourage the Editors from publishing the 
sermons; the thousands who are being blest should tell of 
their profit and pleasure and thus encourage the newspaper 
men. Renew through us or direct, as you please. Use part 
of your "Good Hopes" thus if you think proper. You have 

page 130 

our clubbing rates in the PEOPLES PULPIT— December issue. 



R4597 :page 131 

TO WHAT DEGREE SHOULD WE CONFESS FAULTS? 

"Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for 
another that ye may be healed."— James 5:16. 

THIS text represents a general principle of 

humility and willingness to make acknowledgment 

when we commit a fault, particularly 

to the one against whom the fault or 

wrong has been committed, with due apology 

and reparation so far as possible. It is 

quite proper for us to freely concede that 

we are not perfect, and no one should attempt 

to pose as perfect, but rather to 

acknowledge what the Scriptures declare 

that "there is none righteous, no, not one"; that we are 

merely righteous in our intentions and efforts and are 

trusting for full covering in the sight of God through 



the merit of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

There might be times when the confession of a fault 
should be made publicly to the advantage of others and 
if we feel sure that the telling of our own shortcoming 
would be of advantage to others, we should not hesitate 

R4598 :page 131 

to tell of the matter in a proper way with a view to assisting 
others; but our thought is that in general we do 
well, not only to hide our imperfections, but that it 
should be our daily endeavor to put our faults away 
completely. 

In this passage, however, the Apostle has a deeper 
thought; he is discussing here the case of one who has 
committed a sin that has alienated him from God, causing 
a cloud to come between them. It has been a repetition 
of sins, or something to this effect. He is spiritually 
sick, whether physically sick or not. The prescription for 
him is that he call for the Elders of the Church that they 
may pray over him and anoint him with oil in the name 
of the Lord. "The prayer of faith shall save the sick" 
(the spiritually sick, we think), "and though he has committed 
trespasses or sins they shall be forgiven him." 
The brother is not in a condition to advocate his own 
cause with the Lord, and the Lord therefore arranged it 
so that we should feel a sympathy with our brother and go 
to his relief and make intercession for him. Not that our 
intercessions would avail of themselves; it must be the 
intercession of our Advocate that would avail for the 
wrongs and imperfections before justice; but our Advocate 
may at times thus withhold himself for the good 
of one in error and for the sake of drawing out the sympathy 
of the brethren who have knowledge of the case, 
that they may seek to assist, remembering themselves lest 
they also should be tempted, lest they also should fall 
from their steadfastness, and that therefore the spirit of 
sympathy and mutual helpfulness may be encouraged in 
the Church. 

There is nothing that would be in the way of an Elder 
Brother in the Church praying for one of the fellow-members 
of the Body of Christ or against the members of 
the Church praying for each other in general without 
special request. This would be entirely proper. If one 
should see a brother taking a wrong course, he should not 
only pray for him, but should seek to restore such a one 
in the spirit of humility by calling attention to the course 
he has taken, as wisely as he may be able; but of course 
the matter could not go so far under such circumstances 
as under the circumstances above recited— that the sick 
one should call for the Elders to pray for him, realizing 
his own need. 

Not merely should the Elders pray for those whom they 
see going astray, but the Lord has put a special responsibility 
upon every member of the Church, every member 
of the Body, to look out for all other members to the extent 



of ability and opportunity, yet there could not be 
the same degree either of responsibility or of propriety in 
a younger brother in the Church attempting to correct 
and rebuke and exhort, etc., an Elder Brother. The 
Apostle says to Timothy, "Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat 
him as a father"; thus we see what a younger 
brother in the Lord's family might do, if he saw what he 
thought to be a deflection from the proper course. But 
he should feel a hesitancy about approaching the matter 
and feel also that he would be laboring under a disadvantage 
and would not be as likely to accomplish good results 
as if he were one of more experience. Therefore it would 
be wise for him to pray for the person in secret for a 
while, rather than be too free about giving advice. But 
if he finally thought it necessary, it would perhaps be 
wiser for him to speak to some of the Elders of the 
Church and ask them for their opinion; or if they thought 
it would be wise that the brother be spoken to by them. 
We are not supposing that he is imagining evil— "evil 
speaking"— about the person, but that he has some absolute 
knowledge about some wrong qualities of disposition, 
wrong course of life, something he knows to be wrong, 
something that is outwardly seen, something that is not 
merely imagined. We realize that many of the things that 
comprise evil speaking, etc., are purely imaginary, such 
as, "I thought he was going to do so," and "I thought she 
was doing so," or "I thought she might have been intending 
to do" thus and so. These things are classed with 

R4598 : page 132 

evil speaking. In these cases the brother should make 

the subject a matter of prayer to see that he is not busy-bodying 

in other people's affairs; that he is not setting up 

his judgment in a matter that is of no great importance; 

that it is something really serious and disastrous to the 

brother and dangerous to his interests as a New Creature 

in Christ Jesus. 

The general course, however, should be to go to the 
person alone, as our Lord instructed in Matthew 18:15; 
the going to an Elder would be only in the case of some 
very serious matter in which the person felt that his own 
power to set the matter right was entirely insufficient. It 
is our belief that those instances would be very few. If 
the matter is a trespass against himself, it would be his 
duty to go to the person alone; if it is something 
against the Church or that is outwardly immoral or wrong 
or a violation of some recognized principle of righteousness, 
it would seem to be on a little different plane and 
would call for someone who would be more in authority, 
since it is not the rights of the individual that are trespassed 
upon, but the interests of the Church or the Truth 
or the Lord's cause. In such cases the Elders would no 
doubt be the better able to judge and would know better 
how to approach the matter. 



R4598 : page 132 

WERE THE ANCIENT WORTHIES ON TRIAL FOR LIFE? 

THE Ancient Worthies were not on trial for 

life or death; they were never brought to 

that condition of intelligent opportunity for 

eternal life which would make them amenable 

to a sentence of death. Such a condition 

of knowledge and opportunity did not 

obtain in the world until our Lord came. 

"Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ"; 

"he brought to light, life and immortality." 

These were never disclosed before our 

Lord's time, and consequently no such responsibility, as 

now exists, had come. 

In a certain sense the Jewish nation had been typically 
justified and was typically on trial for life or death, but 
this was not an actuality so far as life and death eternal 
were concerned, because God knew in advance that they 
could not keep the Law, and that they could never have 
eternal life under it; and he had arranged in advance 
that they should be redeemed from the curse of the Law 
irrespective of anything they might themselves do in the 
matter. Hence it was only in the typical, or figurative 
sense, that they were on trial for life or death. 

The Ancient Worthies "had this testimony that they 
pleased God." They pleased him in that when they ascertained 
his will they set about doing it, even before he 
gave it to them as a law or obligation, even before he 
could ask them to obey him and promise them eternal 
life for their obedience. Abraham manifested his faith 
in God although there was no redemption yet accomplished 
in the world. Christ had not yet come. And although 
Abraham was not on trial for life or for death God 
granted Abraham his favor and declared that he pleased 
him; and his word tells us that "a better resurrection" is to 
be not only to Abraham, but to all these Ancient Worthies 
—a resurrection to human perfection. But since human 
perfection will come only under the mediatorial reign 
of Christ, the Ancient Worthies will not be introduced to 
the Father in the complete sense until the close of the 
Millennial Age. 

Hence, they will not have life, in this fullest sense, 
until that time, when, at the close of the Millennial Age, 
the Kingdom shall be delivered over to the Father. What 
they will have in the meantime will be the perfection of 
human nature and all the blessings that God provides for 
mankind, through the great Mediator. But they will not 
come into actual and personal relationship to God, so as 
to be determined worthy of eternal life, until the completion 
of the Millennial Age, because that age is set 
apart for the very purpose of determining who of all 
mankind may have eternal life, aside from the spirit-begotten 



ones of the present time. At the close of the 
Millennial Age, when all mankind shall be in perfection 
of being, they shall be tried of the Father for their worthiness 
or unworthiness of eternal life— just as Adam, while 
enjoying perfection, was tested as to whether or not he 
was worthy to have life made perpetual or eternal. 

Since the Ancient Worthies will be a part of the world 
under the New Covenant arrangements, it follows that 
they will not have this decision of the Divine Court, 
Divine Justice, respecting their worthiness of eternal life 
until the completion of the Millennial Age, until the conclusion 
of the trial at the end of that age, which will 
bring to them, as it will bring to all others who are faithful, 
the great reward of life eternal. 



R4599 : page 132 

MORE TOLERABLE FOR SODOM 

-MATTHEW ll:20-30.-APRIL24.- 

Golden Text:— "Come unto me, all ye that labor and 
are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest."— V. 28. 

IN the cities of Capernaum, "his own city," 

Bethsaida, and Chorazin, situated on the Sea 

of Galilee, the majority of our Lord's notable 

miracles were performed. Nevertheless, 

even in these cities, the majority rejected 

his Messiahship. Today's study tells 

how the Great Teacher arraigned the people 

of those cities for their unbelief, declaring 

that if the mighty works done in them had 

been done in the Gentile cities of Tyre and 

Sidon they would have repented. Hence it will be more 

tolerable for the people of those cities than for the people 

of Capernaum in the Day of Judgment. 

We must rid our minds of the old and fallacious 
thought that the Day of Judgment will be a period of 
twenty-four hours. We must see that from God's standpoint 
a day simply signifies a period or an epoch; as, for 
instance, a twenty-four hour day, a forty-year day in the 
wilderness, and the thousand-year day of Christ, the Millennium. 
The latter is the day referred to in our text as 
the Day of Judgment. Only a few of mankind have their 
Day of Judgment or trial now. These few are specially 
blessed with eyes of understanding to see and with ears 
of understanding to appreciate the special privileges of 
this present time. The great mass of mankind are thoroughly 
blind and deaf to the spiritual things connected with 
the present calling and election of the Church. 

Respecting these the Master thanked the Father, "Because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, 
and hast revealed them unto babes; even so, 



R4599 : page 133 

Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." (Vs. 25,26.) 
The Great Teacher did not mean that he was glad, thankful, 
that his message was hidden from the majority, that 
they might slide down into eternal torture in darkness. 
Oh, no! Surely not! He did mean that he appreciated the 
Father's wisdom in not allowing any but those of proper 
condition of heart to see and clearly understand the present 
call of the Church. For the uncontrite of heart to 
see, to understand, would mean two things:— 

(1) They would oppose God's Plan the more; 

(2) They would come under greater responsibility 
themselves. 

Hence we with the Master may be glad of the wisdom 
displayed in the Divine arrangement of hiding certain features 
of the great Plan of the Ages from all except the 
"very elect." "The secret of the Lord is with them that fear 
(reverence) him and he will show them his Covenant." 
-Psa. 25:14. 

"Thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven 
(highly exalted in privilege and opportunity), shalt be 
brought down to hell (to hades, to the grave, to destruction); 
for if the mighty works which have been done in 
thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until 
this day." (V. 23.) The reason is clear. The people 
of Capernaum were evidently harder-hearted than the 
people of Sodom and, from the Lord's standpoint, were 
more blameworthy. What shall we say, then, of our day 
of still greater privilege in many respects— Bibles in every 
home, preaching in every city, education in every family? 
What might not the Lord reasonably expect of us? 

MORE TOLERABLE FOR SODOM 

We have already referred to a Day of Judgment as the 
thousand-year day of Christ's Millennial Kingdom, when 
the people of Capernaum with those of Tyre and Sidon 
and Sodom and Gomorrah and all the other cities and nations, 
except the elect Church of this age, will be placed 
on trial— for life everlasting or death everlasting. 

According to our Lord's words present knowledge, 
great or small, brings its proportion of responsibility. The 
greater the favor of God enjoyed now, the greater will be 
our responsibility then. Evidently this means surprises 
for the world. Not only the Sodomites, but many of the 
heathen who have thus far enjoyed little or nothing of 
God's grace, will be in a more favorable condition as respects 
the prospects of the future than some who are now 
richly favored but are neglecting their privileges. Our 
Lord intimates that the Judgment or trial of the Millennium 
will be tolerable, not intolerable, for the people of 
Capernaum and more tolerable for the people of Sodom. 
How much more reasonable this is than the unscriptural 
nonsense that was once taught us by our well-meaning, 



deluded forefathers, who made the various sectarian 
creeds that are now causing trouble, and who then burned 
each other at the stake because of differences of opinion 
respecting these creeds and claimed that in so doing they 
were copying God, who was torturing the people of Tyre 
and Sidon and Capernaum and Sodom and hundreds of 
millions of others, heathen and civilized! 

How seriously we have all misunderstood and misrepresented 
the Gospel message! Let us turn to the 
prophecy referred to by our Lord and note this. In 
Ezekiel's prophecy, 16:49-61, the Lord rehearsed in advance 
the greater wickedness of Israel than of her neighboring 
sister peoples, Samaria and Sodom, and tells that nevertheless 
he will restore all three of them, bringing them 
again from the tomb and establishing his Covenant with 
them through Messiah in the Millennial Age. Let us remember, 
too, that our Lord made this promise of restitution 
(Acts 3:19-21) through the very Sodomites who were 
destroyed by fire which came down from heaven. 
(Luke 7:29,30.) They were temporarily destroyed by 
fire as an example or illustration of the absolute annihilation, 
destruction, which ultimately will come upon all 
willful sinners, the Second Death. But before any will 
be thus cut off from all hope he must be brought to a 
clear knowledge of the Truth and have a full trial in the 
great and glorious day of Judgment, which St. Paul tells 
us God has provided and in which the saints of this age, 
the Bride of Christ, with her Lord, will share in the work 
of judging. 

The Father hath delivered all of his great work into 
the hands of the Lord Jesus, and only by knowing him 
can we know the Father in the proper sense, in the intimate 
sense, because the Son, as the Great Teacher, reveals 
the Father to all who are pupils in his School. 

Our study closes with our Lord's invitation to those 
who now have the hearing ear and seeing eye of obedient 
faith. To these, life's experiences, sin's burdens, and 
general unrest are preparations for the Divine message, 
"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy-laden 
and I will give you rest." Those invited must expect 
to be servants and to wear the "yoke" of obedience to 
the Divine will— the yoke of Christ, the service of Christ. 
To be successful they must learn of him, walk in his 
steps. They must be meek and lowly in heart. Such, and 
such only, will find his yoke an easy one and his burden a 
light one— much lighter than the yoke and burden of sin. 
Only such will find rest unto their souls now and be prepared 
to enter into the heavenly rest as "joint-heirs" with 
Christ in his heavenly Kingdom, which is shortly to bless 
and judge the world. 



R4599 : page 133 

"I WILL HAVE MERCY, AND NOT SACRIFICE" 



-MATTHEW 12:1-14.-MAY 1.- 

SABB ATH observance is the essence of this 

study. Reasonable people, regardless of 

their religious convictions, are ready to admit 

the wisdom, the expediency, yes, the 

necessity, for a Sabbath day, a rest day once 

a week. Whatever disputes there are on 

the subject, therefore, pertain to which 

day shall be observed and to the manner 

of the observance. When, through Moses 

as Mediator, God adopted the nation of 

Israel as his peculiar people, accepting them into Covenant 

relationship through their promised obedience to the 

Law, he fixed for them a special day of the week, the 

seventh, to be their Sabbath, or day of rest. This Law 

specially appertained to Palestine. Had it extended beyond, 

to encompass the whole earth, it would have been 

necessary for the Law to specify which day should be 

considered the Sabbath on the other side of the earth, 

where the time would, of course, be twenty-four hours 

different. 

But those of us who are not Jews by nature and not 
under that Law Covenant are not bound by its limitation 
that the Sabbath should be on the seventh day of the 
week. Indeed, neither Jesus nor the Apostles ever placed 

R4599 : page 134 

the Gospel Church under the Law Covenant at all. They 
tell us that those under it were the "house of servants" in 
bondage and that we are the "house of sons," if we "stand 
fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free." 

This does not mean liberty or freedom to do wrong. 
But since Christians are not limited to the land of Palestine, 
it leaves us free to follow the spirit of the Law rather 
than its letter. This is true of the entire Ten Commandments, 
as well as of the Fourth. The Heavenly Father 
does not address his spirit-begotten children with commandments 
not to kill, not to steal, etc., because such 
commandments to them would be unnecessary. Begotten 
of the holy Spirit, they love God and reverence him 
alone, and would not think of homaging images, nor of 
profaning the Holy Name, nor of doing injury to a neighbor 
or a brother. On the contrary, their love for God 
would lead them to honor his Name, to serve his Cause. 

R4600 : page 134 

And their love for their neighbor as for themselves would 
prompt them to render him service— "doing good unto all 
men as we have opportunity, especially to the household 
of faith." (Gal. 6:10.) This love, the Apostle assures 
us, is the fulfillment of the Law, so far as we are concerned 
—the fulfilling of the spirit of the Law— for "ye are 



not under the Law (Covenant), but under [the] Grace 
(Covenant). "--Rom. 6:14; Gal. 3:29. 

The Jews had a system of Sabbath Days and Sabbath 
Years-the Seventh Day and the (7 x 7 + 1 = 50) Fiftieth 
Day, or Day of Pentecost. And they had a system 
of year Sabbaths, the Seventh Year and the (7x7+1= 50) 
Fiftieth Year, or Year of Jubilee. These were 
typical, as the Apostle explains, and true Christians may 
enjoy the antitypes. Thus to us the Seventh Day represents 
a Rest of a higher character than that of the Law— a rest 
of faith, as instead of a physical rest. "We who believe 
do enter into his rest"— a faith rest based upon our acceptance 
of Jesus as our satisfaction before God. The fulness 
of this rest we attain when we receive the begetting of the 
holy Spirit. And this was typified by the sending of the 
holy Spirit on the Day of Pentecost. Similarly Israel's 
Sabbatic Year of Jubilee has its antitype in the great 
Millennial Age of Rest. (Acts 3:20.) But we leave the 
discussion of this for a more convenient season. 

The Great Teacher as a Jew was as much under the 
obligations of every feature of the Law Covenant as any 
other Jew. We may be sure that he did not violate any 
feature of it. He was obligated to keep the letter of it in 
a sense and degree which he has not commanded us, his 
followers. It is ours merely to keep the spirit of it. Hence 
if we were living in Palestine neither the Seventh Day 
nor any other particular day of the week would be obligatory 
upon us. But it would be our pleasure to maintain the 
spirit of the Jewish Law. Acting along the lines of 
this liberty, the early Church began to meet on the First 
Day of the week, because it was on that day that their 
Redeemer arose from the dead. On that day he appeared 
to some in the upper room and to two on the way to 
Emmaus and to Mary, and subsequently to others of the 
disciples near the tomb. These four manifestations of the 
Lord's resurrection marked that day in a special sense 
as a holy day to the early Church. They waited during 
an entire week and then again he appeared on the first 
day of the week. Indeed, so far as we may know, all of 
his eight appearances to his followers after his resurrection 
were on the first day of the week. No wonder, then, 
it became known to them as the Lord's Day. No wonder 
if they specially associated with that Day all the blessings 
of God and a rest of faith which came to them through 
the Redeemer. Quite probably those who lived in Jewish 
communities would continue to observe the Seventh Day 
also, because its general observance would make this a 
necessity. But the First Day of the week became the 
general time for the Lord's followers to assemble themselves 
and to partake of a simple meal called breaking of 
bread (not the Lord's Supper) in commemoration of the 
fact that on the day of his resurrection Jesus manifested 
himself to his followers in the breaking of bread. 

THE LAW MADE VOID BY TRADITIONS 



But we are not to understand from the present study 
that the Master reproved the Jews for keeping the Seventh 
Day, which was their duty. His reproofs attach to certain 
extremes. The Pharisees exaggerated some features and 
entirely overestimated other features of the Law. In their 
theory there was no harm in eating the corn on the Sabbath 
Day, but to pull an ear of it they construed to be 
reaping. And to rub it out of the chaff they considered 
to be threshing and winnowing. Similarly, to scratch or 
look for a flea was estimated to be hunting, and thus 
God's reasonable Law was made to appear absurd. It was 
such absurdities only that Jesus combatted. He showed 
that one had a right to satisfy his hunger, and cited a 
case where the Prophet David had done so without blame. 
He cited also the fact that the priests labored on the 
Sabbath Day without blame. He explained that God was 
desirous of seeing in his creatures the quality of mercy 
towards one another, rather than merely the sacrificing 
of their comforts. Had they recognized this Truth they 
would not have found fault with the Apostles. 

Then, as though to demonstrate his position, he healed 
a man with a withered hand, also demonstrating by his 
miracle that he had the Divine favor and that his teaching 
on the subject had this evidence of its truthfulness. 
He pointed out the inconsistency of his critics, saying that 
since they would relieve one of their brute beasts, if he fell 
into a pit on the Sabbath they would see, therefore, how 
illogical was their position in objecting to his performing 
cures of human ills on the Sabbath Day. But the evil 
heart is not amenable to reason. The very fact that he 
demonstrated his teachings to be superior to theirs excited 
the Pharisees to envy, malice, hatred, and the very spirit 
of murder. Thus they evidenced that they lacked the 
quality of mercy, love, which God would specially approve, 
and without which we cannot be his children. Sacrifice 
is right in its place, but mercy more particularly indicates 
the acceptable condition of the heart. Quite probably 
Jesus did so many of his miracles on the Sabbath Day as 
a type— as a prophetical picture of the great fact that the 
antitypical day, the great Sabbath Day, will be the Seventh 
Thousand Year period, the Millennium. 



R4604 : page 134 

BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 

Four pounds of love we send to thee today, 

And only four, 
For Uncle Samuel's mail bags, they say, 

Can take no more. 
But mail bags, boxes, sacks of ev'ry kind 

Are all too small, 
And only hearts are large enough 

To hold it all. 



So take our love on the installment plan, 

Dear friend of mine— 
We send a part today, more when we can. 

We trust for thine! 

CLASS AT NASSAU, N.H. 



R4600 : page 135 

BE TEMPERATE IN ALL THINGS 

-PROVERBS 23:29-35.-MAY 8.- 

Golden Text:— "At the last it biteth like a serpent 
and stingeth like an adder."— V. 32. 

WHILE it cannot be said that the Bible commands 

total abstinence from intoxicating 

liquors, it can be said that everywhere from 

Genesis to Revelation it reprobates drunkenness 

and points us to its debauching 

effects as injurious both physically and 

spiritually. We think probably that the 

climatic conditions of the centers of civilization 

and the nerve tension of our day 

make the evils of intemperance specially 

grievous at this time. These facts would fully justify us 

as followers of Jesus and the Apostles should we go beyond 

them in urging absolute total abstinence as respects 

all alcoholic liquors. Special emergencies and conditions 

require to be specially met. 

As, for instance, while Adam's children being nearly 
perfect could and did intermarry, nothing of the kind 
would be wise or in any sense justifiable now because the 
great depravity of our race through heredity has so 
prefaced our natures along certain lines of our weaknesses 
that even for two cousins to marry is dangerous as respects 
the sanity of their posterity. In other words, circumstances 
alter cases. In the interim of nearly nineteen 
centuries undoubtedly great changes have taken place 
along certain lines and the wisest and noblest of humanity 
are practically agreed that in our day, at least, alcoholic 
beverages are extremely unwise, extremely injurious. 
They are dangerous for the strong of character, and 
awful, irresistible temptations to the weak, who should 
have the encouragement of the strong in the bearing of 
their burdens of hereditary weakness. The amount of 
crime and sin which directly and indirectly are traceable 
to the influence of alcohol should make all good people 
stand in awe of it and use their influence in opposition to 
it. In this we are not condemning all those who more or 
less participate in the stream of crime and sin produced 
by alcohol. Doubtless amongst those who manufacture and 
dispense these beverages there are, as well as amongst 
those who own stock in distilleries and breweries, persons 



of noble minds, who would rather do good than do evil. 

By some process of reasoning which we do not fully comprehend 

they throw the responsibility off their own shoulders 

upon the shoulders of their weaker brethren and 

sisters of the human family. Unquestionably money is at 

the bottom of the traffic. As the Apostle declares, "The 

love of money is the root of all evil." 

THE DRUNKARD'S PORTRAIT 

In today's Study Solomon the Wise gives us the picture 
of the drunkard— redness of eyes; woe; sorrow; contentious; 
complaining. He advises, "Look not thou upon the 
wine when it is red and giveth color to the cup and goeth 
down smoothly. At last it biteth like a serpent and stingeth 
like an adder." It would appear that there is a charm 
or enticement connected with alcoholic stimulants which 
gradually wastes the strong and quickly enthralls the 
weak of will. The wise man associates the demoniacal 
power of liquor with its twin-sister, fleshly desire and general 
immorality, saying, "Thine eyes shall behold strange 
women and thy heart shall utter perverse things." He 
adds, "Thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst 
of the sea [like floating wreckage] and as he that lieth on 
top of the mast"— in imminent danger of destruction. He 
describes the condition of those who become beastly drunk. 
They are unconscious of injury and seem to have their 
chiefest pleasure in unconsciousness, so that, upon recovering 
from one debauch, their desire is to seek the stimulation 
again. Thus are the chains of slavery to a most 
degrading habit gradually forged and manhood gradually 
enslaved and earthly prospects, not to mention heavenly 
hopes, go glimmering. 

It is written in the Scriptures, "No drunkard shall inherit 
the Kingdom of heaven"— no drunkard, therefore, 
can hope to be a member of the Body of Christ, the elect 

R4601 :page 135 

Church. Thank God, this no longer means to us his utter 
perdition, but it does signify great loss. We are never to 
forget, however, that, having once been a drunkard and 
having turned from that deplorable condition, the individual 
would be a drunkard no longer. Let us remember 
that only "overcomers" are promised a share in his 
Millennial Throne and Kingdom. He who loses the mastery 
of his flesh to the extent of being a drunkard is certainly 
not an overcomer and not at that time in line for 
joint-heirship with Christ. The President of the United 
States expressed the following sentiment: "To a man who 
is actively engaged in reasonable work, who must have at 
his command the best that is in him, at its best— to him I 
would, with all the emphasis that I possess, advise and 
urge, Leave drink alone— absolutely.' He who drinks 
is deliberately disqualifying himself for advancement. 
Personally I refuse to take such a risk. I do not drink." 



When Mr. Taft expressed this he was Secretary of 
War, and evidently did not disqualify himself for advancement 
by his total abstinence. General Frederick D. Grant, 
an outspoken total abstainer, said: "Drink is the greatest 
curse of Christendom, because practically all crime and 
all disaster are the result of it. Ninety-five per cent— I 
will make it no less— of desertion and acts of lawlessness 
in the Army is due to drink. Vice is simply drink in 
another form. Whoever heard of a saloon completely 
divorced from the 'White Slave Traffic,' or a house of 
infamy without a bar? You may tell the young men that 
General Grant does not drink a drop of liquor— has not 
for eighteen years— because he is afraid to drink it." 



R4601 :page 135 

"PROFESSING THEMSELVES TO BE WISE" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A few days ago a Brother put into my hands a little 
booklet published in America, with the object of demolishing 
faith in the Scripture chronology as shown in 
the STUDIES, and to show that the deductions which have 
been drawn are hopelessly wrong. I found the booklet 
very dull, with its many reiterations of statements that 
the findings of Vol. 2 are at fault. Because it cannot do 
better it quotes Vol. 2 on the necessity of a correct 
chronology, and that a difference of a single year in that 
shown would throw the harmony into discord. Then it 
goes on to "prove" the chronology is wrong, and being ill-content, 
it proceeds to make the discord. The claim is 
that Jehoram, of Judah, did not reign as king of Judah 
for eight years, as the Scriptures say, but that he reigned 
four years with his father Jehoshaphat, and only four as 
real king. As I happened to be familiar with the passages 
bearing on this point of history I replied at once to 
the question put to me, and the suggestion was made that 

R4601 :page 136 

I send the reply to you, and in case you may have nothing 
better at hand, you may judge it worth while to use it. 
The difficulty is raised by the attempt to correspond 
the events of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, a task 
which, so far as chronology is concerned, must always 
give unsatisfactory results, because of the peculiar methods 
of reckoning the years of a reign, and because no 
attempts were made to give details. The Father knew 
our needs, and caused a second account to be given, one 
which gives an unbroken record of the kings of Judah 
from David to the end of the kingdoms. That which 
the book of Kings did not give we have in the books of 
the Chronicles, surely a direct word to us from our God, 
and surely a sufficient ground for our faith. But take the 



passage upon which all this opposition is based, and it 
will be found to be a confirmation rather than a source 
of doubt; it strengthens our faith! 

Here is the account of the kings of Judah and Israel 
about that time: Asa was contemporary with Ahab of 
Israel, three years. (I Kings 22:41.) His son, Jehoshaphat, 
reigned twenty-five years. In the seventeenth year 
of Jehoshaphat, Ahaziah of Israel began to reign and is 
said to have been king two years. But in the eighteenth year 
of Jehoshaphat, Jehoram of Israel was made king, and 
he reigned for twelve years. In his fifth year Jehoshaphat 
died and Jehoram of Judah reigned in his stead, and 
in the twelfth and last year of Jehoram of Israel Jehoram 
of Judah died, having reigned eight years. (I Kings 22:42,5 1 ; 
2 Kings 3:1; 8:16,25.) These passages and 
this item of history well illustrate the difficulty of getting 
a certain chronology from a comparison of the lives of 
the kings of Judah and Israel; but it also shows that the 
account in Chronicles is reliable, for the total years 
under review agree even though the details do not show 
the closest harmony, owing, as we have said, to the method 
of counting which obtained. In this period the number 
of years for Judah is: Asa, three years; Jehoshaphat, 
twenty-five; Jehoram, eight; total, thirty-six. The number 
for Israel is: Ahab, twenty-two years; Ahaziah, two; 
Jehoram, twelve; a total of thirty-six, exactly the same 
as recorded of Judah when we take the Scripture statement 
that Jehoram of Judah reigned eight years. 

With much love in the Lord, your brother, 
J. HEMERY. 



R4602 : page 136 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE GARMENTS OF GLORY AND 
BEAUTY 

QUESTION.— Was there any significance in 
the fact that the High Priest, after having 
performed the services of the Day of 
Atonement, took off his linen garments in 
the Holy and left them there and put on 
garments of glory and beauty when he came 
forth to bless the people? 

Answer.— The High Priest all through 
this Gospel Age is carrying on the work of 
sacrifice; it was not only when he offered 
up himself, but during all this age he continues to be the 
sacrificing Priest, and although he has passed beyond the 
vail, he is still, so to speak, in the linen garments of 
sacrifice; and his secondary offering, that of the antitypical 
goat, will be accomplished in the linen garments, 
when he will enter in beyond the vail and present the blood 



of his Body, which is the Church, at the close of this 
antitypical Atonement Day, when the Church shall have 
filled up its share of the sacrifice of Christ. Our Lord, 
the High Priest, will then, the second time, sprinkle the 
blood, the merit, upon the mercy-seat, thereby sealing the 
New Covenant and applying his merit on "behalf of all the 
people." 

Having done this he will come forth to bless the 
people; but he will not again appear in the linen garments 
of sacrifice. The change will be made unseen to the 
world. The last they will see will be the going in of the 
priests after the sacrificial work of the present time, the 
Gospel Age, and the first they will see in the New Dispensation 
will be the appearance of the great Priest in 
glory and beauty— in "the glorious garments." Not that 
they will see these with their natural eye; but his glory 
shall be revealed through the ministration of the New 
Covenant blessings to Israel and the world, and this revelation 
of all the glorious things represented in the various 
garments of the High Priest will be a manifestation that 
will last all through the Millennial Age— the various robes, 
the ephod, etc., will all have their fulfillment then in the 
glorious work of the Anointed One. 

The beginning of this manifestation in glory will be 
in the time of trouble, of which time we read: "All shall 
wail because of him." It is his manifestation in power, 
the breaking in pieces of things of this present order of 
affairs, that will cause the great time of trouble that the 
Scriptures announce will be the conclusion of this Age 
and the inauguration of the Millennial Age. Thus the appearing 
in glory will have various stages, but all will be 
on the glorious plane; none will be again on the sacrificial 
plane of the present age. 

In this picture of the robes of the Priest we understand 
that the High Priest typified the entire Priesthood, 
the Under-Priests as well as the Head; that the Head did 
not need the covering, but that the covering of the linen 
garments represented the merit of Christ imputed to us, 
the members of his Body, whom the Father accepts and 
justifies and whose imperfections are covered through 
him. We understand that the white robe represents especially 
our share in the picture; that the High Priest 
going forth in glory typifies in large measure the glory of 
the Church in connection with her Head, as we read: "It 
doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that 
when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall 
see him as he is." Another Scripture declares that we 
shall be his glorious Body, or his Body in glory, and that 
"we shall be glorified together with him." 



WOMAN THE GLORY OF MAN-THE CHURCH THE 
GLORY OF CHRIST 

Question.— In the Scripture which says that woman 



is the glory of man, is the intimation conveyed that the 
Church is the glory of Christ? 

Answer.— We understand it is. We are not to understand 
by this, however, that woman is the glory of the 
man in the sense of being more glorious than the man; 
nor that the Church is the glory of Christ in the sense of 
being more glorious than Christ; nor that the Son is the 
glory of the Father in the sense of being more glorious 
than the Father; but we do understand that the Father 
is especially glorified in the Son because of the closeness 
of the relationship existing between them and because 
of the honor that the Father has shown the Son. 
Similarly Christ will be glorified in the Church because 
the wonderful glory that will be manifested through the 
Church will be a reflection of the glory of Jesus— all as a 
result of the Father's grace through him. 

R4602 : page 137 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF COALS FROM THE ALTAR 

Question.— What is signified by the Priest's taking 
coals from the altar and using the same for the offering 
of the incense in the Holy? 

Answer.— We see that the fire used in all three of 
these different places represented our Lord's dying, or 
death process. The fire outside the Camp represented 
the destructive influences which came against him and 
caused his death, as viewed from the world's standpoint. 
The fire in the Court represented the same destructive influences 
that came against him and caused his death, as 
viewed from the standpoint of believers. To those outside 
the Camp the burning of the flesh and hide and hoofs 
and horns had a very evil odor, bad odor. To those that 
were inside the Court the burning of the fat— it was 
practically all fat in the sin-offering that was offered on 
the altar at this time— represented that which is not a 
bad odor, as the burning of fat does not give off a bad 
odor when burned under proper conditions and circumstances, 
as it is almost all pure carbon. As has already 
been suggested, the fat would represent the love and 
zeal which would characterize the sacrifice. In a lean 
animal there is very little fat; in a fat animal there is 
much fat to be put on the altar and correspondingly would 
augment the zeal, the flame, with which it would burn. 
But entirely aside from the burning of the fat and of the 
animal outside the Camp is the fact that fire was used 
to start this flame of sacred love and self-sacrifice. 

The coals of fire upon the altar, that which caused the 
burning of the fat, would not seem to represent anything 
that our Lord had or did, but rather experiences from the 
ordinary affairs of life. Wood doubtless was used on the 
altar, as we read in some places, and the glowing embers 
from this fire upon the altar were taken inside the vail to 
constitute the basis of the offering on the Golden Altar, 
the offering of the incense. This shows, therefore, that 



the fire was of the same kind in all three of these pictures 
—wood-fire that burned the animal outside; wood-fire that 
burned the fat in the Court; and wood-fire or coals of fire, 
that burned the incense upon the Golden Altar. 

What does fire here represent? We answer that, as 
usual, fire represents destructive influences. Was there 
anything peculiar about these destructive influences that 
would mark them as separate and distinct from many other 
destructive influences. Our thought is that the fact that 
they are connected with the altar and were typified by the 
fire which burned only on the altar, implies that they were 
destructive influences which were connected with the 
sacrificing; not the destructive influences which might 
come against mankind in general, as disease, or war, or 
famine, or pestilence, or from some other such general 
source of fire, trouble, destruction, but rather here a sacrificial 
fire, sacrificial influence, something connected with 
what was being offered; therefore such adverse influences 
as would be of the Father's appointment and for the very 
purpose of accomplishing this test or sacrifice; as our 
Lord expressed it, using another figure: "The cup which 
my Father hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?" It 
was not the Jews that poured that cup for him; it was 
not the Pharisees that poured that cup; it was not the 
Romans; it was not the people nor the hypocrites; it was 
not the scribes that poured that cup; but it was the Father 
who provided the cup. 

We would understand, then, that all these coals of fire 
represent those classes of circumstances and conditions 
which the Father provides for the very purpose of proving 
the character and the loyalty and the genuineness of 
our devotion. Carrying the coals into the Holy would 
thus seem to identify those two altars as expressing to 
us in symbol or type that the spirit of devotion which believers 
see consuming the sacrifice that is voluntarily offered 
to the Lord and which, while in line, in harmony 
with righteousness, is not commanded by the Divine law, is 
the sacrificing principle which is so acceptable in God's 
sight. It was in harmony with this, therefore, that our 
Lord offered up himself, in the sense of crumbling the 
incense upon the fiery coals. Thus day by day he laid down 
his life, allowed himself to come in contact with these 
experiences, which served to destroy his earthly nature 
and sent forth a sweet fragrance to God. It was not any 
and every tribulation, as before intimated, but simply those 
which the Father had provided and were connected with 
his sacrificial experience. 



SWEETENING OF THE WATERS OF MARAH 

Question.— What typical significance is there in the 
fact that when the waters of Marah were found to be 
bitter, and the Children of Israel had no water to drink, 
Moses caused a certain tree to be cut down and thrust 



into the stream, and thus sweetened the waters? 

Answer.— As a result of Adam's sin there was nothing 
permanently refreshing for God's people to partake of. 
Those who desired to be his people, those who left the 
world behind them, found a great deal of unsatisfaction, 
if we may so express it, from the provisions of the law, 
which brought only condemnation. In due time, however, 
God caused the death of our Lord Jesus, and through or 
by means of his death— through the message of the ransom 
sacrifice— those who drink of this fact, this water, will 
not find that brackish taste. 

We might say that it would not be unreasonable to 
consider that there is a correspondency of this at the 
present time. During the Dark Ages the water of life 

R4603 : page 137 

became very much polluted, and, as a consequence, undesirable. 

When we came to the waters of the Lord's 

Word and found that they were brackish and impure, 

nauseating, not wholesome, the Lord in his providence 

showed us more clearly than we have seen in the past the 

great doctrine of the Ransom, the reason for the cutting 

off of our Lord Jesus in death. Here was the manifestation 

of Divine Love and Mercy. And since we have 

realized this truth; since the truth has come in contact 

with and purified the message of the Dark Ages, we can 

partake of it with refreshment and joy. 

We may not know if this was intended to be a correspondency, 
but we can at least draw some lessons from 
it, the lessons being true whether the matter was intended 
to be thus applied or not. 



SOME TYPES OF THE RESURRECTION 

Question.— Since the Lord arranged very many types 
during the Jewish Age respecting the Gospel Age and 
the future, what would you consider the most important 
type of the resurrection? 

Answer.— If we consider this question as relating especially 
to our Lord we see a number of types that very 
forcefully illustrate his resurrection. The one our Lord 
mentioned should be classed as amongst the most important, 
for two reasons: First, because he mentioned it and 
thus gave it prominence, and second, because it and it 
alone of all the types gives the exact length of time of 
his entombment. Our Lord's words were, "As Jonah was 
three days and three nights in the belly of the fish, so shall 
the Son of man be three days and nights in the heart 

R4603 : page 138 

of the earth," thus indicating that his resurrection would 
be on the third day and that he would be brought forth 



from the grave as Jonah was brought forth from the 
belly of the fish, which he styled "the belly of hell," the 
grave, sheol, the hades condition. 

It would appear, too, from the Apostle's words, that 
we should give prominence to the picture of our Lord's 
resurrection as shown by Abraham's receiving Isaac as 
from the dead, when he had already consecrated him to 
death and was about to slay him, the Lord staying his 
hand and giving him instead another sacrifice. 

We are justified also in supposing that the "wave-sheaf" 
offering was a very prominent illustration or type of 
the resurrection of our Lord, particularly because it occurred 
just at the time which marked the day of his 
resurrection, the morrow after the Sabbath, the fiftieth 
day before Pentecost. This was apparently given to illustrate 
the raising up of our Lord Jesus as "the first-fruits 
unto God," "the first-fruits of them that slept," 
"the first that should rise from the dead." It, therefore, 
is a very beautiful picture. See Lev. 23:10,11,15,16. 

If we think of the types of the world's resurrection 
we see a variety. As has been suggested, the crossing of 
Jordan might be considered a type of the passing out of 
the death condition into Canaan beyond. The Jubilee, 
the restoration of every man to his former estate, is 
certainly a wonderful picture of the "times of restitution 
of all things," of the lifting of humanity up out of sin, 
degradation and death, out of their lost condition, and 
bringing them back to the former estate, full perfection 
of the human nature. 

We would be fully justified, we think, in considering as 
types the miracles of our Lord in awakening some of the 
sleepers— Lazarus, Jairus' daughter and the son of the 
widow of Nain. These were given to us as foreshadowing, 
and therefore in a sense as typifying or illustrating 
the resurrection. 

Another picture of the resurrection, not only the 
awakening, but also the raising up of mankind, is shown in 
the end of the Day of Atonement. When Moses had received 
the blessing for the people as a result of the second 
sprinkling of the blood, he came forth, and, lifting up his 
hands, blessed the people. The people were waiting in 
dust and sackcloth and sorrow because of sin, and now 
the blessing of Moses and Aaron, the Lord's blessing 
through them, signified the removal of that curse and the 
uplifting of the people— their raising up from sorrow to 
rejoicing in the Lord. 



R4603 : page 138 

JOYFUL IN TRIBULATIONS 

"ESTEEMING THE REPROACH OF CHRIST GREATER 
RICHES THAN THE TREASURES OF EGYPT." 



When we consider all thy goodness, Father, 
Thy gentleness, thy tenderness, thy grace, 

Our hearts stir with the mighty impulse 

Thy praise to show in every time and place. 

That all our outward life might show thy praises; 

That other souls might know how good thou art, 
And that our every thought and word and action 

Might show our heart, like thine own perfect heart. 

Thy sons, indeed! and when thy face, O Father, 
Seems turned away, and we are chastened sore, 

We thank thee for thy love so true and faithful 

That scourgeth whom thou lovest more and more. 

We praise thee, since in all thy gentle dealings 
We see thy glory and thy beauty shine, 

And in each act of thine we read so clearly 
The sacred, holy peace of love Divine. 

But, Father, more than all for this we thank thee— 

For privilege to serve and suffer still, 
As did our blessed Lord and holy Master: 

Our sacred joy, since 'tis thy sacred will. 

Thus, Father, spare us not; let fall the death stroke 
Of pain and suffring that our flesh must see. 

But give us grace that in the sharp ordeal, 

Our hearts may yield sweet perfume unto thee. 

We glory in our fleshly tribulation: 

No joy of earth is sweet as pain for thee. 

If pain for thee is sweet, what is the measure 
Of Kingdom joy, our rapture soon to be! 

ETHEL HALSTEAD. 



R4603 : page 138 

THE PRIVILEGE AND POWER OF PRAYER 

"And Jesus spake a parable unto them to this end, that 
men ought always to pray and not to faint."— Luke 18:1- 

TO THE thoughtful, appreciative mind, one of 

the greatest privileges which the Word of 

God offers is that of personal audience and 

communion with the King of kings and 

Lord of lords. When we consider how great 

is our God, and how exalted his station, how 

wonderful is the condescension that thus 

regards our low estate! He it is whose 

glory covereth the heavens, and whose kingdom 

ruleth over the whole universe. He it 

is who is without beginning of days or end of years— 



"From everlasting to everlasting thou art God." He is 
the immortal, the Self-Existing One, "dwelling in the 
light which no man can approach unto, whom no man 
hath seen nor can see." 

The heavens declare his glory and the firmament 
showeth his handiwork. In all his vast universal domain 
there is nothing hidden from him, nor can he be 
wearied by its care. His wisdom, who can fathom? and 
his ways, who can find them out? or who hath been his 
counsellor? His mighty intellect grasps with ease all the 
interests of his wide dominion, from immensity to minutia. 
His eye never slumbers nor sleeps, nor can the smallest 
thing escape his notice, not even a sparrow's fall; and the 
very hairs of our heads are all numbered. It is his skill 
which clothes with life and beauty the grass of the field, 
which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven. 

And are not we, the creatures of his hand, "fearfully 
and wonderfully made," and the subjects, too, of his love 
and care?— "O Lord, thou hast searched me and known 
me. Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising; 
thou understandest my thought afar off. Thou compassest 
my path and my lying down, and art acquainted 

R4603 : page 139 

with all my ways; for there is not a word in my tongue, 
but, lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether. Thou hast 
beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. 

"Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, 
I cannot attain unto it. Whither shall I go from thy 
spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I 
ascend up into heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed 
in the grave, behold thou art there; if I take the wings of 
the morning and dwell in the uttermost part of the sea, 
even there shall thy hand lead me;. ..even the night 
shall be light about me. Yea, the darkness hideth not 
from thee, but the night shineth as the day; the darkness 
and the light are both alike to thee."— Psa. 139:1-12. 

Fallen creatures though we be, from the noble estate 
in which we were created, God so loved our race, even 
while we were yet sinners, as to make provision at great 
cost for our redemption and restitution and subsequent 
eternal glory. And therefore it is— because he loves us— 
that through Christ he extends to us the gracious favor of 
coming to him as children to a father. Wonderful is the 
condescension, wonderful the love and favor of our God! 

Yet our God is a God to be revered. He is not one 
like ourselves, our equal, into whose presence we may 
come without that ceremony and decorum due to his 
glorious person and office. (Job 9:1-35.) The court of 
heaven has regulations and ceremonies of respect and due 
deference which must be complied with by every man 
who would gain an audience with the King of kings; and 
it behooves us to inquire what those regulations are before 
we presume to address him. Here the Word of God 
gives explicit directions. Our Lord Jesus, the appointed 



"days-man" for whom Job so earnestly longed (Job 9:32,33), 
said, "No man cometh unto the Father, but by me. 
I am the way." (John 14:6.) Then he gave us an 
illustration of the manner in which we should address 
him, in what is known as the Lord's prayer.— Matt. 6:9-13. 

The illustration teaches (1) that we (believers in 
Christ) may consider ourselves as in God's estimation reinstated 
(through faith in Christ) to the original position 
of sons of God, and that we may therefore confidently address 
him— "Our Father." (2) It indicates on our part worshipful 
adoration of the high and holy One, and profound 
reverence for the glorious character and attributes of our 
God— "Hallowed be thy name." (3) It expresses full 
sympathy with his revealed plan for a coming Kingdom 
of righteousness, which will be according to his will— 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is 
done in heaven." This shows the attitude of heart to be 
toward righteousness, and fully submitted to the Divine 
will and purpose, that God may work in it to will and to 
do his good pleasure. (4) It expresses in plain and simple 
language its dependence on God for daily needs, and the 
confidence of a child in the Father for the supply of 
those needs out of his abundant fulness— "Give us this 
day our daily bread." (5) It seeks forgiveness for 
trespasses, and recognizes also the obligation thus incurred 
to render the same to those trespassing against us— 
"And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors"; 
and (6) it seeks to be guarded against temptation and to 
be fortified by God's abounding grace against all the 
wiles of the Adversary— "And abandon us not to trial, 
but preserve us from evil." 

Such are the principles which must ever characterize 
our attitude of mind and heart when we would avail ourselves 
of the privilege of addressing the throne of 
heavenly grace. In brief, our prayers, to be acceptable 
to God, must express confident faith, loving esteem and 
reverence, full sympathy with the Divine Plan and submission 
to the Divine will, child-like dependence upon 
God, acknowledgment of sins and shortcomings and desire 
for forgiveness, with a forgiving disposition on our part 
toward others, and an humble craving for the Divine 
guidance and protection. These may not always all be 
expressed in words, but such must at least be the attitude 
of the soul. 

Those who thus come to God are privileged always to 
have their interests considered at the throne of grace, and 
the welcome we shall always find there may be judged of 
by the cordial invitations to come often and tarry long. 
Well might we hesitate to avail ourselves of such privileges 
were we not thus assured, but having this assurance 
we may come with confidence to the throne of grace. 

The Lord knew how necessary to our spiritual life 
would be this communion with himself. Tempest-tossed 
and tried, how much we need our Father's care and the 
comfort and consolation which his presence and sympathy 
realized imparts. And have not all the meek and 



contrite in heart the promise not only of the occasional 
attentive hearing, but of the abiding presence of both the 
Father and the Son, our Lord Jesus? Jesus said, "He 
that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is 
that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of my 
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to 
him. Judas— not Iscariot— saith unto him, Lord, how is 
it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us and not unto the 
world? Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love 
me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, 
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with 
him. "-John 14:21-23. 

The thought which this promise of the abiding presence 
of the Father and Son conveys to our minds is that 
their thought and care and interest will be constantly upon 
us, and that at any instant we may engage the special 
attention of either or both. The same idea is also conveyed 
by the words of the Apostle Peter (I Pet. 3:12)— 
"For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his 
ears are open unto their prayers." And we are urged to 
be "instant in prayer," to "pray always, and not to faint," 
to "pray without ceasing"; for "Like as a Father pitieth 
his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him; for 
he knoweth our frame, he remembereth that we are dust." 
"As the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his 
mercy toward them that fear him," and "As far as the 
east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions 
from us." Yea, "the mercy of the Lord is from 
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his 
righteousness unto children's children, to such as keep his 
covenant and to those that remember his commandments 
to do them. "-Rom. 12:12; Luke 18:l;IThes. 5:17; 
Psa. 103:13,14,11,12,17,18. 

We cannot come too often, then, to the throne of the 
heavenly grace, if we are of those who can claim the 
abiding presence of the Father and the Son— if we are of 
those who love him and keep his commandments and who 
recognize the Lord Jesus as the only way of access to the 
Father. And even "if any man sin"— be overtaken in a 
fault— so that from his outward conduct he might be 
judged as not loving the Lord, yet, if he repent, let him 
remember that "we have an Advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ the righteous," who "is the propitiation 
[satisfaction] for our sins," "who also maketh intercession 
for us." "Who," then, "shall lay anything to the charge 
of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that 
condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is 
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who 
also maketh intercession for us."— I John 2:1,2; 
Rom. 8:33,34. 

Wherefore, the Apostle urges, "Seeing, then, that we 

R4603 : page 140 

have a great High Priest that is passed into the heavens, 
Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession; for 



we have not a High Priest which cannot be touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted 
like as we are, yet without sin. Let us, therefore, come 
with confidence to the throne of grace, that we may obtain 
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need."— 
Heb. 4:14-16. 

With such urgent and loving invitations let no child 
of God hesitate to come to him often or to tarry long in 
communion and fellowship with him. It is our privilege 
to enter into our closets and shut the doors and pray to 
our Father which seeth in secret, who will reward us 
openly. (Matt. 6:6.) And not only so, but he will go 
with us through all the business and hurry and commotion 
of the day; and at any instant in the midst of cares 
and perplexities we may turn our prayerful thoughts to 
him for wisdom, for strength and Christian fortitude, or 
for comfort and consolation for ourselves or others. And 
though we hear no responding voice, if we are attentive 
to the course of his providence we will shortly see the 
shaping of events and circumstances for our good and the 
good of others in answer to such prayers. Beloved, have 
we not many a time proved this true?— in perplexities, in 
tribulations, in afflictions, in persecutions, in bereavements, 
in temptations and trials? 

In coming to God we need have no fear that he is too 
busy with other matters of greater importance, or that he 
is weary of our coming to him repeatedly with things of 
small importance. It was to assure us against this very 
thing that our Lord spoke the parable of the importunate 
widow, who was heard and answered on account of her 
importunity. In so doing we evince both the earnestness 
of our desires and our faith that our prayers will be answered, 
if we faint not from lack of faith or zeal when 
the answer is delayed, as often it must necessarily be, 
since time is an important element in all God's work. 

All night, until the break of day, Jacob wrestled in 
prayer, saying, "I will not let thee go, unless thou bless 
me." Paul thrice besought the Lord until he was assured 
his grace would be sufficient for him. The Lord himself 
frequently spent whole nights in prayer, and he prayed 
earnestly and with many tears. (Luke 6:12; Matt. 14:23; 
Mark 6:46; 1:35; Luke 5:16; Heb. 5:7.) And the 
Apostle Paul says, "In everything, by prayer and supplication 
[earnest pleading] with thanksgiving, let your requests 
be made known to God."— Phil. 4:6. 

The Apostle himself acted on this principle when he 
urged, in his letter to the Romans, that the saints "strive 
together [Greek agonize] with me in prayers to God for 
me," that he might safely accomplish a certain work which 
seemed to be of the Spirit's leading.— Rom. 15:28-32. 

"In every thing": That signifies that our heavenly 
Father is deeply interested in everything that relates to us 
and ours. What thing is too small for his notice who 
numbers even the very hairs of our heads? In today's 
household or business cares, then, we may have his loving 
sympathy and helpfulness. Do a mother's counsel and a 



father's wisdom seem inadequate to restrain and guide 
aright the wayward course of impetuous and over-confident 
youth, they may bring their cares and fears to the 
Lord; and, as the children cross the threshold to meet the 
world's temptations, his wisdom and providence may be 
invoked to so shape their circumstances and surroundings 
as to show them eventually the sure, safe way and the 
folly of pursuing any other. 

Do business cares perplex and annoy? remember the 
Lord's caution, "Be not overcharged with the cares of 
this life," and the Apostle's warning, "They that will be 
rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many 
foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction 
and utter ruin; for the love of money is the root of all 
evil, which, while some coveted after, they have erred 
from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many 
arrows. But thou, O man of God, flee these things and 
follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, 
meekness. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on 
eternal life." And, remembering these things, come to the 
throne of the heavenly grace for wisdom and direction as 
to how you may so adjust your temporal affairs as not to 
be overcharged with the cares of this life. It is right to 
be charged with them to the extent of diligence (Rom. 12: 1 1) 
and the utilization of such diligence in the Lord's 
service; but it is the overplus, the corroding care, that 
interferes with peace of mind and communion with God, 
that is to be avoided. 

Does poverty pinch and cause anxious thought? take 
that also to the Lord in prayer; and then, while diligently 
using the means at hand to provide things decent and 
honest, patiently and confidently wait and watch the indications 
of providence, assured that he who feeds the fowl 
of the air, "which neither sow nor reap nor gather into 
barns," and who "clothes the grass of the field, which today 
is and tomorrow is cast into the oven," is both able 
and willing to clothe and feed you and yours. 

And so through all the list of earth's trials and cares, 
its wants and its woes, its bereavements and disappointments 
and calamities and distresses, its failures and shortcomings 
and sins and mistakes, we may take them all to 
the Lord in prayer and receive that strength and sympathy 
and consolation and help we so much need. Let us live 
in the presence of the Father and the Son who have 
promised to abide with us. It will sweeten our days and 
comfort our nights and ease our burdens and lighten our 
cares and brighten our hopes, and, in a word, it will lift 
us above the world into a higher and purer atmosphere. 
Such is the will of heaven concerning us. Let us appreciate 
and avail ourselves of the privilege. 

By all the encouragements of precept and example, 
the Lord assures us that the fervent prayer of a righteous 
man (a justified and consecrated child of God) availeth 
much. (Jas. 5:16.) We are urged also to come in faith. 
Jesus said, "If ye have faith and doubt not.. .all 
things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye 



shall receive." (Matt. 21:22.) As he was addressing 

his consecrated disciples, it must of course be understood 

that all their petitions would be subjected to Divine 

wisdom, and therefore the answers to their prayers, 

though always sure, might not always be in the way expected, 

but they would always be considered and answered 

in some way for their highest good. 

What a blessed privilege, dear fellow-disciples of 
the Lord, is ours, to be "instant in prayer," to "pray 
always"— to lift up our hearts and minds to God at any 
time and in any place and to realize thus daily and hourly 
that the Father and our dear Lord Jesus continually abide 
with us. And then, when the active duties of the day have 
been performed under his eye and supervision, or at any 
time when the soul realizes its necessity, how precious is 
the privilege of entering into our closets and there alone 
with God unburdening our hearts. 

While secret prayer is the blessed privilege of every 
child of God, and one without which his spiritual life cannot 
be sustained, it is also the privilege of Christians to 
unite their petitions at the throne of grace. This united 
prayer is specially commended by the Lord. (Matt. 18:19.) 
"Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall 
agree on earth as touching anything that they shall ask, 

R4603 : page 141 

it shall be done for them of my Father, for where two or 
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in 
the midst of them." 

With such promises as these, together with an experience 
of their fulfilment, who can doubt the love and 
favor of our God and of our Lord and Savior, Jesus 
Christ? Therefore let us be encouraged to pray always 
and not to faint when the answers seem to tarry long, for 
time is often required to work out the deep designs of an 
allwise and loving Providence. Remember the words of 
the angel to Daniel. Daniel said, "While I was speaking 
and praying and confessing my sin and the sin of my 
people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the 
Lord my God, for the holy mountain of my God; yea, 
while I was speaking in prayer," the answer came by the 
hand of an angel who said, "O Daniel, I am now come 
forth to give thee skill and understanding. At the beginning 
of thy supplications the commandment came forth, 
and I am come to show thee; for thou art greatly beloved." 
-Dan. 9:20-23. 

On another occasion, when Daniel had mourned three 
weeks, fasting and praying, because of his inability to 
understand, the angel of the Lord came and said, "Fear 
not, Daniel, for from the first day that thou didst set thine 
heart to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy 
God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy 
words."-Dan. 10:2,3,10-12. 

Even so shall it ever be with all the beloved of the 
Lord. At the beginning of our supplications God begins 



to set in operation the influences and to shape the circumstances 

which are designed to work out the intended blessing 

for us— if we faint not, but continue instant in prayer, 

thereby evincing our continued earnestness of desire, and 

if we confess our sins, and set our hearts to understand, 

and chasten ourselves before him. How many prayers 

are not heard or are hindered because the one who asks 

does not first purify himself of evil in his own heart? 

"Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye 

may consume it upon your lusts"; i.e., you ask selfishly 

and without regard to the will of God. (Jas. 4:3.) But 

to the chastened and sanctified comes the promise— "Before 

they call [reading the desire of the heart even before 

it finds expression in words] I will answer [will 

begin so to shape events as to bring the answer soon or 

later]; and while they are yet speaking I will hear." 

(Isa. 65:23,24.) While this is in connection with a 

prophecy relating to the Lord's people in the Millennial 

Age, it is also true of all his faithful ones of this age. 

Praise the Lord for all his loving kindness even to the 
least of his lowly children! 



R4601 :page 141 

THE REDEMPTION PRICE AND ITS APPLICATION 

"Ye were redeemed, not with corruptible things, such as silver and 
gold. ..but with the precious blood of Christ."— I Pet. 1:18,19; 
I Cor. 6:20. 

OUR Lord's sacrificed life constitutes the 
price of redemption, but his having the 
price and the application of the price are 
properly considered two things. He applied 
the price for believers when "he ascended 
up on high, there to appear in the presence 
of God for us"— the Church, the household 
of faith, the consecrated ones. And the 
Scriptures show us that he will later apply 
this price for all mankind— that it is intended 
for all ultimately, but has not as yet been applied 
for all. 

Hence the Scriptures declare that the "world 
still lieth in the wicked one"; that mankind are still "children 
of wrath." We were "children of wrath even as 
others" still are, but we have escaped the condemnation 
that is on the world, because the merit of Christ's sacrifice 
has been applied on behalf of believers and we came under 
the terms of that application when we believed the Lord, 
turned from sin, accepted the Redeemer by faith, and made 
a consecration. Then we were begotten of the holy Spirit 
of the Lord. 

It might be asked: Since our human life is sacrificed 
at the time of our consecration and begetting of the holy 



Spirit, will it be true that, when the last member of the 
Body of Christ has offered himself in sacrifice and is 
spirit-begotten, all the imputed life rights so sacrificed will 
be in the hands of our Lord? And if this be true, would 
it be necessary for all the Tribulation Class to be 
resurrected before the blood or merit could be applied for 
the sealing of the New Covenant? And again: Might 
not the New Covenant be sealed and the Ancient Worthies 
brought forth as the first-fruits thereof before the 
resurrection of the Tribulation Class? 

The sacrifice is unto the Father and accepted by the 
Father, and, so far as we will be concerned, the matter 
might be considered as ended at the time the last consecrated 
member of the Body of Christ has made his calling 
and election sure. But on the other hand the "great 
company" class entered into an arrangement, not with 
confidence in their own ability to accomplish anything 
for themselves, but because of the specific arrangement 
made that the Redeemer would cover all their sins, all the 
imperfections and shortcomings that were theirs at the 
time of their consecration, which the Apostle speaks of 
as "the sins that are past through the forbearance of 
God." 

The Lord Jesus offered to be their Advocate with the 
Father and to be with them, an ever-present help in time 
of trouble. He promised to be their Advocate in respect 
to all the trials and difficulties of life, and in their battlings 
with the flesh and in the occasional manifestations of the 
imperfections of the flesh, contrary to the will of the New 
Creature. He agreed to advocate for all this, and hence 
his interest in these members of the "great company" will 
continue after the "little flock" class shall have been dealt 
with and shall have passed beyond the vail. And since 
the basis of his advocacy is the merit of his sacrifice, the 
maintaining of his standing as their Advocate would seem 
to require that he should retain for this purpose, in the 
hands of the Father, the merit of his sacrifice, and hence 
would not yet apply it for the sealing of the New Covenant 
for Israel and through Israel for all the world. 

In the type, the sending away of the scape-goat into 
the wilderness toward the close of the Day of Atonement 
and no account being given of its destruction, might seem 
to imply that the "great company" and their experiences 
would not be taken into consideration at all beyond the 
time of the sending away of the goat; but the argument 
foregoing seems to prove conclusively that the merit of 
Christ must continue applicable until the last member of 
the "great company" class shall have suffered the complete 
destruction of the flesh which he failed to give up 
voluntarily. 



R4603 : page 142 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER 



DIVINE PROVIDENCE permitting, Brother 

Russell and the party of friends accompanying 

him on the trip to Palestine, expect to 

have the privilege of celebrating the antitypical 

Passover Supper, commemorating 

our Lord's death, by partaking of the 

emblems, the bread and the wine, in Jerusalem, 

and in the "upper room" in which, 

according to tradition, the Lord and the 

Apostles partook of the last Passover Supper 

together, and where the Lord instituted that service which 

so wonderfully sets forth his death and the privilege 

afforded the "members in particular of his Body" of 

being broken together with him, and of participating in 

the communion (common-union) of his sacrificial blood, 

by drinking the cup with him. 

That all who desire may be together in spirit at that 
season and have their thoughts and prayers directed along 
the same lines at the same time, we submit a table of the 
relative time of day it will be in other places:— 

7 p.m., Friday, April 22, at Jerusalem, will correspond 
to the following time, on same day, at these places:— 

6 p.m. in Berlin, Germany, and surroundings. 

5 p.m. in London and British Isles. 

I p.m. in Maritime Provinces. 

12 noon, in New York, N.Y.; Washington, D.C., 
and all Eastern time cities. 

I I a.m. in Chicago, St. Louis and all Central time 
cities. 

10 a.m. in Denver and all Mountain time cities. 

9 a.m. in San Francisco and Pacific Coast time cities. 

The Congregation of the Brooklyn Tabernacle will 
gather together to celebrate the Memorial at 13-17 Hicks 
street in the evening of the same day at 8 o'clock. As 
before announced in THE TOWER no special invitation is 
extended to distant friends, as the best interests are perhaps 
served by each group gathering together in its respective 
locality. However, those living in places which 
present no favorable opportunity for observing the event 
will be welcomed at any of the classes anywhere. 



R4604 : page 142 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

page 142 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Richest greetings in the name of Christ. Permit me to 
express my heartfelt appreciation of your loyalty to the 
Lord and his precious Truth; also your earnestness and 
zeal in striving to do God's will, daily laying down your 
life in his service, spending and being spent, even though 



the more you love the less you are loved. 

Dear Brother, I have enjoyed "Present Truth" for the 
last four years, and I can truly say by his grace that these 
few years have been the grandest season of my life. 

Pardon me for not having written to you before this, 
for I really wish to say that I appreciate your labor of love 
on behalf of the household of faith. My only regret is that 
I am not able to express to you my love and gratitude for 
your faithfulness (words fail me to thus express my feelings), 
but trust, my dear Brother, you shall be able to 
receive these few lines in the spirit in which they are sent. 

When I look back into the past, I realize how dark was 
my way before the eyes of my understanding were open. 
Oh! I cannot thank our Heavenly Father enough for permitting 
me to see and appreciate this glorious light of his 
Truth, thus unfolding his great love to even me, the least 
of the least. Oh! I know I have not been worthy, but 
trust that I shall (by his grace) go on to the end, daily 
to show forth his praises, who has called me to this precious 
Truth. 

I also wish to say that I have received a great help, 
and a rich blessing, since taking the Vow; it is certainly 
helping to keep on the whole armor, while some who have 
not taken the Vow are not withstanding the darts of the 
Evil One. 

Assuring you that I ever remember you before the 
throne of grace, I am and hope to remain, 

Your humble and loving Brother, 

F. MANGOLD, --, N.Y. 



R4604 : page 142 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Your kind letter to the Pilgrims and Colporteurs at 
hand, which was very much appreciated, and I will indeed 
endeavor to profit by suggestions. We have been in 
the Colporteur work now for seven years, and these years 
have indeed been the most blessed of all others. We have 
by the Lord's grace delivered 6,271 books this year as 
against 7,088 last year. We trust that we may prove so 
faithful that the Lord will permit us to serve to the very 
end. It would be hard to do anything else; and if faithful 
we need not, but may continue for 1,000 years in this 
glorious work. How wonderful that the Lord arranged 
his work in such a way that we can all help and receive 
the blessing connected therewith! 

I wish, dear Brother Russell, to assure you of my continued 
and growing love for you as the Lord's servant 
over the harvest work. I am very thankful to the dear 
Lord that my faith in you, and in this being the whole 
Truth and nothing but the Truth, has not been shaken. 

It seems very clear to me that if I have been reckoned 
perfect, and then say I need a mediator (a reconciler), I 
ignore my reckoned perfection. Surely I would want to 



know in advance what I am to receive in place of the 
blessed Truth, before I cast it aside. 

I feel sure that the Lord's grace will be sufficient for 
you, for our Master said, No man is able to pluck them 
out of my Father's hand. Nevertheless, let me assure you 
of my deep sympathy and also appreciation for your labor 
of love. I received all my knowledge of "present truth" 
through the DAWN-STUDIES, and surely, if my heart is 
right, I would esteem you very highly in love for your 
work's sake. May the dear Lord bless you more and more. 
May he pour you out such a blessing that there shall not 
be room enough to receive it. I remember you personally 
in my prayers daily, that you may continue to abide in his 
love. Pray for me, dear Brother. I thank you very much 
for the cross and crown pin; you may send it to my address 
here. 

Yours in the glorious harvest work, 

RAY VAN HYNING,-Ohio. 



MY DEAR BROTHER AND BELOVED PASTOR:- 

I thank God and take courage, because of the marvelous 
light that is now shining upon my so darkened 
horizon; and, praise God, it is to shine brighter and 
brighter unto the perfect day. Running from one denomination 
to another, thinking myself satisfied and soon 
finding myself more thirsty than ever, oh how I was 
craving for the real water of life! At last I landed 
among the tongue-people, who got under the power. I 
cried to God night and day to give me this new tongue. 

R4604 : page 143 

I was sure now that if I could only get this tongue I 
should always be satisfied. I starved myself for days 
and weeks in order to "get down flesh." I was soon a 
veritable skeleton and, of course, commenced "to shake" 
from nervousness. Then the tongue-people commenced to 
operate on my jaws and soon I was declared of the interpreter 
as "speaking in a new tongue." I kept fasting, 
kept nervous, kept shaking and kept "talking away" as 
long as I felt a nervous strain; I thought "the spirit" was 
upon me. 

Yet under all this I am sure God saw my earnest heart, 
and sent me deliverance. Two sisters of the tongue-people 
were the cause. One, the foremost in the ranks 
of the tongue-movement, was under the power; the other 
had a vision. "I see a hand," said the sister. "It's a 
child's hand," said the sister under the power and supposed 
to be used by the holy Ghost to answer all questions. 
"No, it is a grown person's hand," said the sister 
in her vision. "Ah, yes! (as correcting herself) the 
Savior's hand," said the sister under the power. I was 
sitting listening to them, and I thought at the moment, "If 
the holy Spirit is giving a vision to one and explaining 



it through another, would it not correspond"? At once 
the scales fell from my eyes, so to speak. From that 
time the demons lost their control over me more and 
more. Soon after a friend (not in "present truth") 
handed me THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES. I was offered 
this book six years before, but would not accept it, answering 
that my Bible was enough for me. He kept on 
advising me to read it, so at last I told him I would look 
it over. I had scarcely opened its pages when I saw 
things explained, according to Scripture which I had long 
been looking for. I at once began to study it night and 
day. I can now say, "glory to God in the highest." His 
choicest blessing upon you, dear Brother Russell. 
One of the smallest of his little ones, C. J. JENSEN. 

IN REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I am duly in receipt of your kind letter of the 5th instant 
and rejoice with you in the peace and joy that has 
come to your heart through a clearer appreciation of the 
love of our God as it shines in the face of Christ Jesus 
our Redeemer, and the wonderful Gospel in him. Truly, 
our God "has put a new song into our mouths, even the 
praises of our God," and we go forth with great rejoicing 
in the privileges that we have of being witnesses of these 
things. 

So walking in our dear Lord as you have received him, 
may you become rooted and grounded and built up in him 
that at his revelation you may be granted an abundant 
entrance into the everlasting Kingdom. 

Very sincerely your Brother and fellow-servant. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings to you and the dear co-laborers at Brooklyn. 
Some months ago a sister handed me the report of expenditures 
of a mission in India. I wrote to the address, 
telling how wonderfully God is revealing to his people 
his wonderful Plan, mentioning among other things 
Daniel's prophecies, and saying that if they would like to 
read along lines which have been specially helpful to me I 
would be glad to send them some literature. I heard 
nothing for some time and was about to give up all hope. 
But while in Chicago a letter came which I will copy and 
enclose. This sister who handed me the report, Sister 
Pauline Martens, of Ft. Wayne, says these native missionaries 
are strong characters, but, as you will see by 
the letter, lack light. 

I have already sent "Food for Thinking Christians," 
"What is the Soul," "Our Lord's Return," and several 
other tracts, also several copies of PEOPLES PULPIT. 

I had no extra copy of Vol. I and, thinking you would 
be interested in this matter, I copied the letter for you. 

Your sister in his service and in the hope of a share 



in the "First Resurrection." B. H. ROSS. 

THE REPLY 

MY DEAR SISTER IN CHRIST:- 

I am very late in answering your kind letter, but I 
know you will pardon the delay, as my illness this year 
has caused it. My head and my eyes have troubled me 
for several months, but the Lord is faithful and he has 
kept me. I am much better now and can attend to almost 
all the work the Lord has put into my hands. 

I shall be so glad and so thankful to you for the reading 
you said you would send me regarding the prophecies 
of Daniel, if I wanted them. Not only I, but my friend 
and sister in the Lord, Miss Chandra, also will thankfully 
receive and read what you send. I had been praying the 
Lord specially and I regard your offer as an answer to 
my prayer. 

The Lord bless you abundantly above all that we can 
ask or think. Wishing you a very happy New Year with 
rich gifts from the Lord unto his glory, 

I am gratefully yours in him, 

SHORAT CHUCHEBUTTY.-India. 

IN REPLY 

DEAR SISTER:- 

In the absence of Brother Russell we are acknowledging 
your kind letter. 

With you we are much interested in the dear one in 
India concerning whom you advise us. We know that it 
would be in harmony with Brother Russell's desire to 
send this brother at least the first volume of SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, but are uncertain whether you request us to mail 
this copy to you that you might remail it to him, or if 
you desire that we forward it to him from here. We 
await information on this point, when we will bring the 
entire matter to the attention of Brother Russell. 

Yours in the love and service of the Truth. 



page 143 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

My greetings to you will be found in Numbers 6:24-26. 
My last and first letter took more of the form introductory. 
The present is indited as a mark of praise and 
thanksgiving to our Heavenly Father for the wonderful 
unfolding of his Word, granted me through a study of 
your valuable works-DAWN-STUDIES, Tracts, TOWERS, 
etc. I feel, dear Brother, caught away from the present 
evil world and, like some new flower, transplanted in "the 
world which is to come," as with patient eagerness I read 
THE TOWER as delivered. 

At time of writing I have read Vols. 1, 2, 3 and have 



gone far enough into Vol. 4 to be able to repeat my eulogy 
of 1, 2 and 3 and say— "Wonderful! Nobody ever has told 
me before." 

My vocation is that of a preacher; the congregation to 
which I minister is in a good measure interested in the 
wondrous things being made known through God to those 
having the hearing ear and eye of faith. 

Why preachers of Christendom in general will have 
nothing to do with your valuable writings is accounted 
for by saying they have greater privileges, better salaries, 
and higher praise in the service of the world and of the 
devil, than in the blessed service of the King of kings. 

Your yoke-fellow, H. WILSON CUST. 



page 146 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five vols.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; 
in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 
each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 
same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 145 



SEMI-MONTHLY 