VOL. XXXV JULY 1 No. 13 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Necessity of Self-Control 195 

Sad Perversion of Sound Judgment 195 

How to Attain Strength of Character 196 

We Must Fight to the End 196 

Our Responsibility Concerning Present 
Truth 197 

Are We Fulfilling Our Commission? 198 

The Great Shepherd and His Sheep 198 

The Tender Shepherd's Care 199 

Mankind the Straying Sheep 199 

Importance of Example 200 

"Let Your Light Shine" 200 

Living Epistles, Known and Read 200 

"He That Is Begotten of God Does Not 
Practise Sin" 201 

Seeming Contradictions Harmonized 201 

Faithfulness to Opportunities 202 

"Be Thou Faithful Unto Death" 203 

Christ's Triumphal Entry 204 

Prepared Hearts (Poem) 206 

Some Interesting Letters 207 

page 194 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



VOLUNTEER EXTENSION WORK 

The Volunteers are doing nobly and we have splendid 
ammunition. No doubt the results will be great. However, 
we must not hope to know the details until we reach the 
Kingdom. Meantime it is ours to do faithfully what our 
hands find to do— what our Lord privileges us to do. We 
are His ambassadors, His witnesses. 

We suggest that Class Extension work find parallel in 
Volunteer Extension work. After you have served your place 
of residence, seek the Lord's blessing in an endeavor to extend 
the distribution of free literature to other towns and cities 
within a reasonable radius. The Society is pleased to supply 
the ammunition free of all charges. It merely wishes, with 
the order, the names of the places to be served and the assurance 
that the work undertaken will (D.V.) be promptly 
done— that the literature will not be permitted to lie by unused. 
Remember that census population includes infants and 
that a proper estimate of one paper to the family would be 
one to five of the population. That is to say, a town of 5,000 
would require 1,000 copies of the Volunteer matter. In cases 
where the population is found to be foreign, remember we 
have free literature in nearly all languages. 



RE DEFECTIVE BOOKS 

Colporteurs and others who may receive books from us 
that are seriously defective will confer a favor by reporting 
the fact at once. Give particulars re time received. We want 
all our books to be right. 



RECEIPTS FOR WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

Regular subscribers for THE WATCH TOWER receive a receipt 
on the wrapper— showing how far their subscription is 
paid. Thus, if you had been paid up to January, 1913, and 
sent in a dollar, renewing until January, 1914, we would 
merely add the figure 4. Such a figure 4, under such circumstances, 
would stand for the year 1914. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 



the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
August follow: (1) 240; (2) 78; (3) 208; (4) 82; (5) 119; (6) 
277; (7) 272; (8) 168; (9) 14; (10) 305; (11) 325; (12) 155; (13) 
197; (14) Vow; (15) 256; (16) 259; (17) 5; (18) 12; (19) 6; (20) 
106; (21) 60; (22) 4; (23) 7; (24) 46; (25) 125; (26) 29; (27) 
300; (28) 240; (29) 263; (30) 25; (31) 235. 



R5487 : page 195 

NECESSITY OF SELF-CONTROL 

"He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city 
that is broken down and without walls."— Proverbs 25:28. 

IN OLDEN times cities were particularly 

places of refuge, where the inhabitants of 

the country congregated for protection. 

When the earth was less populous and the 

necessity for government was less appreciated 

than now, any marauding band was 

likely to take possession of whatever was 

open to their attack. So the cities of ancient 

times had strong walls. This was true, 

we remember, of Jerusalem and Jericho. It 

was true of ancient Troy, and also true of cities in 

Europe. In Vienna, the old wall of the city still stands; 

and so with other walled cities. 

But as improved forms of government were adopted, 
cities no longer needed protecting walls. The police 
nowadays constitute a wall of protection. Our text is 
referring to a wall such as was formerly used, and to a 
city which had become dilapidated and the wall broken 
down. King Solomon gives this as a picture of a human 
being who has no rule over his own spirit. He is unable 
to protect himself against evil influences from within or 
without, as a result of having suffered his will to be 
broken down. 

All mankind are born with more or less of determination. 
Some have this in a very marked degree; others in 
a lesser degree; no one, we believe, is wholly without this 
quality of will, purpose. But we find that whether our 
wills are strong or weak they need direction. Lessons in 
the directing of our wills come from various quarters; 
for instance, we have the laws of the city, laws of the 
state, laws of the country, which direct the individual as 
to what he may do and may not do— particularly what 
he may not do. As one looks into the source and history 
of these laws, he finds that they represent the accumulated 
will of a long period. Mankind now have very good laws. 
We have often thought it strange that fallen men have 
been able to produce such just laws as we find on the 
statute books today. 

But although very good laws may be made, yet people 
may ignore the law. A jury may set aside all law. A 



judge may pervert the law. Thus things that are unlawful 
may become a practise of an individual or a town or 
a city. To cultivate in one's self a lawless disposition is 
to cultivate the spirit of anarchy— a spirit of indifference 
to the rights and interests of others. There are some 
who manifest reasonable respect for the laws of man 
because necessity or public opinion makes it impossible 
or inadvisable to do otherwise, who may at heart be 
anarchists as regards the Law of God, the great Law-giver 
of the Universe. 

SAD PERVERSION OF SOUND JUDGMENT 

To yield ourselves to passion, to allow it to sweep over 
us and master us, is disastrous, whether we are weak-minded 
or strong-minded. The weak-minded have their 
limitations; the strong-minded have the excess of power, 
and are more potent for evil. We hear a great many say, 
when they have lost control of their temper, or have been 
petulant or morose or ill-natured or discourteous, Well, 
that's my way; I do not mean any harm. They acknowledge 
the matter, and seek to justify themselves by saying 
that it is natural to them. But no human being should live 
according to what is natural to his or her fallen nature. 
A being created in the image of God, and still retaining 
some traces of his original Godlikeness, should live above 
the plane of the lower animals, which follow merely their 
natural instincts and passions. 

R5488 : page 195 

Some seem to glory in what they are pleased to term 
their high spirit, which will always stand up for their 
"rights." They are not so weak and childish as to let 
anybody run over them ! If they do not like what others 
do or say, they will tell just what they think of the 
others. They have some force of character! Oh, how 
the great Adversary and his hosts, together with the perverse 
fallen nature, can deceive and mislead and blind 
the judgment that is not guided and instructed by the 
only true Guide— the Word of God! How they can make 
that which is noble, and truly strong and Godlike appear 
weak and puerile— and make that which is weak, base, 
selfish and animal appear strong and manly! 

ALL NEED REGULATION BY SOME STANDARD 

All should recognize that the inclinations, the impulses 
and the preferences of the fallen nature of man 
are often contrary to that which is right, noble, truly 
desirable. All should be regulated by some standard, 
either the civil standard by which the world is governed, 
or the standard of God. But one might live up to the 
letter of a law and yet be violating its spirit. The Law 
of God is the very highest standard of law. And the 
spirit of God's Law is embodied in the Golden Rule. 



This standard the whole world recognizes as right; and 
surely the Lord's people should measure all their conduct 
and their words, yea, their very thoughts, by this standard. 
Thus they will be rulers over their own spirit. 
The word spirit in the text under consideration represents 

R5488 : page 196 

the mind, the impulses of one's nature. We are to 
rule our mind, our natural impulses. This means that if 
a thought present itself to the mind, or if we feel a certain 
impulse, we should be quick to perceive the nature 
of the thought or impulse; and if it is not in harmony 
with the principles of righteousness or with our covenant 
as children of God, we should at once resist it. If we 
are unable to do this successfully of ourselves, as is often 
the case, the heart should be promptly lifted to the Lord 
for His promised grace to help in time of need. If we 
feel an impulse toward a certain action or course, we 
should carefully weigh the matter, and decide as to its 
righteousness or propriety in the circumstances, looking 
to our unfailing Source of help for guidance. 

The world would say that this is too exacting— that 
they would have more pleasure in doing their own will. 
But we know that in doing their own will they frequently 
get into difficulty. A Christian has covenanted not to 
follow his own will; he has given up his own will, and 
has taken the will of God instead. The more advanced 
the Christian, the more should we expect that he would 
be able to rule his spirit— "casting down imaginations 
and every high thing that exalteth itself against the 
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every 
thought" to the will of God in Christ. And if we rule 
our mind, our thoughts, we shall rule our tongue. If the 
thought were not in the mind, the tongue would not 
utter it. 

There is a grave danger of saying things, or of doing 
things, under a momentary impulse, that our heart, our 
consecrated judgment, would not approve; hence the 
necessity of bringing our thoughts and impulses into subjection. 
We are to consider, What would be the effect 
of my words or my action upon another? Would it 
bring harm? Would it be an injury, or cause needless 
pain, for me to say or do this thing, or would it do good? 
By thus scrutinizing himself, by thus taking himself in 
hand, and ruling his spirit, the child of God is showing 
his earnest desire of heart to be pleasing to the Lord 
and true to his covenant. And those who learn to rule 
their own spirit according to the will of the Father are 
the ones whom He will be pleased to make joint-heirs 
with His Son in His Kingdom. 

HOW TO ATTAIN STRENGTH OF CHARACTER 

In what way can a Christian cultivate this control of 
his own spirit? At first the individual has not the power 



to control himself in everything; but as he learns to exercise 
self-control in the little things, more and more doing 
what he can in this direction, in thought and word and 
deed, he will gain in strength of character. We should 
remember the story of the man who wished to develop 
his muscles, and who for this reason began to practise 
each day in lifting a calf. He commenced when the calf 
was very young, and he lifted it day by day for weeks 
and months. In due time the calf had become an ox, and 
he was then able to lift the ox. His daily practise had 
gradually strengthened his muscles; they increased in 
strength with the increase in the weight of the animal, 
until he was strong enough to lift the full-grown ox. 

And so with the Christian in his character-development: 
If we daily practise self-control, we shall gradually 
attain a strong character along this line, which will 
be of inestimable advantage to us in our Christian warfare. 
The cultivation of self-control should properly 
begin in one before birth, yea, at the time of conception. 
The mother should practise self-control, that this disposition 
might be impressed upon the mind of her unborn 
child, that thus it might enter the world in a much 
more favorable condition in this direction. And this 
spirit of self-control will grow in the child after birth, 
under the proper training of the parent, so that the child, 
approaching manhood's estate, will be able to exercise 
more natural self-control. Such a one, if he become a 
child of God, will make a very noble Christian indeed; 
he will be strong in the Lord and be helpful to others. 
But all have not had this natural advantage, and must 
battle the more determinedly for this reason. 

MORAL STRENGTH MORE DESIRABLE THAN PHYSICAL 

There is no place where the proof of our ability to 
rule our spirit is better shown than in our own home. 
With husband and wife, with parent and child, with 
brother and sister, this is an important matter. The 
battle with self is the greatest battle we have to fight; 
and the Word of God declares that "he that ruleth his 
own spirit is greater than he that taketh a city." He is 
greater because he has learned to exercise the will, the 
determination, of a true character in the right direction, 
in the direction of control of self. 

Moral strength is infinitely nobler and more to be 
desired than the greatest degree of physical strength or 
the keenest strategy. And it is only after we have conquered 
ourselves, only after we have become master of 
our own flesh, only after we have cast out the beam from 
our own eyes, have subdued anger, malice, hatred and 
strife in our own hearts, that we are able, by means of 
these severe battles with our own weaknesses, to assist 
the brethren, to assist our neighbors, to aid them— by our 
example— in overcoming their besetments and infirmities. 

WE MUST FIGHT TO THE END 



To rule one's own spirit, mind, disposition, implies a 
conflict similar in some respects to that of taking a city; 
for no matter where we begin, we find entrenched within 
us many armed and opposing powers. They have possession 
by heredity— they are there as the result of the 
fall. And if we have passed the days of youth they are 
the more strongly entrenched, and it requires the greater 
skill and generalship to rout them. But whether one has 
begun early or late, he that would succeed in ruling his 
own spirit must "war a good warfare." He must "fight 
the good fight of faith," down to the very end of the 
present existence. 

If the child of God would be the victor in this fight, he 
must not only storm all the fortresses of inherited evils, 
which seem to be a part of his very nature, but having 
gained possession and taken his seat upon the throne of 
this symbolic city (his will), he must thereafter be continually 
on the defensive; for the old enemies are constantly 
on the alert, and ever and anon seek to regain 
possession, so that he who continues to rule his own 
spirit is one who has not only routed the enemy, Sin, 
from the throne of his being, but is continuing to keep 
him at bay. 

This ruling of one's spirit is by no means an easy 
task; and, as in the illustration, it cannot be done single-handed 
and alone. Consequently, the wise "general" will 
invoke all the assistance at His command, remembering 
the words of the Apostle— "We wrestle not against flesh 
and blood, but against principalities and powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against wicked 
spirits in high places." (Ephesians 6:12.) These powers 
of the world, the flesh and the Devil are closely allied, 
and therefore he who plans for conquest and an established 
reign thereafter, must seek alliance with another 
and a stronger Power. This Power is tendered to all who 
earnestly undertake this great work. It is none other 
than the Almighty Arm of our God, who says to those 

R5488 : page 197 

who accept His strength, greater is He that is with you— 
that is for you— than all they that be against you; gird 
yourselves like men, be strong, fear not.— See 1 John 4:4; 
Isaiah 35:4. 

The ruling of this symbolic city— one's own spirit- 
will never be accomplished until first the "commanding 
general," the Will, has positively decided to change his 
allegiance from Sin to God, and to rout the rebels who 
resist the change. But, in the words of a trite saying, 
"Where there's a will, there's a way"— for good or for 
evil. God will assist, through various agencies, toward 
good; Satan, through various agencies, toward evil. If 
the Will says, "It must be done," it calls in the needed, 
available help; and forthwith it sets all the other faculties 
of the mind at work, first to subjugate, and then to rule 



and regulate the entire being. Conscience is commanded 
to keep a vigilant watch over all the mental operations. 
Judgment, under the influence of Conscience, must decide 
as to the righteousness or the unrighteousness of any 
matter, and report to the Will, which is under the same 
moral influence. 

THREE DEPARTMENTS OF MENTAL GOVERNMENT 

Thus we have three departments of government established 
—the legislative, which should always be the Conscience; 
the judicial, the Judgment; and the executive, 
the Will. In every well-regulated and righteously-ruled 
mind, all the other faculties must make their appeal to 

R5489 : page 197 

this Congress and, as the Will insists, in due and proper 
order. Their appeal to the Will to execute their desires 
before submitting them first to Conscience, and then to 
Judgment, should never be tolerated; but when approved 
there, they may freely urge their claims upon the executive 
power, the Will. The Will governs; and if the Will 
be weak, the government is slack, and the appetites, passions 
and unholy ambitions take advantage of the situation. 
They seek to overbalance Judgment and to silence 
Conscience, and loudly clamor to the Will to have their 
own wild way. 

If the Will be weak, but strive to keep itself under the 
influence of Conscience and sound Judgment, it will be 
fitful and irregular in its rulings; and the government 
will be unstable and ultimately wholly at the mercy of 
the fallen appetites, passions and ambitions. The condition 
of such a soul is one of anarchy which, unless its 
wild course be speedily arrested, will hurriedly sweep the 
whole being toward destruction. It is all-important, 
therefore, that the Will be entirely consecrated to God 
and righteousness; and that it strengthen itself in the 
Lord, and in His name and strength rule with a firm 
hand, cultivating as its assistants Conscience and Judgment, 
in determining the good and acceptable and perfect 
will of God, as expressed in His Word.— Romans 12:2. 

The Will has the most difficult office to fill; and the 
Lord's commendation will be to the man of resolute Will, 
instructed by an enlightened Conscience and Judgment. 
Blessed is the Christian who sets his house in order, and 
who maintains that order to the end of his days. The 
thorns and thistles of his old nature have been exterminated; 
the beautiful flowers of peace, righteousness and 
love have been cultivated; and now they flourish and 
adorn his character. The warring elements of his old 
nature have been brought into subjection to his New Will. 
As the poet Whittier has beautifully expressed it: 

"All the jarring notes of life 
Seem blending in a psalm; 



And all the angles of the strife 
Now rounding into calm." 



R5489 : page 197 

OUR RESPONSIBILITY CONCERNING PRESENT TRUTH 

"His Word was in my heart as a burning fire 

shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing; 

and I could not stay."— Jeremiah 20:9. 

THE Prophet Jeremiah is here using a very 
forceful comparison. He had a burning zeal 
in his heart, a consuming sense of the importance 
of the message given him to deliver. 
His previous declaration of the Word 
of God concerning Israel had been so despised 
and rejected that he had become disheartened. 
He himself declared, "The Word 
of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, 
and a derision, daily. Then I said: I will 
not make mention of Him, nor speak any more in His 
name. But His Word was in my heart as a burning fire 
shut up in my bones, and I was weary of forbearing, and 
I could not stay!" His message had to be spoken. The 
Lord had instructed him to tell Israel that they were 
about to be given over into the hands of their enemies. 
This Word of the Lord to the Prophet Jeremiah was 
given prior to the seventy years' captivity of the Jews. 
There were false prophets among them who declared that 
the King of Judah was to gain a victory over their enemies. 
The people were glad to hear this assurance; and 
they despised the true Prophet of the Lord, who gave 
them the real Message from God. Jeremiah told them that 
they had failed to keep their Covenant with the Lord; 
that they had failed in their responsibilities to Jehovah, 
whose people they professed to be, and whom they had 
promised to serve faithfully; that it was not too late even 
then for any to be delivered, who would repent; but that 
the nation was surely to be delivered to their enemies and 
carried away into captivity. 

JEREMIAH'S CRUCIAL TEST 

Jeremiah knew that the false prophets would encourage 
the king, and that he himself would bring the king's 
wrath upon his own head by reiterating the message 
which Jehovah had commissioned him to deliver. He 
shrank from the infamy, the reproach and the persecution 
which by experience he knew would result from loyalty 
to the Lord. But he overcame the temptation to 
hold his peace. He would speak as God commanded him, 
let the cost be what it would. He would tell Israel again 
the words which had been given him. He would give 



them a further warning. 

If Jeremiah had allowed his fears to overwhelm him, 
and had withheld the message, undoubtedly he would have 
been set aside as the mouthpiece of God, and another 
would have been commissioned to deliver the message. 
The burning within the heart of the Prophet would have 
grown feebler and would ultimately have died out. When 
a fire is kept shut off from a draft for some length of 
time, it will become extinguished. This is as true in the 
realm of moral and spiritual forces as in that of physical 
nature. This is why the Apostle Paul urged: "Quench 
not the Spirit." We might let the Holy Spirit of God die 
out in our hearts by a failure to do our duty, a failure 
to keep our covenant faithfully. The light within us, the 
holy fire, would smolder for a time, and finally become 
extinct. The Prophet Jeremiah could not withhold that 
which God had commanded him to speak; he could not 
quench the fire within his soul without losing his relationship 
with Jehovah. 

R5489 : page 198 

GOD'S MESSAGE GIVEN US TODAY 

Thus it is with us today. God has let us into the secret 
of His counsels. He has granted us a wonderful 
spiritual illumination. He has given us a Message of the 
utmost importance to deliver to His professed people. We 
have been informed by the Lord that a great change is 
impending— that the lease of power to the Gentile nations 
is about to expire. We are instructed that the present religious 
systems of Christendom are to go down, that the 
rule of the present order is about to end, and that the dominion 
is about to be given "to Him whose right it is" to 
reign. The kingdoms of this world are about to "become 
the Kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ, and He shall 
reign forever and ever." 

This Message is not to be stated in a rude manner. 
But it is to be stated, nevertheless. The great King whom 
God hath appointed is about to come in. In Jeremiah's 
time, the message was that the Kingdom of God, His 
typical kingdom, was about to be overthrown. The lease 
of power to the Gentiles, under the domination of the 
Prince of this world, was about to be inaugurated. This 
order of things was to be permitted to run for an appointed 
time. That time is now about to run out. The 
King's Son is soon to receive His long-promised inheritance. 
(Psalm 2:7-9.) We are glad that our Message is 
not now the overthrow of God's Kingdom, but the very 
opposite of this— the overthrow of the kingdom of darkness 
and the establishment of the Kingdom of God. 

So we are to tell forth this glorious Message. We 
are to tell it in our actions, in our words, by the printed 
page, by pictorial presentations to the eye, and in every 
way that the Lord shall give us the opportunity. If 
through fear of persecution, of losing prestige in the eyes 



of men, for love of ease, or for any reason whatever, 

we should fail to give forth the Message of God, it will 

be taken from us and given to one who is worthy. The 

Lord is seeking those who are valiant for Him, for righteousness, 

for truth. If we prove ourselves weak, we are 

not fit for the Kingdom. 

ARE WE FULFILLING OUR COMMISSION? 

Is this wonderful Message, this Message the like of 
which was never before granted to men or angels to tell, 
burning within us? And are we speaking it forth, that 
its inspiration may cause other hearts to take fire? Can 
we sing with the poet: 
"I love to tell the Story, 

It did so much for me! 
And that is just the reason 
I tell it now to thee"? 

If we refrain from telling the Glad Tidings, the result 
will be that the fire of God's Holy Spirit will become extinguished 
within us. And if the light that is within us 
become darkness, how great will be that darkness! The 
possession of the Truth— God's Message— brings with it 
great responsibility. Shall we prove faithful to it? Shall 
we show to our God our deep appreciation of His loving 
kindness in granting us the knowledge of His wonderful 
Message of Salvation, His glorious Plan, with its 
times and seasons? 

There is a difference between the operation of the 
Lord's Spirit in His children now and its operation in 
the days of the Prophet Jeremiah, and the other holy 
Prophets. During the Jewish Age the Holy Spirit acted 
upon the servants and mouthpieces of God in a mechanical 
manner. Now the people of the Lord have both His 
Message in His written Word and the begetting of the 
Spirit, which gives us a spiritual understanding impossible 
to His people of past Ages. The mysteries of God are 
now opened up to His faithful children, the watchers; 
and we are granted a clear understanding of "the deep 
things of God," some features of which were never revealed 
until the present time, even to the most faithful of 
the Lord's saints.— 1 Thessalonians 5:1-6. 

R5490 : page 198 

"THE DAY IS AT HAND!" 

We are also told by the Apostle Paul that the things 
which were written of the servants of the Lord in past 
dispensations were written for our admonition and instruction 
and comfort, "upon whom the ends of the Ages 
are come." (1 Corinthians 10:11.) Seeing all these 
things, dearly beloved, "What manner of persons ought 
we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness?" How 
earnestly, with what painstaking care, should we give 
heed to the Word spoken unto us! Let us be faithful in 



proclaiming the Message of our Lord, now due. Let us 
tell forth the words which He has put into our mouths, 
whether others hear or whether they forbear— whether 
our faithfulness bring us the favor or the disfavor of the 
world and of nominal Spiritual Israel. But let us speak 
His Word in meekness and love, leaving the results with 
our great Chief Reaper. "The Day is at hand" ! 

"He cometh to His own— our glorious King! 

Can human tongue or pen show forth such glory? 
Through earth and sky let our glad praises ring ! 

O Saints of God, tell forth the wondrous Story! 

"He cometh now to reign. What wealth of joy 

To all the world! Thy matchless name confessing, 

O Son of God, we sound Thy glory forth 

O'er land and sea— Thy promised Reign of Blessing!' 



R5490 : page 198 

THE GREAT SHEPHERD AND HIS SHEEP 

"The Lord is my Shepherd."— Psalm 23:1 

THROUGHOUT the Old Testament the word 

rendered Lord is in the Hebrew Jehovah, 

and therefore applies to the Heavenly 

Father and not to the Heavenly Son. The 

thought presented in our text— as in other 

Scriptures— is that the great Over-Shepherd 

appointed His Son to be the Under-Shepherd 

of the Sheep, even as the Son has appointed 

under-shepherds in the Church subject 

to Him. The work of shepherding 

is not exercised toward the world. The great Under-Shepherd 

does not shepherd goats or wolves. The only 

ones who are shepherded are the sheep; and special care 

is taken of the Flock of God. The great Over-Shepherd 

looks out for the interests of His sheep, provides for 

them, leads them into green pastures, as the Psalmist tells 

us. He also protects them from wolves and other ravenous 

beasts. 

If we would inquire, Who are these sheep? we find 
that the Scriptures give us good evidence that originally 
the Jewish nation constituted this flock, and that King 
David recognized himself as one of the sheep. Israel 
was not chosen by the Lord because they were better than 
the rest of mankind; but God made an exception of that 
people on account of Father Abraham, for whose sake He 
became the "Shepherd of Israel." Because of Abraham's 
great faith in God and his implicit obedience under the 
most crucial tests, the Lord promised to make of his seed 
a peculiar people above all the peoples of the earth. He 
promised to bless them, to assume a particular care over 



their affairs, and eventually to use them in blessing all 

other nations. So God made the Hebrews His chosen 

people. In proportion as they were obedient to His commands, 

He blessed them; and whenever they went astray, 

He chastised them and brought them back again under 

His care. 

R5490 : page 199 

But Abraham was to have another Seed, a spiritual 
Seed, who were to reign over the natural seed, and to 
bless all nations and kindreds through the natural seed. 
The special application of this text, then, we understand 
to be to Spiritual Israel, just as all the chiefest of God's 
promises are to Spiritual Israel. Natural Israel were the 
children of Abraham according to the flesh; but the spiritual 
children of Abraham are those begotten of the Holy 
Spirit to a new nature— the spiritual nature. So while 
the Lord had a care over the affairs of Natural Israel, 
and still has a care, He has a still more particular care 
over the affairs of Spiritual Israel. 

Hence, we understand that the speaker of this text, 
viewed from the prophetic standpoint, is primarily the 
Lord Jesus; and that all His consecrated followers 
throughout this Gospel Age, all the members of His Body, 
are also represented in the speaker. All these are likewise 
privileged to use these words: "Jehovah is my Shepherd; 
I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in 
green pastures; He leadeth me beside the still waters. He 
restoreth my soul; He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness 
for His Name's sake." 

BEWARE OF WOLVES 

In this 23d Psalm there is a distinction implied between 
sheep and wolves. The world likes to be considered 
strong and well able to defend themselves and their 
rights. On their escutcheons we never see a sheep portrayed. 
We see lions; we see the eagle, with its outspread 
wings and its sharp claws and beak; we see dragons 
and bears and serpents— everything to indicate 
ferocity, rapacity, cunning, desire for conquest. The Lord 
passes by all these strong, fierce nations— the lion, the 
eagle, the bear, etc., and has called out a new nation, altogether 
distinct from any of these. 

God has chosen for the members of this nation those 
—few in number— who are sheeplike in disposition and 
who desire to come into His Fold. For these He has provided 
a particular way in which to enter this Fold. He 
does not have bears in His Fold, nor tigers nor wolves 
nor birds of prey. God does not recognize such; they 
are not to be fed and cared for as He cares for His sheep. 
He is the Shepherd only of the sheep. 

If, therefore, we would claim the promise of this beautiful 
Psalm, we must make sure that we are of sheeplike 
disposition and desirous of being led of the True Shepherd. 



We are to be careful to note that there is only one 

Shepherd who is able to care for our interests and who 

can be safely entrusted with them. A strange shepherd 

would lead the sheep astray, would lead them into difficulties, 

dangers and disaster. For this reason we do not 

trust everybody who wears the garb of a shepherd. There 

is but one Shepherd that we can trust. 

THE TENDER SHEPHERD'S CARE 

The great Over-Shepherd is willing to receive all the 
straying sheep that long to come back to the Fold. He 
has appointed as the Under-Shepherd the One who died 
for us, that He might fully deliver all the sheep from the 
Evil One— the roaring lion who walketh about seeking 
whom he may devour. Our gracious Savior left the 
Courts of Glory and came down to earth, and for thirty-three 
years He traversed with weary feet this vale of 
tears. He mingled with the poor and lowly; He wept 
with the sorrowing and the sinful; He had no place to 
lay His head. He bore the griefs and sicknesses of those 
about Him. He suffered and sorrowed; He bore shame 
and ignominy— and all this even unto death! And why? 
It was that He might save the "lost sheep." His blessed 
fellowship with the shining hosts of Heaven was all relinquished 
during these years of earthly pilgrimage, that 
the wandering sheep might be found and brought back to 
the Fold of God. 

"There were ninety and nine that safely lay 

In the shelter of the Fold; 
But one was out on the hills away, 

Far off in the dark and cold— 
Away on the mountains wild and bare, 
Away from the tender Shepherd's care. 



"But none of the ransomed ever knew 

How deep were the waters crossed; 
Nor how dark was the night that the Lord passed through, 

Ere He found His sheep that was lost. 
Out in the desert He heard its cry- 
Sick and helpless, and ready to die. 



"Then all through the mountains, thunder-riven, 

And up from the rocky steep, 
There arose a glad cry to the gates of Heaven, 

'Rejoice! I have found My sheep!' 
And the angels echoed around the Throne, 
'Rejoice, for the Lord brings back His own!'" 



How grateful we should be for such a Shepherd! How 
can we sufficiently show forth His praise! Truly we 
can never know this side the veil, "how dark was the 
night that the Lord passed through," that He might redeem 
us to God. And from the time we become His sheep 
He tenderly cares for all our interests, shielding us from 
every foe and the dangerous pitfalls that lie in our path. 

MANKIND THE STRAYING SHEEP 

All of the race of Adam are this "lost sheep." Soon 
the great Heavenly Shepherd will have gathered His 
sheep of the present Age into the Fold beyond the veil, 
and then He will have another flock— the world in general. 
"Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; 
them also I must bring," said the Master. Ultimately, all 
who become godly indeed will be glad to be counted 
among the Lord's sheep. They will understand God's 
great Plan for the salvation of men, and will appreciate 
the marvelous blessing conferred upon the world by the 
great Over-Shepherd, in sending His Son to die for all 
mankind, that they through Him might live. 

All who will accept the gracious arrangements and 
obey the rules and regulations of the Lord's Kingdom, 
doing their best, will be brought into the sheep-fold. In 
proportion as they are obedient they will be raised out of 

R5491 :page 199 

degradation up to perfection. Thus all who become sheep 
in the next Age will be cared for— nothing shall offend 
or injure them. The Lord will not permit anything to 
harm them. They shall feed in green pastures and drink 
of the pure, refreshing waters of Truth. They shall have 
a goodly heritage. 

But the sheep of the present Age, who are to be exalted, 
and are to do a shepherding work for these sheep 
of the incoming Age, are given a distinct and peculiar 
training, to fit them for their future great work. From 
the time they are accepted to this higher plane, they are 
dealt with accordingly. This means that they must have 
certain trials and afflictions, according to the flesh. And 
if these sheep recognize that these difficult experiences 
of the way are necessary, they can well rejoice. If they 
have full confidence in the Shepherd, they know that He 
will permit them to have no needless experiences, and 
none which will be to their injury; but that He will over-rule 
all their affairs, and will cause all things to work 
together for their good, because they love Him, because 
they are the called according to God's Purpose. 

R5491 : page 200 

These are the Little Flock, sheep of the highest order. 
They represent only a small portion of mankind— those 
who have the special qualities of earnestness, humility 



and love of righteousness. Having come into this Fold 
of God, we have every reason for confidence in the great 
Shepherd, and should recognize His constant care over 
us, His supreme interest in our spiritual welfare. Let us 
be good sheep! Let us not stray from the Fold, to the 
right hand or to the left, nor be attracted away from the 
green pastures and pure waters to go browsing on the 
thistles and poisonous weeds of some by-path, or to drink 
of the muddy, polluted waters of human speculation and 
delusive theories of men. 

THE SHEEP CHARACTERISTICS 

"My sheep hear My Voice and follow Me," said the 
Master. If we are the Lord's true sheep, we shall know 
His Voice. We shall not make a mistake. A stranger 
will we not follow, but will flee from him; for we know 
not the voice of strangers. (John 10:27,5.) In designating 
His people "The sheep of My pasture" (Jeremiah 23:1), 
the Heavenly Father chose a very significant and 
fitting emblem of the kind of characters He is now seeking 
The special characteristics of the sheep are meekness, 
docility, lack of self-confidence, and obedience to 
the shepherd in whom they fully trust. The true sheep 
will listen intently for the faintest sound of the shepherd's 
voice. It will respond quickly to his call; it will 
watch for his guidance. Let us manifest all these most 
desirable traits of character, and ever keep close to our 
Heavenly Shepherd and Guide, dwelling under His loving 
care and watchful eye. Those who thus abide in 
Christ are safe. 

"Trusting Him, they cannot stray; 
They can never, never lose their way." 



R5493 : page 200 

THE IMPORTANCE OF EXAMPLE 

"Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the 
believers, in word, in conversation, in charity [love], in spirit, 
in faith, in purity."— 1 Timothy 4:12. 

WE REMEMBER that Timothy was an Elder 
in the Church, though young in years. 
Therefore, it was appropriate that St. Paul 
should impress upon his mind that He 
should be an example of the believers, an 
example to all the Church; and such instruction 
is implied in other parts of the Epistle. 
But note that the Apostle, in our text, does 
not say: Be thou an example to the 
believers, but, "Be thou an example of the 
believers." How different! 



Being an example of believers means that one should 
show forth not only to his fellow-workers in the Gospel, 
but especially to the world, what believers stand for— what 
they believe, what they teach, how they live. We should 
see to it that we are setting such an example in word, as 
the Apostle enjoins, in the character of our language when 
declaring the Message of Truth. We are not to be merely 
smooth-tongued and unctuous; we are not merely to use 
kind words; but the kindness and interest manifested 
should be genuine— from the heart. All of the Lord's 
people are thus to be examples, striving to show forth the 
praises of our Master. 

St. Paul further urges: "Be thou an example in conversation." 
This word conversation does not refer merely 
to language, as it is now used: the original meaning of this 
word is conduct. Our conduct relates to our manner, to 
the way we walk, to the way we act, to our general deportment, 
and not to our words alone. We are to be an example 
in our gentleness of demeanor. We should not slam 
doors, nor be boisterous, nor uncouth, nor thoughtless of 
others. In every way we are to be gentle and kind and 
considerate, and not rude. 

"LET YOUR LIGHT SHINE" 

Those who are begotten to the new nature should strive 
to be examples to everybody of what Christians ought to 
be. The kind of work we are engaged in should be honest. 
It may be secular work, yet it should be done as unto the 
Lord, carefully, faithfully, not merely as men-pleasers, but 
in singleness of heart, as servants of God; "for we serve 
the Lord Christ." The walk of the Christian should be in 
charity— love— in sympathy, in benevolence, in kindness of 
word and conduct. A generally sympathetic spirit should 
pervade his words and deeds, his entire behavior. The 
Heavenly Father loved mankind; while they were yet 
sinners He so loved the race that He gave the choicest 
Treasure of His heart for man's recovery. And He still 
loves the world, and is fitting the Church to be the blessers 
of the world in the future. So any begotten of the Lord's 
Spirit should have a transforming influence at work in his 
life— an influence that will manifest itself even to those 
who are out of the way, those who have not yet been 
blessed with the Light of God. 

Our text also reads: "Be thou an example in spirit." 
This phrase, "in spirit," is not found in the original, but 
the thought seems proper enough: we are to show kindness 
of spirit, of disposition, to all. The spirit that animates us 
at all times should be the spirit, the mind of the Lord. 

We are exhorted to be examples "in faith." The 
Apostle's exhortation applies to us all. The Christian's 
faith is also manifested to others in his conduct, his words, 
his course in life. If he is full of faith, he will not be 
murmuring against the experiences of life as they come, 
against the providences of the Lord. The Almighty has 
accepted us as His children; we should have continual and 



implicit confidence in Him, and whoever has true faith has 
this confidence. If any of us lack faith in God we shall 
not manifest faith to others, nor inspire faith in them. 

We are to be examples "in purity." There is a purity 
that goes with all that pertains to God and to His Word— 
a loftiness of standard, which is not to be found elsewhere. 
There are people in heathen lands who live more or less 
chaste lives, but there is nowhere so high a standard as in 
the Christian religion. Everything impure is contrary to 
God. Purity is one of the component elements of Christian 
character. As the Apostle said on another occasion, 
we are to be "first pure, then peaceable, gentle." 

LIVING EPISTLES, KNOWN AND READ 

In all these ways each of God's people should be living 
lessons, living epistles, wherever they go; they should be 
examples to the world. Whether the world believe what 
we preach or not, we should manifest these qualities which 
they cannot but approve and respect. This example will 
bear fruitage in due time, if not now. Every Elder, like 
Timothy, should be especially careful of his conduct, his 
words, his example. The Church has declared by choosing 
such a one Elder that they believe him to be an 
example of the fruitage of the grace of God in the heart. 

The Apostle's counsel to Timothy: "Let no man 
despise thy youth," should be looked upon as advice not 
only to Timothy, but to all Elders of the Church who are 
young in years, that they so conduct themselves as to be 

R5494: page 201 

examples of the Flock, that their deportment and ability 
to "rightly divide the Word of Truth" be such that none 
will have cause to slight the Message they bring, or to 
think of them as immature and unfit to lead the Flock 
of God. 

Let every child of God, the younger as well as the 
older, strive to be an example worthy of imitation— an 
example of earnest, faithful endeavor to copy the Master 
in his daily life, a pattern of active zeal in the service of 
our God. We shall not be able while in the flesh to be 
examples in the full sense of the ultimate glory and beauty 
of holiness which will be ours beyond the veil: we cannot 
expect this in the present life. Our Lord alone was such 
a Pattern. 

The Apostle Paul urged, "Be ye followers of me, even 
as I also am of Christ." (1 Corinthians 11:1.) St. Paul 
was a noble example of earnest endeavor to attain the perfect 
likeness of Christ, and his love, his zeal, his intense 
earnestness in striving to copy the Master and to accomplish 
His will should be an inspiration to us all. Let each 
of the Lord's children, individually, realize his or her personal 
responsibility. We are as "a city set upon a hill." 
Let each ask himself the question: Am I "an example of 
the believers"? 



R5491 : page 201 

"HE THAT IS BEGOTTEN OF GOD DOES NOT PRACTISE SIN" 

"My little children, these things write I unto you that 
ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an Advocate 
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous."— 1 John 2:1. 

ACCORDING to history the Apostle John at 

the time of writing this Epistle was quite an 

aged man. He was the last of the Apostles 

to die, according to tradition. In his ripe 

age he had naturally a tender, fatherly feeling 

toward all the Church; he had become 

very mellow in character through his experiences. 

According to the original, our 

text would more properly read: "My 

darlings, these things write I unto you." 

The translators have taken the liberty of saying "little 

children" instead. A little child is always considered a 

darling. 

St. John was especially spoken of as "the disciple 
whom Jesus loved"; this is the Apostle's own testimony. 
He seemed to be of a peculiarly loving disposition, combined 
with great force of character. And now as his 
pilgrimage neared its close, his heart went out in loving 
solicitude toward God's "little children." He had, in the 
chapter preceding our text, been pointing out that sin is 
a trait or quality of perversity which affects all. The 
Apostle declared that if any man say that he has no sin, 
he deceives himself— he is a liar, and makes God a liar. 
We are all sinners, as facts and Scripture testify. St. 
John thus impresses upon us that if we say we have no 
sin, we are displeasing to God, who is pleased to have us 
acknowledge our sins and apply for cleansing, seeking to 
put away sin so far as possible. 

The Apostle says: "These things I write unto you 
that ye sin not." He does not say: Yes, we are all sinners 
—we cannot help it— and must continue in sin. No! 
But he says: Realizing that you commit trespasses which 
are contrary to the desire of your heart, remember that 
there is a place to go, a Mercy Seat, where you may confess 
your sins and obtain forgiveness. Remember that 
"we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
Righteous." Remember that He gave Himself a Ransom-price 
for all, and that the merit of this price was applied 
by imputation on our behalf. Remember that all the sins 
of the flesh are forgivable through faith in His blood. 
Bear this in mind, too, that He knows that with our imperfect 
flesh we cannot as New Creatures do perfectly, 
and it is because of this that God has constituted Him 
our Advocate and Head over all things. 



OUR HIGH PRIEST GRANTS ABSOLUTION 

Our Father knows that we all come short on account 
of the weaknesses of the flesh. Jesus laid down His life 
to absolve us from sin and to restore us to the Father, and 
He has appeared in the presence of God as the Advocate 
for all those who, during this Gospel Age, turn away from 
sin and consecrate their lives to His service. Thus we see 
that the righteousness of Christ, through the great offering 
for sin which He made (His own body of flesh), is the 
basis for the forgiveness of our sins. And the blessing 
and privilege of going to the Throne of Grace for mercy 
and pardon for daily shortcomings is ours because we are 
the children of God, because we have come into the relationship 
of sons. We have a standing with the Father 
through the imputed merit of Jesus. Jesus does not advocate 
for others than the people of God. It is not the 
Father's purpose that He shall advocate for the world; 
God's dealing with the world will be quite different. 

The One who is now our Advocate will soon take the 
Church class to Himself. As the great Priest after the 
Order of Melchizedek, He will then reign over the world 
for a thousand years— not as Advocate, but as Mediator 
between God and fallen man. He will do a work of restitution 
for the world during this reign of a thousand years, 
and will bring up to perfection all who will avail themselves 
of the privileges and blessings granted during that 
period. At the close of the Millennium, when mankind 
are perfected, Messiah will turn them over to the Father: 
they will not need a Mediator after they have become perfect. 
So we see the difference between the Advocacy of 
Christ for the Church and His future work as Mediator 
for the world of mankind. 

SEEMING CONTRADICTIONS HARMONIZED 

The Apostle John in this same Epistle says: "He that 
is begotten of God sinneth not." How can this be true? 
Is the Apostle contradicting himself? Does he here say 
that "he that is begotten of God sinneth not," and does he 
say in our text that there is danger of our sinning? And 
again, that we would be lying if we denied that we have 
sin? What does he mean by the statement, "He that is 
begotten of God sinneth not"? 

We reply that that which is begotten of God is the 
New Creature— the holy will, the new soul. But this New 
Creature has only the mortal body in which to operate; 
God promises to give a new body to the New Creature in 
the resurrection. In the meantime, however, he is required 
to live under the present imperfections of the 
human body, and by his good fight against the weaknesses 
and sins which are entrenched in his flesh he will show 
either his loyalty to God and to the principles of righteousness 
or his disloyalty. If he be overtaken in a fault, either 
through ignorance or through temptation which he cannot 
control, it will not be sin on the part of the New Creature, 



but an infirmity of the flesh. Nevertheless, he must go to 
God for forgiveness for these trespasses. 

But the New Creature sinneth not— he "does not practise 
sin"— as the Emphatic Diaglott translates this passage. 
He who loves sin will sin; he who does not love sin will 

R5491 : page 202 

not sin wilfully. He might be entrapped through his weak 
flesh, or fall into a snare of the Adversary, but this would 
be unintentional on his part. And Jesus, our Advocate, 
will intercede for such sins, but not for deliberate sin. 
Jesus did not die for wilful sins of the New Creature, but 
for sins due to the fall— Adamic sin. So if any sin wilfully 
as a New Creature, he perishes thereby. Our first life 
was in Adam; our first death was the Adamic death. 
When we accepted Christ and the New Creature was begotten, 
our second life was begun. Now if such a one 
should be guilty of wilful sin, he would no longer have any 
standing whatever before God; he would again come under 
the sentence of death— the Second Death. 

SLACKNESS IN THE NEW CREATURE 

We might remark here, incidentally, that sometimes 
there is a kind of mixed condition; the New Creature has 
been slack in guarding against temptation, and has yielded 
with some degree of culpability. To the extent that the 
New Creature has been derelict, negligent, the face of the 
Lord will be darkened to him. If the flesh start to do 

R5492 : page 202 

wrong, the new will is not to consent to, or allow the 
wrong. The New Creature is to mortify, put to death, the 
flesh. To whatever extent he is slack in this matter, to 
that extent it is sin. A full sin would be a full consent of 
the new will, a full turning away from God. 

But the flesh might have certain desires and temptations, 
and there might occur a partially wilful sin. In 
such a case stripes would be administered in proportion to 
the wilfulness. Such an individual might get into a place 
where he would be spiritually sick, so that the Lord would 
entirely shut him off from the light of His countenance. 
The Apostle James points out that the only proper action 
then would be for the individual to apply to the Elders of 
the Church, the seniors of the Church, the spiritually 
minded ones, that they go with him to the Throne of 
Grace in order that he might obtain mercy and be 
reinstated. 

Seniors, spiritually minded ones not Elders, might do 
this service for the one who is sick, but preferably it 
should be the chosen Elders of the Congregation. This 
course would be a very humiliating one for the sin-sick 
brother, but such action might save that soul from death 
by a proper humbling of self "under the mighty hand of 



God." Thus such a one might be recovered and become 
again a true child of God. 

CHRISTIAN, WALK CAREFULLY! 

If we realize that through lack of proper watchfulness, 
or through some infirmity of the flesh, we have taken a 
wrong step, contrary to the Lord's will and to our interests 
as New Creatures in Christ, let us lose no time in retracing 
the step and in calling upon the Father for forgiveness. 
"We have an altar whereof they have no right to partake 
who serve the [typical] tabernacle"; an altar not sanctified 
by the blood of bulls and goats, but by the precious blood 
of Christ; and we are urged to "come boldly [with holy 
courage and confident faith] to the Throne of Grace, that 
we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of 
need." (Hebrews 13:10; 4:16.) How blessed this Throne 
of Grace, this Mercy Seat, provided by our Father's love! 
How undone we should be without it! Yet, beloved, let 
us walk with great carefulness— let us never presume upon 
the mercy of our God by being careless of our steps. Let 
us, instead, with earnest prayer and watchfulness, "work 
out our own salvation with fear and trembling," while our 
Father "worketh in us both to will and to do His good 
pleasure. " — Philippians 2:12,13. 

"Christian, walk carefully! oft wilt thou fall, 
If thou forget on thy Savior to call. 
Safe shalt thou walk through each trial and snare, 
If thou art clad in the armor of prayer!" 



R5492 : page 202 

FAITHFULNESS TO OPPORTUNITIES 

-JULY 26.-LUKE 19:11-27.- 

"Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many 
things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord."— Matthew 25:21. 

WE ARE NOT to confound the Parable of the 
Pounds with the Parable of the Talents. 
They teach totally different lessons. In the 
case of the talents, the amount given to each 
of the servants differed. In the case of the 
pounds, it was the same— each servant received 
one pound— approximately sixteen 
dollars. This parable, therefore, deals with 
something that is common to all of the class 
to which reference is made. 

The object in the giving of the parable is stated in the 
lesson. The Lord and His disciples were approaching 
Jerusalem, where shortly He was to be crucified. The 



disciples had supposed, on the contrary, that the Messianic 
Kingdom would immediately be established in power and 
great honor. This parable was intended to inform them 
that a considerable period of time would elapse before the 
Kingdom would be established. 

The disciples knew that the kings of Palestine were 
appointed by the Roman Emperor, and they had recently 
had an experience along this line, when one of the Herods 
went to Rome, seeking an appointment to a kingdom. 
Some who hated him sent a message to Rome, discrediting 
him and declaring their preference for another king. 
Jesus seized this circumstance as an illustration in His 
own case. He was the Appointee for the Messianic Kingdom 
of the world; but He would go to Heaven itself and 
there appear in the presence of the Heavenly Father, the 
great Overlord or Emperor of the Universe. He would 
be invested by the Father with the ruling authority, and 
later return to earth and exercise His dominion. 

This is exactly the presentation of the matter given us 
prophetically. (Psalm 2:8.) The Divine regulation is 
that Messiah, after finishing His work, shall in Heaven 
itself make application for a Kingdom which Divine providence 
has already arranged for and which Divine 
prophecy has already foretold. "Ask of Me, and I will 
give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and the 
uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession." 

"OCCUPY TILL I COME" 

During the interim of the Master's absence— in 
Heaven, waiting for Divine investiture with the government 
of earth— He has committed to His disciples, His 
servants, otherwise styled His brethren, one pound each. 
He has left them with full liberty to use their best judgment 
and to show their love and their zeal in His service. 
At His return, all these servants will be reckoned with, 
and the degree of their zeal and efficiency as servants will 
be manifested by the results; and the rewards given them 
will be proportionate. 

The parable distinguishes between these consecrated 
servants of God and the masses of the people. It shows 
that nothing is committed to the masses of the people; 
and that no judgment, reward, is made in their case at 

R5492 : page 203 

the return of the Master as King. Only to His servants 

did He give the pounds— only His servants had the responsibility 

of those pounds, and only those servants will be 

reckoned with or held responsible, either for reward or 

for punishment in respect to the matter. 

In considering what is signified, or symbolized, by the 
pound, we must keep in memory the fact that as the same 
amount was given to each, the fulfilment must show some 
blessing or responsibility given in each case alike to all 
of God's consecrated people— all who are His servants. 



There is but one thing that we can think of that is given 
to all of the Lord's people in exactly the same measure. 
They have not talents and opportunities alike, but, on the 
contrary, very unlike. Some have more and some less 
wealth; some more and some less mental capacity; some 
more and some less of favorable or unfavorable environment. 
None of these varied talents belong to this Parable 
of the Pounds. 

The pound is the same to all; it represents justification. 
The one thing which the Redeemer does for all who become 
His followers is to justify them freely from all 
things. This leaves them all on exactly an even footing; 
for justification makes up to each individual in proportion 
as he is deficient— in proportion as he by nature is short 
of perfection, the Divine standard. 

"BE THOU FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH" 

All who in the present time become children of God, 
servants of God, followers of Christ, must receive from 
the Lord, as a basis for this relationship, the pound— the 
free forgiveness of sins— justification. On this basis he 
has a standing with God, and whatever he may do or 
endeavor to do will be to his credit. Because all are alike 
qualified by justification, the results will show the degree 
of loving zeal controlling each servant. Those who love 
much will serve much. Those who love little will neglect 
to use their opportunities. As one in the parable gained 
ten pounds, so such noble characters as St. Peter, St. Paul, 
St. John and others, sacrificed themselves over and over 
again in the Divine service. In their zeal they counted all 
earthly things but as loss and dross, that they might be 
pleasing to their Master, the coming King. 

These, and such as these, who have gladly spent themselves 
zealously in the service of the Lord, are to have the 
highest rewards, as represented by the Lord's words, "Well 
done, thou good and faithful servant! Because thou wast 
faithful in a very little have thou authority over ten 
cities." In the parable another came, reporting a gain of 
five pounds. He had not done so well as did the first, but 
he had done well. He received the same commendation: 
he had been faithful, although less faithful than the first. 
He received his master's "Well done," however; but the 
reward was less— dominion over five cities. This will 
mean a less influential place in the Messianic Kingdom. 

Then came a servant saying, "Lord, here is the pound 
that you gave me; I have kept it carefully laid up in a 
napkin." This represents a class that say, "I endeavored 
to maintain my justification. I endeavored to live justly 
and honorably, but I did not sacrifice myself. I am glad 
to be able to say that I have lost nothing. I was really 
afraid to use my opportunity, to use my privilege; for I 
realized that You would be expecting considerable return 

R5493 : page 203 



from the amount which You gave me." 

The master in the parable addresses this one still as a 
servant, but a wicked servant, who knew his master's will, 
who had undertaken his service, but who had been found 
unfaithful in respect to it. Had he not professed to be a 
servant, he would have received no pound and would have 
had no responsibility for it. He should have made use of 
his privilege and opportunity. He should have lived for 
his master. If not so actively and so directly as did the 
others, he should have made at least some use of the 
pound entrusted to him, so that he would have had some 
results to show. 

We may assume that this one represents a considerable 
class of those who have entered into a covenant with the 
Lord to be His servants, and who have received justification 
at His hands, but who have neglected to comply with 
their engagements for self-sacrifice in His service. This 
neglect indicates their lack of loving zeal; and all this 
means that they will not be fit for a share in the Kingdom. 
This class is referred to on several occasions by the Lord: 
for instance, they are represented in the foolish virgins, 
who failed to enter in to the wedding; and so these will 
fail to become members of the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. 

"SAVED SO AS BY FIRE" 

The same class seems to be pictured by St. Paul when, 
speaking of the same testing of the Church in the end of 
this Age, he declares, "The fire of that Day shall try 
every man's work of what sort it is." He proceeds to say 
that those who build with gold, silver and precious stones 
will suffer no loss, but will receive a full reward; while 
others building upon the same Rock, Christ Jesus— the 
same justification by faith— will suffer the loss of all their 
time and opportunity. He adds, however, that they themselves 
shall be saved, yet so as by fire. 

This we understand to mean that this class of servants 
who maintain their justification, seeking to live harmless, 
honest lives, but who fail to sacrifice as they have 
covenanted to do, will not be lost, in the worst sense of 
that word. They will indeed lose the great prize— the 
highest blessing— the Kingdom; but because they still 
remain servants and have a love for righteousness they 
will be saved so as by fire; that is, through tribulations. 
They will ultimately gain everlasting life on the spirit 
plane, but will be quite inferior to the Bride class. They 
seem to be represented in the Scriptures as the virgins, 
the Bride's companions, who follow her.— Psalm 45:14. 

These seem again to be pictured in Revelation, Chapters 14 
and 7. Here the elect Church are referred to as 
144,000, who will stand on Mount Zion, because they followed 
the Lamb whithersoever He went. Then a great 
multitude is pictured as coming through great tribulation, 
washing their robes and attaining a place before the 
Throne, instead of on the Throne. To these are given 
palm branches, instead of crowns. They are victors, but 



not "more than conquerors." In this respect they are not 
wholly copies of God's dear Son, and are not esteemed 
worthy of being members of His Bride class, who are to 
share with Him the honors and glories and services in 
His Kingdom, as set forth in this parable. 

The fear expressed by this servant, saying, "For I 
feared thee," reminds us of the Apostle's words respecting 
this same class. He declares that Christ at His Second 
Coming will deliver those who all their lifetime were subject 
to bondage through fear of death. The consecration 
of the Lord's servants is unto death, and those who fear 
death are fearful of performing their covenant vow. They 
will not be worthy of the Lord's approval as faithful 
servants. Nevertheless, there are many vessels in the 
house of the King— some to more honor and some to 
less honor.— 2 Timothy 2:20,21. 

"THOSE MINE ENEMIES" 

Not until first He shall have finished dealing with His 
own servants at His Second Coming will the glorious 
Messiah begin to deal with the world, and especially with 
His enemies. This is the statement of the parable, and it 
is borne out by numerous Scriptures. When Jesus prayed 

R5493 : page 204 

on the night before His crucifixion, He said: "I pray not 
for the world, but for them which Thou hast given Me; 
word." (John 17:9,20.) Thus we see the work of the 
Gospel Age outlined by our Lord. It is merely for the 
selection of His servants, and the testing and proving of 
these. It is with a view to determining which of them 
will be found worthy of association with Himself in the 
great Millennial Kingdom which God has decreed, and 
whose work will be for the blessing and uplifting of the 
whole world of mankind. 

So the Second Psalm points out that the Redeemer will 
not pray for, ask for, the world until, at His Second Advent, 
He is ready to establish His Kingdom, His Church 
having first been gathered to glory. Then He will ask 
for the heathen. By the term heathen, or Gentile, is 
signified all out of fellowship with God, "enemies through 
wicked works." The Psalm proceeds to say that Messiah 
will deal rudely with the heathen. "He will dash them in 
pieces as a potter's vessel," etc. This, interpreted by other 
Scriptures, means that the inauguration of Messiah's 
Kingdom will bring a great Time of Trouble, symbolically 
styled fire, or fiery judgments. "He shall be revealed in 
flaming fire, taking vengeance." Everything appertaining 
to present institutions contrary to the Divine standards of 
justice will be rudely shaken and eventually destroyed. 

However, the Lord wounds that He may heal. The 
lessons of the Time of Trouble will be salutary; as we 
read, "When the judgments of the Lord are abroad in the 
earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 



These judgments will not in any sense continue 

upon all throughout the thousand years of Messiah's Kingdom, 

but will be inflicted only upon those deserving them. 

Hence the judgments will be especially severe at the beginning. 

All who learn righteousness will thereby deliver 

themselves; and as they come into harmony with the King 

of kings and Lord of lords, blessings will be their portion, 

uplifting them gradually to human perfection. 

"SLAY THEM BEFORE ME" 

At first thought, we might gather that these words signify 
that the King of Glory will be implacable, ferocious, 
unsympathetic, with His enemies. We might wonder how 
this shows sympathy! He admonishes us to love our enemies 
and to do good to them that despitefully use us. 
Gradually we come to see that this will indeed be the policy 
which the great King will pursue. He will be doing 
the greatest good for His enemies in bringing upon them 
punishments for their wrong course— shame, publicity, 
contempt. These things will be necessary to arouse them 
to an appreciation of their true condition and show them 
their privileges. 

We are not to forget that during this Age the Lord's 
dealings with His faithful servants has been in permitting 
fiery trials to try them and to instruct them. It should not 
be a wonder to us therefore that fiery judgments upon the 
world are the Master's design, not for the world's injury, 
but for its blessing. We read that as a result of St. 
Peter's preaching at Pentecost the truths struck home to 
the hearts of his hearers— "They were cut to the heart." 
But we realize that this was a great blessing, in that it 
prepared them for the Message of Divine Mercy. So 
here we read of the Lord's slaying His enemies; they will 
be cut to the heart. A picture of this slaughter is given 
us in Revelation, where the Lord is represented in glorious 
majesty, with a sword proceeding out of His mouth, 
that with it He should smite the nations. (Revelation 19:15.) 
Blessed smiting! The sooner it begins, the better 
for the world, we might say; and yet we remember that 
God's time is best for everything. 

Another similar picture of the progress of Messiah's 
Kingdom is given us in figurative language, as follows: 
"Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O Thou Most Mighty, 
with Thy glory and Thy majesty. Thy right hand shall 
teach Thee terrible things. Thine arrows shall be sharp 
in the hearts of the King's enemies; whereby the people 
shall fall under Thee."— Psalm 45:3-5. 

Here the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom with 
power, great glory and majesty, is presented in pictorial 
imagery; and the sharp arrows of Divine Truth are represented 
as slaughtering the hosts of error. This terrible 
carnage will mean a great blessing; for the Lord smites 
to heal, and when His Word cuts to the heart the effect 
is to destroy the enemy. Unless the enemies of the Lord 
be thus brought into subjection to Him, nothing will remain 



for them but the final extinction mentioned by St. 
Peter: "It shall come to pass that the soul that will not 
hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from amongst the 
people."— Acts 3:23. 



R5494 : page 204 

CHRIST'S TRIUMPHAL ENTRY 

-AUGUST 2.-MARK 11:1-11.- 

"Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of 
Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee."— ZECHARIAH 9:9. 

THE MESSAGE of John the Baptist was, "The 

Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." This same 

message Jesus bade His disciples carry from 

village to village throughout Palestine. This 

same message was the burden of His preaching 

and the theme of His parables. Finally, 

at the close of His ministry, the Kingdom 

came to the Jewish nation in the sense that 

it was offered to them— it was theirs for the 

accepting. Today's lesson tells of the formal 

offer of the Kingdom by Jesus and of the neglect of the 

Jews as a people to accept it. Thus "He came unto His 

own, and His own received Him not"— except a few. 

His own nation rejected Him, and five days later crucified 

Him. A little later, at Pentecost, a few who received Him 

were begotten of the Holy Spirit and became the nucleus 

of Spiritual Israel, in preparation for the glorious Kingdom 

and the work which is to be accomplished at His 

Second Advent. 

On the evening preceding the story of this lesson, Jesus 
and His disciples were at Bethany, the guests of Lazarus, 
Martha and Mary, who had prepared a special feast for 
Jesus, whom they loved so dearly. This was the Lazarus 
whom He had awakened from the sleep of death but a 
short time before. The feast took place at the close of 
the Jewish Sabbath day. The next morning corresponded 
to our Sunday, the first day of the week. 

THE CRISIS OF ISRAEL'S EXPERIENCE 

In preparation for presenting Himself as King, Jesus 
sent two of His disciples for an ass's colt, telling them 
where they would find it, and instructing them to say that 
it would be returned after the Master had used it. By 
the time the colt arrived, a considerable multitude had 
gathered— people of the village of Bethany and others 
who had come out from Jerusalem, about two miles distant, 
to see Jesus and to see Lazarus, upon whom the 
notable miracle had been wrought. It had long been the 
custom of the kings of Israel to ride to their coronation 



R5494 : page 205 

upon an ass; and the multitude seemed to enter into the 
spirit of this occasion and to realize what it meant that 
Jesus was about to ride into Jerusalem on this colt. It 
signified that finally He was ready to assume the office 
of King. 

For some time the disciples had recognized Him as the 
Messiah, the glories of whose Reign they were to share; 
and the multitude in general had learned to so regard 
Him, saying, "When Messiah cometh, will He do greater 
works than this man?"— could we expect anything more 
of Messiah than we see being accomplished by this man 
Jesus? But this was the first time Jesus had formally put 
Himself forward. On previous occasions, when they had 
sought to take Him by force to make Him a king, He had 
withdrawn Himself, realizing that the time was not yet 
come. Now, so far from withdrawing, He was taking the 
active part, sending for the colt, preparing for the 
triumphal ride to the capital of the nation as its King. 

We may be sure that the hearts of the Apostles thrilled 
with excitement as they thought of the nearness of their 
Master's glory and of their own share in it; for as yet 
they did not realize the full import of His words to the 
effect that He must be crucified and must depart to a "far 
country," even Heaven itself, and be invested with authority, 
and later return to establish the Kingdom which 
would bless the world. 

Jesus, however, was fully aware that the presentation 
of Himself as King was a formal matter, fulfilling the 
prophecy and leaving the nation of Israel without excuse. 

R5495 : page 205 

If, when He entered the city, the people should rise en 
masse, acknowledge Him and acclaim Him, then indeed 
they would be in line with the Divine requirements which 
would bring them the greatest of all blessings. But Jesus 
knew that prophecy had already declared that He would 
be despised and rejected, and that His own people would 
hide their faces from Him in shame. (Isaiah 53:3.) 
The journey and the preparation for it, therefore, meant 
something very different to Jesus from what it signified to 
the disciples and the multitudes. 

"THE STONES WOULD CRY OUT" 

When the ass arrived, some of the people put their 
garments upon it in lieu of a saddle; Jesus mounted, and 
the procession began. Some went before Him, and some 
followed after. The people were familiar with the 
prophecy relating to Messiah's coming, which declared, 
"Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem! behold, thy King 
cometh unto thee; He is just, and having salvation; lowly, 
and riding upon an ass." They were familiar also with the 



"shout" the prophets had foretold and the responses— one 
party crying, "Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is 
the King of Israel, that cometh in the name of the Lord!" 
Again came the cry, "Blessed be the Kingdom of our 
father David, that cometh in the name of the Lord!" 
Then the response, "Hosanna in the highest!" These different 
expressions are recorded by the different 
evangelists. 

But not all were enthusiastic acclaimers of Jesus; a 
discordant note was heard. Some of those who had come 
from the city through curiosity criticised the shouting, and 
wondered why Jesus did not rebuke the people for ascribing 
so great honor to Him. They sent word to this effect 
to Jesus through His disciples. Jesus made answer that 
a great prophecy was being fulfilled. The Prophet 
Zechariah had by inspiration said, "Shout, O daughter of 
Jerusalem" ! and such a shout must be made. Jesus declared 
that if the multitudes had failed to shout, the 
prophecy would still have been fulfilled— the very stones 
would have cried out. 

THE FIRST PALM SUNDAY 

It is customary with some Christians in various parts 
of the world to commemorate especially that Sunday of 
the triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem. The record 
tells that on the journey many of the people strewed their 
garments in the way, as a mark of respect and honor, 
waiting until the little animal had passed over them, and 
then running on before and placing them again. Others 
brought ferns, flowers and grasses, and strewed them in 
the way. Still others, St. John's Gospel tells us, brought 
branches of palm trees. 

It was a jubilant procession, fulfilling the prophecy of 
Zechariah. Yet to Jesus it had the sad feature, as indicated 
by the account. When they had reached the turn 
of the Mount of Olives, which brought Jerusalem into 
view, the Master halted the procession while He looked 
over the city and wept, saying, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent 
unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children 
together, as a hen gathereth her brood under her wings, 
and ye would not! Behold, your House is left unto you 
desolate; and verily I say unto you, Ye shall see Me no 
more, until that Day [nearly nineteen centuries later] 
when ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the name 
of Jehovah!" 

Jesus realized that that day was a turning point with 
the Jewish nation— that their rejection of Him meant their 
rejection by the Heavenly Father for a long time. It 
meant that they would be cast off from Divine favor, except 
a few who would become His disciples. It meant that 
during those long centuries the highly favored people of 
Abraham's natural seed would be in distress. It meant 
that the favor of God, which had been with them for centuries, 
would instead be extended to the Gentiles, to gather 



out of the Gentiles a company of faithful, saintly ones to 
be associates and joint-heirs with Jesus and the faithful 
ones of the Jews in the Heavenly Kingdom. It meant that 
not until this elect, Heavenly, spiritual Kingdom class 
should be received to glory would the Jewish people be 
again received into fellowship with God. 

St. Paul markedly calls our attention to this fact that 
the rejection of Israel is not permanent, but only for a 
time— only until the complete number of faithful saints 
be gathered out from amongst the Gentiles. Then God's 
favor will return to Natural Israel, and subsequently extend 
to all the families of earth.— Romans 1 1:25-32. 

JESUS, THE PRINCE OF PEACE 

How different was this entry of Jesus, the Prince of 
Peace, from the triumphal marches of earthly conquerors 
and kings! In the excitement of human passion and the 
prejudice of human minds a special halo of glory has 
surrounded the world's conquerors. Heroic deeds, valiant 
conquests, as pictured by historians have a charm. The 
rising generation reads with thrilling interest of the 
prowess of Alexander the Great, of the Spartans of 
Greece, of the Caesars of Rome, and in more modern times 
of Robert Bruce, of Napoleon and Wellington, of Generals 
Grant and Lee, Sherman and Johnson, Sheridan and 
Stewart. The home-comings of all of these were 
triumphal marches, in many cases rendering honor to 
whom honor was due. 

Nevertheless, in every instance the mind's eye necessarily 
closes against scenes which led up to such triumphs. 
We try to forget the millions of slain and wounded, and 
other millions of mourning widows and orphans. We try 
to forget the smoking ruins of homes behind those victorious 
armies. However necessary war at times may 
seem to be for the maintenance of justice, nevertheless 

R5495 : page 206 

all must concede that the blessings purchased by the sword 
are procured at a terrible cost. 

From this viewpoint Jesus, the Prince of Peace, followed 
by an army of saints who are walking in His footsteps, 
presents a beautiful picture— even to the worldly. 
These victors— Leader and followers— conquer by dying. 
Thus Jesus said to His followers, "Whosoever will save 
his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life for 
My sake and the Gospel's shall find it." Thus viewed, all 
the followers of the Lamb are self-sacrificers, as the Bible 
declares: "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of 
God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy 
and acceptable to God— your reasonable service." (Romans 12:1.) 
Such a victory— victory through death— is difficult 
for the majority of people to understand! What is 
the philosophy of it? Where is the victory? 



VICTOR-KINGS THROUGH DYING 

Well may it be asked, Wherein is the victory of Christ 
and His followers in laying down their lives for the 
brethren and in support of truth and righteousness? Only 
the Bible answers the question, and only those who exercise 
faith can understand the Bible answer. The Bible 
declares that the real victory of Christ and the Church is 
over self. Their crowning day is future— their triumph 
will be then. 

The triumphal entry of Jesus on the ass was only 
typical. The antitype will be glorious— beyond the veil. 
As Jesus after His resurrection was "received up into 
glory," so also He has promised His Church that their 
resurrection shall change them from imperfect human 
beings to perfect spirit beings, joint-heirs with their Master, 
their Redeemer, in the glorious Millennial Kingdom 
which is to bless the world. 

After Jesus had risen from the dead, He explained to 
His perplexed disciples what His death signified, saying, 
"Ought not Christ to have suffered these things [death] 
and to enter into His glory?" (Luke 24:26.) So St. 
Paul has declared in respect to all who will be Jesus' associates 
in the Kingdom— they must suffer with Him if 
they would reign with Him; they must be dead with Him 
if they would live with Him. (2 Timothy 2:12.) Christ 
and His Church die to human hopes and interests, present 
and everlasting— laying down their lives, suffering for 
righteousness' sake. Their reward is two-fold: (1) 
Their own personal exaltation to a Heavenly, spirit glory, 
like unto the angels, and yet more glorious— "far above 
angels, principalities and powers and every name that is 
named." (2) The Kingdom glory— the joy of being the 
Divine agents for human restoration. 

From this, the Bible viewpoint, the Christian warfare 
is different from every other warfare known to the world. 
It is a fight against sin, a fight against self-will, a full 
submission to the Divine will, a victory through death. 
"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown 
of life." (Revelation 2:10.) "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne, even as I also 
overcame, and am set down with My Father in His 
Throne." (Revelation 3:21.) No wonder that a proposition 
of this kind is but imperfectly understood by the 
world! "The world knoweth us not, even as it knew 
Him not." And this is one of the requirements of the 
Gospel, that Jesus and His followers shall submit themselves 
to be misunderstood by the world. We are counted 
fools for Christ's sake.— 1 Corinthians 4:10. 

It requires some stamina to be a loyal follower in the 
footsteps of Jesus, misunderstood as He was misunderstood 
by those of His day, reviled as He was reviled. 
"They shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for 
My sake." It is only when we understand through God's 
promises that in these trying experiences of Christ and 
His followers there is a glorious purpose, that we are able 



to endure them with any measure of rejoicing. Only 
these are granted of the Lord the eye of faith which can 
clearly discern things beyond the veil— the glory, honor 
and immortality, and the Kingdom which the Lord has 
promised to His faithful followers. 

"THE WRATH OF THE LAMB" 

Since Jesus is the Prince of Peace, how shall we 
understand various passages of Scripture which refer to 
Him as a mighty Conqueror in blood-stained garments, 
taking vengeance on His foes? But especially, how shall 

R5496 : page 206 

we understand the declaration that, at His coming in the 
clouds of heaven, all the tribes of the earth shall wail 
because of Him? 

Of this Prince of Peace it may be said that He will 
wound to heal, that whatever disasters He may bring or 
permit to come upon the world will be so overruled as to 
make of them blessings in disguise. Undoubtedly much 
that is said respecting our Lord is highly symbolic. For 
instance, He is to smite the nations with the Sword that 
proceedeth out of His mouth— the Word, or Message, of 
Truth. Such a smiting is in full conformity with the 
declaration that when St. Peter preached the Gospel at 
Pentecost, some of his hearers were "cut to the heart"— 
not with St. Peter's literal sword, but with "the Sword of 
the Spirit, which is the Word of God." Eventually, that 
Sword will smite all opponents of righteousness for their 
good. Only the wilfully wicked will eventually be destroyed 
in the Second Death. 

We are not to forget, however, that the inauguration 
of the Messianic Kingdom is to be in the midst of the 
Time of Trouble, and that Christ will have to do with the 
bringing, or at least the permitting, of that Trouble. 
Apparently mankind will be permitted to bring the great 
trouble at the end of this Age upon themselves. There 
are forces of evil, Satan and his angels, ready to do us 
harm and, through human forces, sin-forces entrenched in 
human nature, ready to do harm to the social fabric. The 
Bible represents that Divine Power holds these in check 
—the four angels holding the four winds— that they shall 
not blow upon the earth to its injury until the appointed 
time, until all of God's elect Church shall have been sealed 
in their foreheads— their intellect— with the Truth. 

At the appropriate time those "winds" of strife will be 
let loose, and great will be the trouble, until in due time 
the King of kings and Lord of lords shall intervene to 
rescue the race from itself and from the Adversary. Then 
Satan shall be bound for a thousand years, and Messiah's 
Kingdom shall be established for the blessing of all the 
families of the earth. 

R5506 : page 206 



PREPARED HEARTS 

FRANCES DARDEN. 

Prepare our hearts to know Thee, Lord, 
And seek for wisdom in Thy Word, 
So, as our days, our strength may be, 
To spread Thy Truth, o'er land and sea. 
O'er all the earth this light must shine, 
Restoring faith to all mankind. 

Run swiftly, oh! ye angel "feet," 

Upon the mountains; tidings sweet 

Send forth! Proclaim the Word, 

So men shall know their reigning Lord. 

Earnest watch, on Zion's wall, 

Lift high His banner over all; 

Loud sound the Seventh Trumpet call! 



R5496 : page 207 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
QUERIES OF A COLPORTEUR 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

How shall we do respecting the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
after October, 1914? Will the Society continue to publish 
them? Will the Colporteurs and others continue to circulate 
them? Is it right to circulate them now, since you have some 
doubt respecting the full accomplishment of all expected by 
or before October, 1914? With Christian love, 

Your brother, M. F. C. 

IN REPLY 

MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Yours of May 20th has reached me. Thanks! I think 
that you are not taking a right view of the matter treated in 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II. It is our thought that 
these books will be on sale and read for years in the future, 
provided the Gospel Age and its work continue. 

So far as the features are concerned, we have merely set 
forth the Scriptures and our view respecting their application 
and significance. We have not attempted to say that these 
views are infallible, but have stated the processes of reasoning 
and figuring, leaving to each reader the duty and privilege of 
reading, thinking and figuring for himself. That will be an 
interesting matter a hundred years from now; and if he can 
figure or reason better, he will still be interested in what we 
have presented. In any event, we think that the consummation 
cannot be long deferred. 

To cease to print and circulate the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



because everything suggested therein has not been, apparently, 
fulfilled, would be like rejecting our Common Version 
of the Bible because the chronology given in the margin 
throughout is known to be incorrect to the extent of a number 
of years. Usher's chronology is used in our Common Version, 
and shows the birth of Christ in the year 4004. Scholars are 
agreed that the event varied at least two years from 
that date-some say four years. And STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
show from the Bible that the date was actually 4128. 
Nobody thinks of throwing away his Bible on this account. 
No more need any one think of throwing away his STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES or failing to circulate them on account of the 
fact that October, 1914, may not witness all that we had expected 
and in the manner expected. With much Christian love, 
Your brother and servant in the Lord. 

page 207 

AN OCCASION FOR REJOICING 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER:- 

You have had my continuous love and prayers for a good 
many years, but I have not written you personally for quite 
awhile, knowing of the pressure of the Harvest work upon your 
time. But knowing that you would be much pleased to hear 
of the wonderful demonstration of the Truth that I have just 
witnessed, I write you this brief account: 

Brother Petran, wife and I have just returned from Osseo, 
Wis., where Brother J. M. Kidd's whole family, sons, daughters, 
son-in-law and daughter-in-law, numbering thirteen, 
have consecrated and been baptized, except one, who was unable 
to symbolize on account of sickness, but is coming to 
Appleton before long, D.V., to symbolize. 

Dear Brother, I never saw a more happy family and a more 
loving and sincere demonstration of an appreciation of the 
Truth and of the brethren as they embraced each other and 
wept for joy and gladness. They are all in deep earnest and 
thoroughly understand the steps they have taken. All have 
taken the Vow also. They also organized a class with regularly 
appointed officers and set the time of their Berean, 
praise and testimony meetings, etc. 

A Brother Davis, Brother Kidd and his sister, Sister Blakeley, 
have been witnessing hereabout for the Truth for a great 
many years without much apparent result, until after Sister 
Blakeley's death, just a few weeks ago. Brother Petran, of 
the Appleton class, accompanied me and assisted in the funeral 
service, after which three of the friends consecrated themselves 
to the Lord on the train on their way home. When they 
arrived there the influence of the Holy Spirit spread among 
their friends and relatives and the result is we have already 
immersed twenty-three. 

At the last talk at Osseo, the evening before we left, about 
sixteen of the neighbors were present at our meeting, at the 
close of which we asked if they would be willing, for the 
sake of the Truth, to give their attention, their time, their 
reputation, their friends, their money, and life itself, as the 



service might require of them? At each of these questions 

a number of them gave their assent, which, if fully understood, 

means a complete consecration to Christ. And so we 

are expecting to be called upon in the near future to perform 

another baptismal service. In fact, six more have expressed 

the desire to be baptized at the first opportunity. 

I might add that the brethren have had quite a struggle 
with tobacco, but they have conquered and cast it out. 

We rejoice with you in the Harvest work and pray God's 
blessing to continue with you until your work is done. Sister 
Deming joins me in sending much Christian love. 

Your Brother in Christ, H. W. DEMING.-Wis. 

R5496 : page 207 

A SIGNIFICANT MESSAGE 

DEAR FRIEND :- 

As one who believes in "the Present Truth" as presented 
in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, I venture to write to you for 
a word of advice and comfort. I am in deep distress and 
have suffered intense mental agony during the last few 
months through being careless of the privileges connected 
with Present Truth. 

I came, through God's favor, into touch with the Truth ten 
years ago, and had great rejoicing in it. My fatal mistake 
was a lack of decisiveness and a consequent failure to act 
according to my conscience. I became timid and avoided my 
fellowmen because of my failure to speak out. Added to this 
I stumbled, time and again, through weakness of the flesh, 
and gradually settled down to the thought that success in the 
"narrow way" was not for me. 

At the end of last year my interest in Volume One was revived 
and I argued that if it is true why should I fear to come 
out of Babylon? Acting upon this I sent for withdrawal 
letters. I had a talk with our minister here, but at the critical 
moment I gave way to fear. This plunged me into a blackness 
which I cannot describe; I imagined all sorts of things, chief 
amongst which was that I had committed the sin unto death. 
The thought of this made me worse, and I gave way to careless 
living. 

Dear friend, I would give anything for a word of comfort! 
I have striven hard to find peace of mind. I would not trouble 
you, as I know you are fully occupied; but somehow my unhappiness 
compels me to write you, as I know you are in close 
fellowship with the Lord. I hope that you can help me. My 
soul is sadly diseased. I cannot express the gratitude I shall 
feel. God bless you! Yours sincerely, 

T. H. HUGHES.--N. Wales. 

OUR REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Yours of the 28th ult. has come duly to hand and contents 
are noted. Frequently, "earth-born clouds arise" to obscure 
the Lord's face from us when we neglect to do those things 



which He indicates would be pleasing to Him. Faithfulness 
to the Lord will restore a sense of His favor. My suggestion, 
therefore, is that you start anew, doing faithfully everything 
which you find to be His will for you. 

The very fact that you are penitent and feel the separation 
is a good sign. Those who have sinned the sin unto death are 
not usually penitent. A rereading of the Six Volumes, laying 
hold upon the promises quoted therein, should be of help to 
you. May the Lord's guidance and blessing be with you as 
you seek to return to a condition of favor with Him. With 
much Christian love, we remain, 

Yours in the Master's service. 

THE CORRESPONDENCY SEEMS CLEAR 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Have often thought of writing you as to how far the type 
and antitype extend in the Harvest of the Jewish and 
Gospel Ages; particularly as to whether the time that the 
Roman army under Titus besieged Jerusalem and the length 
of the siege are types of the trouble coming on the world? 

To my understanding the Harvest of the Jewish Age commenced 
in the fall of 29 A.D., and, being a period of forty 
years, ended in the fall of 69 A.D. In the spring of 70 A.D., at 
the time of the Passover, the Roman army besieged Jerusalem. 
The siege lasted about six months and ended in the fall of 
70 A.D. Thus the great calamity that our Lord foretold to 
Jerusalem did not reach its worst until six months after the 
end of the Jewish Harvest, and continued about six months 
thereafter, or one whole year after the end of the Jewish 
Harvest. This same period in antitype, if antitype it is, would 
seem to be from April, 1915, to October, 1915. If there is any 
significance in this it would seem that the burning of the 
"tares" in the Time of Trouble will not take place until the 
Harvest is entirely ended. 

This may be reaching after types where none are intended. 
Will be thankful for any suggestion along this line. 

Yours in the one hope, S. W. PENNOCK. 



page 209 
