Are You a Regular Kingdom Proclaimer?
1 We all rejoiced upon learning that the United States reached an all-time peak of 1,040,283 publishers in August 1998. Truly a united and determined effort! Evidently in the months that followed, some of these publishers have had difficulty being regular Kingdom proclaimers, for the monthly average ever since has been about 940,000. This indicates that 1 publisher in 12 has not reported sharing in the ministry every month. We believe that the following encouragement can help to remedy the situation.
2 Appreciate the Privilege: Our appreciation should run deep for the privilege we have to share the Kingdom good news with others. This activity makes Jehovah’s heart glad and helps honesthearted ones to learn the way to life. (Prov. 27:11; 1 Tim. 4:16) Witnessing regularly builds up our experience in the ministry and results in a feeling of joy and accomplishment.
3 Report the Activity: Some who share in field service neglect to report their activity on time. Never should we feel that our effort was not worth reporting. (Compare Mark 12:41-44.) By all means, we should report what we have done! Having a system at home, such as using a calendar, for recording time spent in the ministry will serve as a constant reminder to make an accurate report promptly at the end of each month.
4 Give the Help Needed: Local arrangements may have to be improved for assisting those who need help in having a consistent share in the ministry. The congregation secretary and book study conductors should arrange for experienced publishers to lend a helping hand. If you have children or other Bible students who are unbaptized publishers, train them to report their activity every month.
5 Recall the life story, “Grateful for a Long Life in Jehovah’s Service,” in the October 1, 1997, Watchtower. Sister Ottilie Mydland of Norway became a regular publisher of the good news prior to her baptism in 1921. Seventy-six years later, at age 99, she said: “I am glad that it is still possible for me to be a regular publisher.” What a marvelous attitude for all of Jehovah’s servants to imitate!

