Are You Responding to Christ’s Love?
1 Reflecting on his Master’s life course, the apostle John wrote: “Jesus, having loved his own that were in the world, loved them to the end.” (John 13:1) During this Memorial season, our thoughts turn to the greatest expression of Christ’s love. We can respond to that love by exercising faith in the ransom, by having a zealous share in the preaching work and, like Jesus, by enduring “to the end.”​—Matt. 24:13; 28:19, 20; John 3:16.
2 Responding to Christ’s Love: Jesus was very active in the final week of his earthly life. (Matt. 21:23; 23:1; 24:3) As imitators of Christ, we too are moved by love to ‘exert ourselves vigorously’ in Jehovah’s service. (Luke 13:24) Can you take advantage of the arrangements for added witnessing activity during April by increasing the time that you spend in the ministry?
3 This year the Lord’s Evening Meal falls on Wednesday evening, April 19. How many will be on hand for this significant occasion? To a large extent, that depends on us. Have you made a list of those you plan to invite​—your Bible students and other interested ones, relatives, business acquaintances, and schoolmates? Have you contacted them and extended a heartfelt invitation? Will you remind them a few days before the Memorial? Do they need your assistance in getting there? The elders are also inviting any who have become inactive in the ministry. The fact that the Memorial will be held on a weeknight rather than on the weekend makes it no less important for all to attend.
4 Come Prepared: It is vital for us to be prepared and to be in the proper frame of mind when we attend the Memorial. Paul exhorted fellow believers to keep in mind the seriousness of the occasion. (1 Cor. 11:20-26) You might read chapters 13 to 17 of John’s Gospel during your family Bible study and then have each family member relate what Jesus’ sacrifice means to him. Do not forget to do the daily Bible reading for the week of the Memorial as well!
5 Our love for Christ runs deep, and it extends far beyond April 19. We are determined to demonstrate our love for him forever! This year’s Memorial celebration will help us to strengthen that resolve.

