Do You Have the Spirit of Self-Sacrifice?
1 Appreciation for what Jesus Christ unselfishly accomplished for mankind should move all of us to use our abilities, energies, and strengths in a self-sacrificing way. The Scriptures entreat: “Present your bodies a sacrifice living, holy, acceptable to God, a sacred service.” (Rom. 12:1) Periodic self-examination will help you to see if you are showing that sort of spirit as fully as your personal circumstances allow.
2 In the Pursuit of Bible Knowledge: Have you set aside time for personal Bible reading and study on a regular basis? Do you hold to that schedule? Is it your routine to prepare well for congregation meetings? If you are a family head, do you have a regular Bible study with your household? Doing these things may require sacrificing time spent in front of the television or at the computer or in other pursuits. However, what a small sacrifice to make, knowing that time spent with God’s Word will help lead you to everlasting life!​—John 17:3.
3 In the Training of Your Children: The best time to begin learning a course of self-sacrifice is in childhood. Teach your children that while there is a time for play, there must also be a time for work and for theocratic activities. (Eph. 6:4) Give them some useful work to do around the house. Establish a regular schedule to have a share in the ministry with them. Reinforce your instruction with your own good example.
4 In Congregational Activities: A congregation is enriched when everyone in it makes willing sacrifices to accomplish things for the common good. (Heb. 13:16) Is it possible for you to spend more time in the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work? Can you volunteer to assist the sick or the elderly, perhaps helping them with transportation to the meetings?
5 Prior to making the ultimate sacrifice of his human life, Jesus counseled his disciples to focus their eyes on Kingdom interests, making everything else in life secondary. (Matt. 6:33) Pursuing such a spirit of self-sacrifice will bring us the greater happiness as we continue serving Jehovah with rejoicing.

