Make Sure That You Go Back!
1 “What a good conversation! I’ll have to remember to make a return visit there.” Have you ever said those words and later forgotten where the person lives? If so, you know that the only way you can make sure that you go back is to put it in writing.
2 Write It All Down: While a conversation with an interested person is still fresh in your mind, take a moment to write down all the pertinent information about the call. Note the person’s name and how you will recognize him. Put down his address, but do not guess at it​—check to be sure that what you write is correct. Note the subject you talked about, any scriptures that you read, and what literature was placed.
3 If you left the person with a question to be answered on the next call, write it down. Did you learn something about the person, his family, or his religion? If so, make a notation of this. Then the next time you call, your making mention of it will demonstrate your personal interest in the individual. Finally, include the day and time that you made the initial call and when you said you would return. By making good notes, you will have clear reminders and will be less likely to forget your promise to return.​—1 Tim. 1:12.
4 Once your record is complete, put it with the rest of your field service equipment​—book bag, Bible, Reasoning book, and literature—​so that it will always be handy. It is best to record not-at-homes on house-to-house records that are separate from those that you use to make note of your return visits. Of course, regardless of the work you put into keeping track of return visits, the important thing is to make sure that you go back!
5 Think About the Person: When preparing for the ministry, review your return visit notes. Give thought to each individual and what approach might best be used when making the next call. Think of how to develop the person’s interest into a home Bible study. Such planning can increase your productivity as a minister of the good news and, hence, your personal joy.​—Prov. 21:5a.
6 So the next time you find a listening ear, do not reason that you can easily remember the call. Instead, write it down, review your notes, keep thinking about the person, and then make sure that you go back!

