Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting April 10
Song 122
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Do not forget the special public talk on April 16, entitled “Why Mankind Needs a Ransom.” Encourage all to follow the Memorial Bible reading scheduled for April 14-19, as outlined in Examining the Scriptures Daily​—2000. Review “Memorial Reminders,” on page 4 of the insert.
15 min: “Are You Responding to Christ’s Love?” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Include thoughts from May 1, 1998, Watchtower, pages 16-17, paragraphs 12-13. Encourage everyone to put forth a special effort to invite people to the Memorial.
20 min: “April​—A Time to Be Zealous for Fine Works!” Questions and answers. An enthusiastic discussion of what we desire to accomplish in April. Use concluding three or four minutes to review “Zeal That Stirs Up the Majority.”
Song 199 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 17
Song 25
13 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Only two weekends are left in April, so encourage everyone to participate in the ministry before the month ends. Demonstrate a brief magazine presentation using the current issues. Since we may be obliged to respond to people who want us to share in their Easter customs, review what is stated in the Reasoning book, pages 179-80.
16 min: “Do You Have the Spirit of Self-Sacrifice?” Questions and answers. We need to establish priorities, putting first things first. It takes initiative and self-control to persist in doing what will benefit us spiritually. Explain what we can learn from Jesus’ example.​—See Insight, Volume 2, page 68, paragraphs 3-5.
16 min: Place Magazines Where They Will Do the Most Good. Talk, with audience participation. Review suggestions in the January 8, 1995, Awake!, pages 22-4. Explain why it is good to search out people who are likely to respond to specialized articles appearing in the magazines. Consider examples from past issues and the types of individuals, businesses, or organizations that the articles might have appealed to in the local territory. Invite audience to relate experiences showing how they got good results using this method.
Song 71 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 24
Song 137
10 min: Local announcements. Announce the congregation’s Memorial attendance. Invite audience to relate expressions made by those who attended for the first time.
17 min: Help New Ones Attend Meetings. A talk based on the Knowledge book, pages 161-3, paragraphs 5-8. After studying for a time, it is essential that new ones start coming to meetings. Getting them to attend can be a challenge. What can you do to motivate them? Those who are conducting studies should take the time to review this material in the Knowledge book with their students and then make definite arrangements to assist them to join us in true worship.
18 min: “Are You a Regular Kingdom Proclaimer?” Talk and audience discussion handled by the secretary. Explain why we report our field service activity. (See Our Ministry, pages 106-8.) Relate some of the problems that develop when we fail to turn in our reports promptly. Invite audience to tell what they do to make sure that they turn their reports in on time. Point out how Congregation Book Study conductors can help. There is only one weekend left in April, so emphasize the importance of everyone’s sharing in service and reporting the activity at the end of the month.
Song 200 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 1
Song 213
12 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for April. Congregation Book Study conductors should check with everyone in their group so that all reports can be tallied by May 6. Review Question Box, making local application.
15 min: Local needs.
18 min: “Make Sure That You Go Back!” Audience discussion. Consider the reasons why we may fail to make return visits. Explain why accurate notes and a willingness to return are important. Suggest setting aside some time each week to make return visits. Review what is stated in Our Ministry book, pages 88-9. Relate experience reported in 1995 Yearbook, page 45.​—1 Cor. 3:6, 7.
Song 68 and concluding prayer.

