Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
We here at Bethel have certainly enjoyed attending one of the 20 “Victorious Faith” International Conventions throughout the United States. It was most encouraging to be present at various places with so many of you, friends both old and new, from far and near. You will be pleased to know that in the continental United States there was a peak attendance of 785,051 and 5,539 were baptized.
The conventions have provided us with much to think about, haven’t they? The field service Friday morning was also a delight. Indeed, “the one whom people put in charge of much, they will demand more than usual of him,” and so it was most fitting that talks during the morning and afternoon sessions of one entire day were devoted to considering the needs of the elders, who number about 45,000 in this country.​—Luke 12:48.
Elders especially appreciated the kindly admonition to keep examining themselves as to their attitude toward their assignment, their spirituality and the example they set in the evangelizing work, matters of morality and firmness for right principles. One of them said: “Wednesday’s program was for me. Now I can see how to perform all my duties and be balanced as a person and family head.”
Were you not encouraged to learn that almost 28,000 were baptized in the United States last year and 273,000 studies were conducted each month? We are glad to have these new ones in our midst. While we were reminded that all of us can share in aiding them, we can readily see the big responsibility that elders have in this area where they can demonstrate their genuine care and concern for the flock.
We were happy to hear that 60 percent of one congregation in Colorado and 59 people in a congregation in Illinois auxiliary pioneered as a result of the fine lead that the elders took in the evangelizing work. We were reminded that with their “ability to teach,” elders are to aid fellow Christians to share effectively in this vital activity. May we all reflect on such fine counsel and become “doers of the word.”​—Jas. 1:22-25.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

