Have You Tried a Magazine Route?
1 During October we are offering the Awake! subscription from house to house, and we are sure that many will be interested in taking a subscription. However, for various reasons some persons prefer not to subscribe and yet may show interest in our magazines. What could we do then? Why not try starting a magazine route by returning in a week or two with the latest issues?
2 Surely we want to be regular proclaimers of the good news, do we not? Regularity in service strengthens our faith and develops our effectiveness. And here is one advantage of a magazine route. We find that every week or every two weeks the one with a magazine route gets out on a regular basis to deliver the magazines to those on his route. And often two publishers can work together, the more experienced one assisting and training the one with less experience in the field. Thus the route really helps two publishers to be regular and effective proclaimers of the Kingdom good news!
3 Another benefit of a magazine route is that personal calls are made on people regularly. Even though the witness given might be brief, seeds of truth are being sown on each call. An alert publisher soon knows which calls merit follow-up, and many publishers and pioneers find this an excellent way to start new home Bible studies. So a good magazine route not only helps to get the magazines placed but also helps to locate truly sheeplike persons so that we can assist them to become disciples of Christ, too.
4 Some publishers find it advantageous to start a magazine route with shopkeepers and store clerks. In this way they are able to do store-to-store work on a regular basis and briefly witness to busy persons who may not hear about the truth in any other way.
5 Do you find your magazines stacking up at times? A regular magazine route certainly helps in getting our journals into the hands of readers, as you are taking the magazines to persons who know the type of material they contain and are glad to have them brought to their homes.
6 So, if you do not have a magazine route yet, why not try starting one? There are many advantages and blessings. And, remember that each time you return with the magazines you give a witness; so a return visit should be counted. It may take a little time and persistence to get your route established, but the rewards and blessings are worth while.

