Is Your Kingdom Hall Presentable?
1 What a joy we experience when in our travels we see a Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Here is where a congregation of our brothers meet! We note the appearance of the Kingdom Hall and are happy when its appearance is presentable.
2 The Kingdom Hall is likely the only building in the community that has Jehovah’s name on it. It is identified as a place where Jehovah’s name people meet together. Appreciation of this should make us very conscious of maintaining the Kingdom Hall in good condition.
3 Is your Kingdom Hall’s appearance a credit to the work? Each one of us should be vitally interested in its appearance. All of us are involved. How can we help?
4 On the outside of the Kingdom Hall, we might first look at the sidewalk and street. If paper and debris accumulate, would it not be good to have some arrangements to do necessary cleaning up for a few minutes before and after the meetings?
5 Is the grass regularly cut? Is the outside appearance of the building itself neat and clean, properly representing the clean and pure worship of Jehovah? Special attention should be given to the outside appearance of the main entrance, since this is especially noticed by any who pass by. What about the sign “Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses”? Is it neat and well kept, with good lighting, if necessary? Are the times of the meetings listed correctly? A clean, pleasant Kingdom Hall invites, yes, welcomes people to come and listen.
6 The inside of the Kingdom Hall should also enhance the message being presented. Is the interior neat and clean? Well arranged? Is seating adequate? What about the ventilation? Are rest rooms clean and well supplied with towels, toilet tissue and soap? Are the fixtures in working order? Do you help your group when it is assigned to clean the Kingdom Hall?
7 All of us should not only be conscious of the Kingdom Hall’s inside and outside appearance, but should also be willing to help out as needed. We do well to appreciate that the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses should at all times be an honor and praise to Jehovah’s name, and we should gladly do our part in keeping it in a condition that results in a favorable impression.

