Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 1
Theme: Faith with Works.​—Jas. 2:26.
10 min: Song 24 and announcements.
15 min: “Demonstrate a Living Faith.” (Handled by field overseer.) If necessary, elders meet prior to this part to arrange times for field service in October in order to inform publishers at this meeting. Question-and-answer discussion. Look up and discuss texts cited. Have publishers prepared to relate how one’s schedule might be arranged so as to spend more time in field service during October. If some are able to auxiliary pioneer, let them briefly relate how they are able to schedule their time. Inform all of meetings for field service scheduled at times practical for pioneers, auxiliary pioneers and publishers.
15 min: Know Your Magazine. (Encourage each one to have a copy of the October 8 Awake!) Cover interesting highlights, illustrations and talking points that publishers can use while working in the field, helping others to build up their faith in the Bible.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Emphasizing the Bible’s Practical Value.” Develop presentations with audience and thereafter demonstrate each one. In connection with each presentation, let publishers express what appeals to them. Make the part practical and helpful. We want to be effective in our faith-building work.
 5 min: Song 76 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 8
Theme: Our Place of Worship.
10 min: Song 5. Branch Letter.
20 min: Supporting the House of True Worship. Talk and Scriptural discussion with audience of the following:
1. Congregations of Jehovah’s people today look to Kingdom Hall as house of true worship. Building not considered as sacred, yet given special position and honor due to use in Jehovah’s worship. Need for all to support Kingdom Hall in various ways. Can look to ancient Jewish nation as an example.
2. Tabernacle constructed in wilderness in 1512 B.C.E. Materials were required; Israelites volunteered more than enough.​—Ex. 36:3, 6, 7.
3. Tabernacle replaced later by temple in Jerusalem. King David gave from his personal fortune to support temple construction under Solomon’s supervision.​—1 Chron. 22:14; 29:3-7.
4. More than initial construction support required. Repairs and cleansing needed at times. (2 Chron. 29:3, 15, 16) Continual support of temple worship was required.​—Neh. 13:9-14.
5. Those who supported God’s house had his blessing. (Mal. 3:10) Took time, effort, finances, but all went to support true worship of Jehovah God, to magnify his name. All in congregations today should be willing workers as faithful Israelites were. Our Kingdom Halls should be focal point of true worship in each community. We should all support this house of true worship. How? Not only by attending meetings, but also by contributing our time, energies, finances and skills to make and keep our Kingdom Halls presentable. Each Kingdom Hall should be well maintained inside and out and thus be a silent witness to the name of Jehovah. We should be proud of our Kingdom Halls, happy to invite people to come there for Christian association and Bible study. Jehovah will bless us as we give of our “firstfruits” to support his worship today.​—Prov. 3:9, 10.
15 min: “Is Your Kingdom Hall Presentable?” (Handled by presiding overseer.) Question-and-answer discussion with application of points to needs of the local Kingdom Hall.
10 min: Our Kingdom Hall Needs. Talk by elder. Some Kingdom Halls may need painting or rather extensive work that will take a week or two or longer. Outline what the elders discussed and suggested to improve the Kingdom Hall’s appearance. (The Society is not making Kingdom Hall loans at this time. Costs for repairs must be financed locally.)
Some congregations have a relatively new hall that may only need a thorough cleaning. It may be that a nearby congregation has much to do to improve their hall. Why not analyze your circumstances to determine if you can be of assistance? Elders can cooperate with one another in working out the details and arranging help through the elders. If possible, would it not be good to organize for the Kingdom Hall work this month or the next?
If some will spend considerable time on Kingdom Hall work, encourage others to share more fully in field service to make up for the time some will be working on the Kingdom Hall.
 5 min: Song 8 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 15
Theme: Use the Magazines in Evangelizing Work.
15 min: Song 4 and announcements. Then brief discussion to show urgent need for people to learn truth to cope with family and marriage problems. God’s Word shows root cause of problems and also proper remedy. (Prov. 3:5, 6) Our magazines will help to direct people to God’s Word and God’s remedy for family problems. (Chairman can here interview two or three prepared publishers. Ask: What points in recent issues have you found practical and useful in field service?) Conclude by showing which articles are practical and helpful for field service. Encourage use of magazines in all features of our evangelizing work.
13 min: “Have You Tried a Magazine Route?” Question-and-answer discussion of article with congregation.
15 min: How to Develop Magazine Routes. Consider following points with audience and draw out answers:
1. House-to-house record. Why should we use it to record interest and magazine placements?
2. What should we say about our calling again to one who takes the magazines? (Get practical suggestions on laying groundwork for future calls. Include thought that new issues of magazines are available every week with interesting, thought-provoking articles.)
3. As we return with new issues, what approach might be helpful to get route established? (Emphasize knowing the magazines well, reading them first. Have several talking points to use. Try to determine what might appeal to certain people in territory.)
4. When should we go on a magazine route? (Include suggestions from audience. Some may go on Saturday or Sunday after regular field service. Others prefer late afternoons or evenings when they find more at home. Some publishers go on routes as they travel or walk to or from congregation meetings.) Chairman can point out value of regular contact with people in territory through magazine route calls, and then conclude part.
12 min: Interview publishers who have good success in field service and who are effective in placing magazines. (Include one or two elders who are taking a good lead in field service.) What do they find appeals to people in local territory? What are various ways that magazines may be placed other than direct approach, such as informal witnessing? Do elders feel that the magazines are helpful in their evangelizing work? How? Have younger publishers found articles in magazines helpful in speaking to other students or to teachers? Have any studies been started in territory as a direct result of magazine placements? (Encourage this way to make disciples!) Conclude by encouraging all to consider their personal schedule for evangelizing work and the possibilities for arranging more time to help people in local territory to gain a knowledge of the truth.
 5 min: Some 10 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 22
Theme: Examining Our Personal Relationship with Jehovah.
10 min: Song 35 and local announcements. Briefly mention theme of meeting and how each part relates to it.
20 min: Our Relationship with Jehovah. Question-and-answer discussion of following material. Encourage audience to bring out what they see in examples cited that can help us to strengthen our relationship with Jehovah and to make our service to him a source of joy and blessing.
1. Consider Proverbs 17:17. Why do some friendships develop with time and others just dwindle away? A good relationship is not static; constant effort is needed to maintain it “all the time.”
2. What direction has your personal relationship with Jehovah taken since the time of your dedication? (Heb. 10:9) Many feel things have become routine, done merely out of duty or habit. What can we do to strengthen and improve our relationship with Jehovah and to rekindle the warmth and zeal we had for him?​—Heb. 10:32-34.
3. What earned Abraham the privilege of being called “Jehovah’s friend”? Consider James 2:21-23. Abraham not only did what he knew he should; he was responsive to Jehovah’s every direction, always looking for opportunities to demonstrate his willingness and obedience, thus endeavoring to please Him.​—Heb. 11:8-10, 14-17.
4. Abraham’s understanding of Jehovah’s viewpoint and his reflecting it in his own dealings with others contributed further to his good relationship with Jehovah. Consider Genesis 18:22-33. Abraham clearly understood Jehovah’s ways, his justice and compassion, his willingness to listen to lowly, imperfect creatures. Genesis 13:8, 9 shows Abraham reflected same qualities in settling dispute with Lot. His course of action clearly was pleasing to Jehovah, thus strengthening the relationship between them.​—Gen. 13:14-17.
5. Read and discuss Micah 7:18-20. When we center our lives and activities around our relationship with Jehovah, we will come to know and experience the fullness of Jehovah’s loving-kindness and mercy. What a grand privilege to have such a relationship with Jehovah God!​—Ps. 84:10.
25 min: Benefiting from Abraham’s Example. Talk with audience discussion, based on theme of meeting and material discussed in previous part. To be handled by a qualified elder who will first review circuit overseer’s comments in last Report on Circuit Overseer’s Visit with Congregation under section dealing with the spiritual condition and needs of the congregation.
As Abraham received many directions from Jehovah and faithfully carried them out, we have the command to preach the “good news” and make disciples, to “hold fast the public declaration of our hope without wavering,” and to “consider one another to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together.” (Matt. 28:19, 20; Heb. 10:23-25) Do we view such directions from Jehovah the same way that Abraham did​—as opportunities to demonstrate our love and devotion to Jehovah and thus strengthen our relationship with him? Or, have they become a burden, an obligation to us? If so, analyze what the obstacles are and what can be done to overcome them. How can elders help? Similarly, do we feel enthused about participation in meetings, actively contributing to them? What elders can help us to do so? How can elders and others who have parts on meetings help? We can imitate Abraham and seize every opportunity that our circumstances afford, to carry out what we know is well-pleasing to Jehovah.​—Eph. 5:15-17; Ps. 26:12; 66:13; 122:1.
We can also benefit from Abraham’s example by reflecting Jehovah’s qualities in our daily activities and our dealings with others, thus drawing ourselves closer to Him. The spirit of the world is to compete and win and get the best for oneself at the expense of others. (Gal. 5:26) Those who follow such a course alienate themselves from God and become his enemies rather than his friends. (Col. 1:21) We must resist any such tendencies on our part. Another factor that can easily undermine our relationship with Jehovah is the spirit of independence that caused Adam and Eve to take the course of rebellion that resulted in sin and death for the entire human family. (Rom. 5:12) Then, particularly in areas in which our Christian conscience is involved, our response and the action we take will directly affect our relationship with God. (1 Tim. 1:19; 1 Pet. 2:19, 20) Invite audience to comment on how, and in what areas, we can imitate Abraham in reflecting Jehovah’s qualities in our daily life and dealings with others.
Conclude by encouraging all to treasure our personal relationship with Jehovah God and to put forth sincere effort to strengthen and improve it.
 5 min: Close meeting with song 91 and prayer. (Pass out a copy of the new tract (KN 26) to each person. Encourage all to read tract and bring to next meeting.)
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 29
Theme: Relief from Pressure​—How?
10 min: Song 21 and announcements. (During song pass out tracts to those who do not have them.)
15 min: Pressures on People Today. Talk and audience discussion of tract cover and page 2. Ask questions and let audience comment on various pressures people in general must endure. Cover each point illustrated, applying points to local circumstances. What are some facts showing the effect of pressure? What are pressures we must personally face? Do pressures seem to be getting greater?
30 min: Relief from Pressure. (Timing of parts is approximate and may be adjusted in keeping with local needs.)
(10 min:) Discussion, looking up and applying scriptures. Paul was convinced of the value of his service. He realized it could result in life to others. (2 Cor. 4:1, 2) Effort and sacrifice on his part were required. Appreciating what God had done for him moved him to speak from his heart to others, as did the psalmist whom he quoted. (Ps. 116:10; 2 Cor. 4:13) God has helped each of us through many distressing circumstances and we can depend on him to help us in the future. Moved by a heart filled with appreciation, we will speak to others, helping them to see that the Bible has the answers to the problems brought on by pressure.
(10 min:) Discuss pages 3 and 4. Page 3 of tract is designed to show how a study and application of Bible principles can help one to cope with pressure now, and page 4, that the Bible has the answers for permanent relief from pressures. Study of the Bible and application of its principles result in peace of mind. (Ps. 37:11) Tract offers free spiritual assistance.
(10 min:) Discussion with audience of the following sample presentation, and thereafter have prepared publisher demonstrate it. “Hello. I would like to give you this folder that mentions something that affects everyone​—pressure. [Read title of tract.] Do you think we will ever find relief from pressure? [Allow for response.] Some of the pressures that we face every day are: [Open to page 2 and discuss householder.] Did you know that because of pressure, approximately one out of every three people today has mental illness? [Allow for response.] The Bible is helping many people to cope with pressures. Here are some actual examples. [Depending on the householder, draw attention to one of the experiences or mention how a study of the Bible has helped you personally.] [Turn to page 4.] The Bible offers a hope of permanent relief from pressures. It foretells a time when there will be no crime, sickness will end, loved ones in the grave will be raised to life and there will be plenty for all.” (Let finger run down each of the points as each is quickly covered.) Start study in the Bible, if possible, or in Truth book. If study is not started, but interest warrants it, make arrangements for return visit. Throughout we will keep in mind how we can help people, not merely placing literature. Get householder involved in discussion of tract to see how the Bible has the answer to relieve pressure.
 5 min: Song 58 and prayer.

