Honesty Is Appreciated by Others
IN THESE DAYS when dishonesty abounds, does it really pay to put forth the effort to be honest? Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that it does, and they sincerely endeavor to practice honesty in matters of daily life. The following experiences illustrate that it is appreciated.
● A congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Carlsbad, New Mexico, received this letter from an appreciative woman:
“Yesterday about 6:15 p.m. on a return trip from El Paso we stopped at the highway rest stop near Guadalupe Peak and I inadvertently left my handbag. It included credit cards, cash, and other valuables. Members of your congregation, Mr. and Mrs. B‐‐‐, found the purse and brought it to Carlsbad. They attempted to contact us but we were apparently still at the police station reporting the loss. They finally reached us and they would take no reward for their trouble.
“We will therefore appreciate it if you would accept the enclosed check for $50.00, . . . in gratitude for their honesty.
“We think we are extremely fortunate to have citizens such as the B‐‐‐’s in Carlsbad.”
● Jehovah’s Witnesses in Athens, Greece, have built up such a reputation for honesty that the following ad was published in one of the leading newspapers in Athens:
“WANTED: Oil-burner technicians for a permanent job. . . . Preferred are Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
● A Witness in New Mexico received a letter from a motel manager that said the following regarding Jehovah’s Witnesses who had stayed as guests in his motel:
“To illustrate how impeccably honest these people are, I would like to tell you of an incident that occurred here. One of the ‘Witnesses’ took a small wash cloth when he left. It may have gotten mixed up with clothing. He mailed the wash cloth back, along with an apology. I am sure that the cost of mailing the package far exceeded the value of the wash cloth.
“Again, please accept my thanks for the privilege of serving you and your people.”
● In Orange, Massachusetts, a 12-year-old boy whose mother is a Witness found $10 (U.S.) in school and turned it in to the principal’s office, despite being ridiculed by his schoolmates. As a result, the principal wrote a letter to his parents that said:
“Your son Michael has shown a high level of honesty. He found a ten dollar bill on the school’s playground and brought it to the office. I am sure you are proud of the fact that he did not allow himself to be tempted.
“A child’s values generally reflect those of his parents as well as his training.
“Keep up the good work!”
● The Palm Beach “Post-Times” of Florida reported the following regarding Todd, the 11-year-old son of a Witness couple. While he was out riding his bicycle one day, Todd stopped at a pay telephone. When he could not get a dial tone, he hit the coin return. At that point $1 (U.S.) in change fell out of the phone. Todd took the money home and put it in his dresser drawer. Several weeks later he went back to the same phone and this time $7 in change fell out. Now Todd had $8 in his dresser drawer. Several days later, when he went back to the phone for the third time, still more change fell out. Now Todd had about $10. What would he do with it?
Todd discussed the matter with his parents. After they talked to him about honesty, his parents decided to let him make up his own mind. What did he decide? Reports the paper: “Without saying anything, Todd hopped on his bike and, through a heavy rain on a Friday afternoon, returned the money to the local phone company office.” As a result of this incident Todd’s parents “received a letter of ‘commendation’ praising their son’s honesty,” from the local telephone company.
The Bible recommends that we “conduct ourselves honestly in all things.” (Heb. 13:18) And it is appreciated by others.

