Have You Ever Wondered—
Why Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Call at Your Door?
IT IS unusual for a stranger to come uninvited to your door to discuss religion. Even devout religious leaders don’t do it. In fact, few persons will spend time calling at the homes of their neighbors to discuss spiritual matters. Perhaps you’ve noticed how people can live side by side without taking any real interest in their neighbors.
SHOULD PEOPLE TAKE MORE INTEREST IN THEIR NEIGHBORS?
Most persons will say, Yes. They know that when neighbors communicate, even if they don’t always agree, an atmosphere of friendship can exist. Would not our world be more secure if there were more trust and a freeness of speech among neighbors?
But we see just the opposite. Many large cities have become cold concrete jungles filled with persons who have forgotten how to care about others. One artist, after living for years in a large city, finally left, saying: “Nobody smiles. I just don’t want to live in a society like this any more.”
Yes, many discouraged persons welcome a smile and some pleasant news. For this reason they have appreciated cheerful calls by Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, many hesitate to talk to them because their own religion is different from that of the Witnesses. They feel that the Witnesses want them to join their church.
ARE THE WITNESSES SEEKING CHURCH MEMBERSHIP?
Frankly, no. They are what their name states: witnesses. A witness testifies to what he has seen and heard. The founder of Christianity, Jesus Christ, came to “bear witness to the truth” and his first-century followers imitated him by ‘speaking about the things they saw and heard.’​—John 18:37; Acts 4:19, 20.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have ‘seen and heard’ many useful Bible truths from their personal and congregational study. The application of this knowledge has led them to happier family lives, to their overcoming ruinous habits, getting along better with others, enjoying a good conscience, finding self-respect and having hope for the future. Since they personally have benefited, they want to share such Scriptural truths with their neighbors. This information has been treasured by many whom they contact and has helped millions to find greater happiness.
However, if you have ever talked to one of the Witnesses, you know that their concern is not limited to having a better life amid today’s distressful conditions. There is an air of urgency about their message.
JUST WHY ARE THEY SO CONCERNED?
The Witnesses seriously believe what the Bible says at 2 Peter 3:7, 13: “The heavens and the earth that are now are stored up for fire and are being reserved to the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly men. But there are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his [God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”
Imagine what the “destruction of the ungodly men,” followed by a world in which “righteousness is to dwell,” would mean! Eliminated forever would be racial strife, crime, wars and all other violence. The Bible also promises the permanent end of food shortages, high cost of living, sicknesses and death. Yes, it even promises a resurrection of those in the graves!​—Ps. 72:16; Rev. 21:3, 4; John 5:28, 29.
Just think how much hope these promises could bring into a person’s life! Jehovah’s Witnesses know this, and that’s why they want to reach as many as possible by going directly to people’s homes. They want these to know that the awaited ‘new heavens and new earth’ are very near.
ARE WORLD CONDITIONS REALLY THAT URGENT?
The Bible foretold that just prior to God’s taking action against the wicked there would be a “sign . . . of the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matt. 24:3) The fulfillment of this “sign” on the world scene would provide clear evidence that the end was near. At the left are listed some of the features of the sign of the “last days.” As illustrated, you can see its fulfillment in world conditions every day!​—2 Tim. 3:1-5.
Rather than dishearten us, Jesus said that these distressful conditions should cause us to ‘lift our heads up, because our deliverance (into a new order) is getting near.’ (Luke 21:28) It is to bring you this good news that Jehovah’s Witnesses call at your door.
[Pictures on page 4]
SIGN OF THE “LAST DAYS”
‘Nation against nation.’​—Matt. 24:7.
“Outbursts of disease.”​—Luke 21:11, Bible in Basic English.
“Food shortages.”​—Matt. 24:7.
“Increasing of lawlessness.”​—Matt. 24:12.

