Helping Men to Security During God’s War
TODAY the nations of the world are interested in security more than ever before. Because of the quarrels they have among themselves relative to world domination, they seek to gain security from one another by making alliances, by means of international espionage and intrigues, by holding summit meetings and by stockpiling all manner of destructive weapons.
With all their feverish activity toward gaining security, they foolishly overlook the greatest threat of all to their very existence, namely, “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” That is the war to be concerned about, for it is certain to come and to annihilate all God’s enemies. That war is concerned, not only with global domination, but with universal domination, involving as it does the unseen world. The issue to be settled by that war is Jehovah’s sovereignty by means of his kingdom, for which Jesus taught us to pray.—Rev. 16:14, 16.
Those who would find security during God’s war must heed the call of divine wisdom. Heeding that call provided security for Enoch in a hostile world, for Noah and his family at the time of the Deluge, for Lot and his daughters at the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, for the Gibeonites of Canaanland who took their stand with Jehovah’s people in the days of Joshua, even as it did time and again for the nation of Israel.
Concerning divine wisdom and its call we read: “True wisdom itself keeps crying aloud in the very street. In the public squares it keeps giving forth its voice. ‘Turn back at my reproof. . . . As for the one listening to me, he will reside in security and be undisturbed from dread of calamity.’”—Prov. 1:20, 23, 33.a
What is involved in listening to divine wisdom? It means to obey the Scriptural command: “Seek Jehovah, all you meek ones of the earth, who have practiced His own judicial decision. Seek righteousness, seek meekness. Probably you may be concealed in the day of Jehovah’s anger.” That means one must show himself meek or humble before God. It also means not only praying, ‘Your will be done on earth as in heaven,’ but making an honest effort to find out what God’s will is now and then doing it lovingly, in faith and obedience. It means calling on the name of Jehovah, making him one’s refuge and dwelling place.—Zeph. 2:3.
As dedicated Christian witnesses of Jehovah we have taken our stand for him and his kingdom, and therefore we can hope for security during God’s war—provided we continue to fulfill our dedication vow, which includes the obligation to sound forth the voice of divine wisdom so that others who are of good will toward God may hear and heed and thus also come in line for this security. More than that, we should be concerned about helping as many as possible to get in line for that security, for each one that does contributes to the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
All this requires of us that we keep on seeking first God’s kingdom and his righteousness, that we buy out the opportune time, for truly the days are wicked, more so than ever before. Let us keep our hope bright, our appreciation keen, our zeal hot for God’s cause. Let us not slack the hand but seek to find ever more and more time, energy and means for letting the voice of divine wisdom be heard on the streets, from house to house, in the homes of the people, from the public platform and incidentally, wherever we can make an opportunity. Let us take care to keep the minor things of life, such as recreation and creature comforts, in their place, making them contribute to our well-being instead of making them the purpose of our life. Let us ever be on guard that the maelstrom of materialism does not suck us into its current and we become of that vast throng today that are lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.
Because of Christendom’s religious holiday season and the vacations that go with it, December is an especially good month for all, young and old, to help men to security during God’s war, and what better instrument could we have than our New World Translation of the complete Bible? Let us get this volume into their hands and then help them to understand it. Doing so will contribute to the vindication of Jehovah’s name and help others as well as ourselves to security during God’s war.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, October 15, 1960.

