New World Society Looks Out for Its Youth
CHRISTIAN fathers are counseled: “Do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and authoritative advice of Jehovah.” (Eph. 6:4) That the Christian witnesses of the New World society are doing this is being testified to by non-Witnesses.
Thus a Jewish photographer, associated with one of New York city’s leading newspapers, on seeing so many young folks at the United Worshipers District Assembly held at Yankee Stadium, asked: “How do you get all these children to come here? My boy doesn’t like to go to our synagogue. He comes home and says: ‘I didn’t get a thing out of it.’” When it was explained to him how Jehovah’s witnesses look after their youth, he replied, “I think I’d better give you my son.”
And said the publisher of seven of New York city’s neighborhood papers: “One of the many things I like about Jehovah’s witnesses is the order and quietness in the Stadium. I like to see children take an interest in religion, and just look at them here! I told my church committee we should be like Jehovah’s witnesses—have meetings for the whole family. It would be a better world if Protestant religions would copy Jehovah’s witnesses. You have a wonderful organization.”
Among the youthful witnesses of Jehovah who appeared on the platform at the Yankee Stadium assembly was one Gary who lives in the Bronx. Although only six years old, he goes alone from house to house preaching the good news of God’s kingdom. One day, while offering The Watchtower on a subscription basis, he met a woman at the door who patronizingly asked: “Doesn’t a little boy like you find it very tiring to be calling at people’s doors? A little boy like you should be having fun and should be doing something else instead of knocking on the doors of people’s houses.”
Six-year-old Gary, having been properly taught in Bible principles, had the right answer: “The Bible says that there is a time for everything, and when we go from door to door that is the time to speak to the people about God and his kingdom as the only hope for man.” As a result of this Scriptural answer the lady subscribed for The Watchtower and since then a number of calls have been made upon her by Gary and his father.

