From Our Readers
Divorce  Your articles on “Divorce​—The Human Cost” (February 8, 1992) prompted me to write. In 1988, I divorced after four years of marriage to my high school sweetheart. I would have tried to save my marriage had I known then what I know now. Divorce ruins you financially. And while married men prey on divorced women, single men frown on women with children. They may date you, but they will not get serious. I certainly hope this article saves at least one marriage; I couldn’t save mine.
T. R., United States
Your point that there are painful consequences to divorce, even when there are legitimate grounds, was well taken. Sometimes I feel I’m swimming in a sea of emotions. The passage of time, a routine of spiritual activities, and Jehovah’s tender mercies have lessened the frequency and intensity of these difficult emotions.
M. H., United States
Young People Ask  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Is It Normal to Be a Virgin?” (March 22, 1992) Since many laugh at me and ridicule me for preserving my virginity, I began to have doubts in this regard. But this article opened my eyes. I have decided to preserve my physical and emotional well-​being, and most important, my fine relationship with God.
A. R., Brazil
I appreciated the “Young People Ask . . .” article “Why Don’t I Fit In?” (October 22, 1991) It came at a time when I was feeling really down about not fitting in with the cliques. I could relate to the youth who said, ‘If you’re not wearing the right tennis shoes, you don’t fit in,’ because I don’t have the money to buy all the in clothes. Your article helped me to see that I’m not alone.
K. M. S., United States
Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . What if My Family Is Poor?” (January 22, 1992) Even though I’m not a youth and not truly poor, this article helped me. My husband and I have been going through some hard times. Things looked so hopeless that I felt immobilized. The information helped me to realize that my negative thinking was only making matters worse. Now I am better able to endure.
K. J., United States
Incas  I just finished reading the article “A Look at the Golden Age of the Incas.” (January 22, 1992) I am 15 years old, and the study of pre-​Columbian civilizations of South America has always intrigued me. Your article was very interesting, objective, and different from others that I have read. This kind of material helps us to increase our knowledge of diverse subjects in a practical and entertaining manner.
D. A. S., Argentina
Eating Disorders  Thank you for the article “Helping Those With Eating Disorders.” (February 22, 1992) My best friend is always complaining about her weight. She only weighs 100 pounds [45 kg] or so, and I am twice her size! So it really makes me ashamed of my obesity. I have tried every diet there is but to no avail. I have had very little respect for myself because of being so big. Your article helped build in me a little more respect for myself.
P. M., United States
I have been free of the vise grip of bulimia for close to two years now. Daily check-​ups by my husband, as well as constant prayer to Jehovah, were my springboard to recovery. Another thing that helped was keeping healthy foods such as fruits and vegetables in my kitchen instead of junk foods. It’s amazing how sweet a peach begins to taste when you’ve stopped eating junk foods!
S. G., United States

