Group Witnessing Brings Joy
1 When sending forth 70 disciples to preach, Jesus instructed them on what to say, organized them into teams of two, and outlined the territory they were to cover. This contributed to the joy they experienced. (Luke 10:1-17) Similarly today, group witnessing helps to equip, organize, and encourage God’s people for the preaching work.
2 Elders Take the Lead: Elders play a vital role in helping all to have a regular share in the preaching work. The service overseer takes the lead in making arrangements for midweek service. Each book study overseer is responsible for organizing the activity for his group, especially on the weekend. On occasions when the entire congregation meets for field service, such as following the Watchtower Study, each book study overseer should care for the needs of his own group.
3 “Decently and by Arrangement”: The one designated to conduct the meeting for field service should begin on time and limit the meeting to 10 or 15 minutes. It is best that he arrange the witnessing groups and assign territory (unless the book study overseers will be caring for this, as noted earlier) before concluding with prayer. This reduces the need for publishers to congregate in the territory, which can detract from the dignity of our work. It is also in harmony with Paul’s counsel: “Let all things take place decently and by arrangement.” (1 Cor. 14:40) All who attend these meetings should contribute to the success of the arrangement by arriving on time, cooperating fully with the one taking the lead, and departing promptly for the territory once the group is dismissed.
4 Drawn Together in Unity: Group witnessing arrangements provide an excellent opportunity for us to get to know others in the congregation. While there is no objection to arranging in advance to work with someone, it can also be rewarding for us to attend meetings for field service without having prior arrangements. We may be assigned to work with someone we do not know well, thus enabling us to “widen out” in our love.​—2 Cor. 6:11-13.
5 Group witnessing encourages us and draws us together as “fellow workers in the truth.” (3 John 8) May we share fully in it!

