New Circuit Assembly Program
1 Our Master foretold that his disciples would have tribulation. (Matt. 24:9) How are we to view trials? What will enable us to endure tribulation? The circuit assembly program for the 2004 service year will answer these questions. The theme is “Rejoice in the Hope. Endure Under Tribulation.”​—Rom. 12:12.
2 Two Symposiums: The first symposium, entitled “Bear Fruit With Endurance,” will consider ways in which we bear fruit. Several publishers will be interviewed on how they preach and teach with a sense of urgency. Parents especially will want to pay attention to the part “When Disciplined by Jehovah,” which will discuss how parents can reason with their children. The final speaker of the symposium will highlight what we must do to prevent the world from making inroads and causing us to become unfruitful.​—Mark 4:19.
3 “Run the Race With Endurance” is the theme of the second symposium. It will make clear how our life course is like a race. Why do we need to run according to the rules? How can we successfully put off every weight and not tire out in the race for life? The timely Scriptural counsel that will be provided will help all of us to continue running with endurance.
4 Endurance Brings God’s Approval: Talks delivered by the traveling overseers will prove faith-strengthening to those who listen and apply the counsel. One of the district overseer’s talks is entitled “Endurance Leads to an Approved Condition.” The public talk will answer the questions: In whose name should the nations hope, and what is involved in that? The concluding talk, “By Endurance You Will Acquire Your Souls,” will consider how Jesus was able to endure injustice without becoming embittered.
5 Remember to bring your Ministry School book and your Watchtower for the week. Take notes to help you concentrate and for future reference. A review of the program will be held later in the congregation.
6 Jehovah himself has prepared this banquet of spiritual food. Come! Eat! We will cry out joyfully if we are present to benefit from the entire program.​—Isa. 65:14.

