Offering Literature in Multilingual Territory
 1. Why do many congregations have a need for literature in a foreign language?
1 In many places, the field has come to include people from other lands. Many of these learn much more quickly and with deeper understanding when they are taught in their mother tongue. What arrangements are there to provide interested ones with Bible-based publications in the language they best understand?
 2. What cooperation is needed when two or more congregations speaking different languages work the same territory?
2 When to Offer Literature: When two or more congregations speaking different languages work the same territory, the bodies of elders involved will work through the service overseers in setting up a mutually acceptable system so that each language group is given a thorough witness. When preaching from house to house, publishers would not normally offer literature in the language of the other congregation(s). However, when publishers witness informally or in public areas, they may offer literature in the languages of the community.​—See the October 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Box.
 3. When would a congregation stock foreign-language literature?
3 When to Stock Literature: What can be done if there is a sizable foreign-language population in an area but no congregation speaking that particular language? Under those circumstances, congregations may stock a small quantity of the basic literature items that are available in that language, such as tracts, the Require and God’s Friend brochures, and the Knowledge book. Publishers may offer this literature whenever they meet people who can read that language.
 4. How can literature in a language that the congregation does not stock be obtained?
4 How to Order Literature: If the congregation does not stock literature in the language that an interested person reads, how can literature in that language be obtained? The publisher should check with the literature servant to determine which publications are available in that language so that the needed items can be ordered with the congregation’s next literature request.
 5. What can be done if literature is needed before the items on the next request would be received?
5 If faster service is necessary, the publisher may ask a member of the Congregation Service Committee if the request may be submitted before the congregation’s next scheduled literature request. If this is approved, the literature coordinator or someone designated by him can place a rush request through the mail or by telephone to the branch office. The literature will be shipped to the congregation’s regular delivery address or to a temporary delivery address, if desired. If overnight or two-day delivery is requested, the congregation will be billed for the delivery costs.
 6. What is our goal in making Christian publications available?
6 May we make good use of Christian publications to help “all sorts of men,” regardless of their language, ‘come to an accurate knowledge of truth and be saved.’​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4.

