Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting July 14
Song 56
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 4, have two realistic demonstrations of how the July 15 Watchtower and the July 22 Awake! could be presented in the congregation’s territory. In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured.
15 min: How Does the Worship of Jehovah Enrich Our Lives? Audience discussion. True worship is the key to a happy, meaningful life. (1) It helps us cope with the problems and anxieties of life. (Phil. 4:6, 7) (2) It encourages us to cultivate godly qualities. (2 Pet. 1:5-8) (3) It helps us to use our time and resources in the most worthwhile way. (1 Tim. 6:17-19) (4) It provides a sure hope for the future. (2 Pet. 3:13) (5) It enables us to develop an intimate relationship with Jehovah. (Jas. 4:8) Contrast how these things are lacking among those who do not know or serve Jehovah.
20 min: “Gratitude for God’s Mercy.”a When discussing paragraph 3, offer suggestions for starting a magazine route, based on the October 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8. Ask one or two capable publishers what approach they have found effective in starting Bible studies. Encourage all to make it their goal to start and conduct a Bible study.​—om p. 91.
Song 176 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 21
Song 184
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
10 min: “New Circuit Assembly Program.” Talk and audience discussion. Announce date of the next circuit assembly. If the congregation will be attending its assembly in the next few months, mention that those wishing to be baptized should inform the presiding overseer. Encourage all to make a special effort to invite Bible students and to be present for every session.
25 min: Imitate Their Boldness in Preaching. Audience discussion based on Worship God book, pages 170-1. Invite the audience to answer the questions posed in paragraph 7 and to include the cited scriptures in their comments. Read selected texts. Highlight the lessons we learn from these accounts and how they help us to have a proper view of our assignment to preach.
Song 201 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 28
Song 45
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for July. Using the suggestions on page 4, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the August 1 Watchtower and the August 8 Awake! In each case, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured. In one of the presentations, show the publisher witnessing informally.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Group Witnessing Brings Joy.”b When discussing paragraph 3, include comments on the September 2001 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Box. Briefly interview a Congregation Book Study overseer. Ask about the field service arrangements he has made for his book study group and how the group benefits from witnessing together.
Song 36 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 4
Song 178
10 min: Local announcements. Mention literature offer for the month. Demonstrate one or two brief presentations that could be used.
20 min: “Offering Literature in Multilingual Territory.”c Use the questions that are provided. When considering paragraph 3, demonstrate a simple presentation in a foreign language that is spoken in the local territory and for which there is no congregation.​—km 7/02 p. 1 par. 4.
15 min: Young Ones Are Praising Jehovah! Talk with audience discussion and interviews. We enjoy hearing young people give well-prepared comments at meetings. Their diligence and progress in the Theocratic Ministry School are a delight. They demonstrate genuine faith as they give a fine witness in the ministry. Their godly conduct honors Jehovah. (yb88 pp. 53-4) Their spiritual progress lays a foundation for future privileges. Briefly interview two or three Christian youths who enjoy a regular share in congregation activities. Warmly commend the youths in the congregation for their fine efforts to praise Jehovah.
Song 49 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

