From Our Readers
Disabled Full-Time Minister  Over the years many articles have touched my heart—but none so deeply as the experience of Gloria Williams, “A Bullet Changed My Life.” (October 22, 1995) My problems pale into insignificance in comparison with hers! Thank you for giving us such rich spiritual food and encouragement.
E. L., Canada
This experience reminded me that whatever conditions we find ourselves in, however bad, we can pray to Jehovah and ask for help. I am having a bad time at school now, and I get disheartened. But reading this article encouraged me very much.
M. S., Japan
As I read Gloria Williams’ story, I had tears in my eyes. It encouraged me to continue giving the best of myself in the field service, despite living in a religiously divided home.
F. C., Italy
The article has encouraged me to continue persevering in my goal of preaching full-time. If Gloria Williams can do so, then why can’t I—when I have all my body members intact?
I. O. A., Nigeria
Wood  I am 11 years old, and I really enjoyed the article “Why Build With Wood?” (October 22, 1995) It helped me to appreciate Jehovah’s power and ability. It also drew me closer to him and his Son, Jesus Christ, because I realize how smart and wise they both are.
A. B., United States
Why Still Single?  Thanks a lot for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Is Everyone Getting Married but Me?” (October 22, 1995) A marriage boom has broken out in this area with many getting married at a very young age. Some are worried about me, as I am 18 years old and do not have a boyfriend. The article arrived at just the right time to help me keep a balanced attitude.
S. Z., Germany
Being 19 and single, I often wonder what I am doing so wrong that no one has shown interest in me. Some unbelievers have shown interest, but it is not the kind of attention I want. The article helped me to see that patience is necessary and that what is really important is that I please Jehovah.
J. G., United States
As a single man 38 years of age, I have found myself asking the question posed in the article title. Having endured countless rejections by single Christian sisters, I well know the pain caused by “expectation postponed.” (Proverbs 13:12) It is reassuring to know that Jehovah views the feelings of single Christians in this situation as legitimate and that he appreciates our faithful endurance.
D. T., United States
Greatest Artist  After reading the series “In Search of the Greatest Artist” (November 8, 1995), I am moved to express my appreciation. I have seen too many nature programs on television that fail to give credit to the Grand Designer. Awake!, however, consistently gives the credit to our magnificent God, Jehovah.
E. Z., United States
What a wonderful new way to look at Jehovah! The quality of his art is indeed exceptional, as is the unmatched quantity of his work. I would also like to add a bravo for the many talented artists who make Awake! appealing in order to draw people to Jehovah God.
M. Q., United States

