VOL. XV. SEPTEMBER 1, 1894. NO. 17. 

"IF YE BE CHRIST'S." 



"If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, 
and heirs according to the promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

THESE words were addressed by the inspired 



Apostle to Christians, and they apply with 
equal force to the same class to-day. He does 
not say— "If ye be Jews;" although like all the 
early Christian churches, those of Galatia were 
no doubt composed in good proportion of 
Hebrews of various tribes. That was not the 
ground, or condition, upon which they might 
consider themselves heirs of the promise made 
to Abraham. 

Neither does he say— "If ye be Anglo-Israelites." 
He knew nothing about such kinship 
according to the flesh having anything 
whatever to do with a joint-heirship in the 
promise. Quite to the contrary indeed: for 
under divine inspiration he tells us— 

"Though the number of the children of 
Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant 
[only] shall be saved [from their blindness predicted.]" 
"For they stumbled at that stumbling 
stone;" and "the Gentiles, which followed 
not after righteousness, have attained to the 
righteousness which is by faith." "I have great 
heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. 
For I could wish that myself were accursed from 
Christ [if by losing this joint-heirship myself 
I might gain it] for my brethren, my kinsmen 
according to the flesh, who are Israelites. "-- 
Rom. 9:27,32,30,2-4. 

Still discussing the blindness of Israel and 
their fall from divine favor, which opened the 
door of favor to the Gentiles, the Apostle assures 
us that the vessels of God's mercy prepared 
unto glory are "us whom he hath called, 
not of Jews only, but also of the Gentiles." 
(Rom. 9:23,24.) "Israel [as a nation, the 
twelve tribes] hath not obtained that which he 
seeketh for; but the election hath obtained it, 
and the rest were blinded."— Rom. 1 1:7. 

Keeping up the same discussion he asks, "Have 
they [the fleshly seed] stumbled that they should 
fall [utterly]?" He answers, "God forbid: 
but rather that through their fall [as the natural 
seed to which the promise first was made] salvation 
is come to the Gentiles, for to provoke 
them to jealousy." And it has had, and will yet 
more have, this effect. Since the preaching of 
the Gospel to the Gentiles, Israel no longer 
goes after Baal, Moloch and other idolatries. 
That people seem to be growing more and 
more jealous of Christianity, and are now claiming 
and quoting Jesus as a Jew, as shown in our 
issue of Apr. 15, page 1 14, and June 11, page 162. 

Thus "the fall of them [is] the riches of the 
world; and the diminishing of them [the selecting 
of only a few, a remnant from them results 
in] the enriching of the Gentiles [proportionately 



--Gal. 3:14.] And if the cutting off 

of that people resulted in such blessing to 

others, how much greater blessings may we expect 

as a result of Israel's ultimate full regathering 

to God as a result of the jealousy? (Rom. 11:12.) 

Blindness in part [temporary blindness] 

has happened unto Israel [—except the remnant 

which accepted Christ; and that blindness will 

last] until the fulness of [the completeness of the 

R1696: page 276 

elect Church, selected from] the Gentiles be 
come in. And so [thus or then] all Israel shall 
be saved [from the blindness which happened 
to them eighteen centuries ago]: as it is written, 
There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer 
[Christ, the head, and his Church, the body], 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob 
[Israel after the flesh]. For this is my covenant 
[agreement] with them when I shall take away 
their sins."— Verses 25-27. 

Satisfied that the Apostle did not in our text 
refer to all Israel that stumbled and that is to 
be saved from blindness by and by, nor to their 
children according to the flesh, lost or found, 
we settle it in our minds that the Apostle meant 
the words of our text to apply to consecrated 
believers in Christ, only; for whether Jew or 
Gentile, bond or free, all who are in Christ 
Jesus are one; joint-heirs of the promise made 
to Abraham.-Rom. 10:12; Gal. 3:28. 

But notice, again, very particularly, the words 
of our text. The Apostle begins the statement 
with that small but very significant word, if: 
"If ye be Christ's." It was not sufficient to 

R1697: page 276 

be known as a regular attendant of one of the 
congregations of believers in Galatia— a brother 
in good standing with fellow Christians and of 
good moral character. Nor did it avail anything 
that the great Apostle Paul recognized 
those congregations of believers in Galatia as 
"brethren" and "sons of God." (Gal. 3:15,26; 
4:6,12,31; 5:1 1,13; 6:1,18.) Notwithstanding 
all this, the inspired writer says, "if." 

To "be Christ's," therefore, evidently means 
a great deal more than faith, respectability and 
good endorsement. It means to belong to Christ; 
—to be his, body, soul and spirit;— to be his 
to-day and forever; his servant, to do his will 
in his way and at his time; when convenient 
and pleasurable, and when inconvenient, painful 
and difficult. 



It means, furthermore, that we cannot belong 
to anyone else in this complete sense, for no 
man can serve two masters. Here comes in a 
difficulty for those who belong to secret or other 
Societies. The laws, professions and customs 
of these are almost certain to conflict with or 
infringe upon a full consecration to Christ. 
They profess some things which Christ condemns, 
and if we would speak as his oracles we 
would offend. Their laws and customs are 
worldly, or at least conformed to this world, 
and our Master has laid down as his law that we 
be not conformed to this world, but that we be 
"transformed by the renewing of our minds- 
proving [ascertaining] the good and acceptable 
and perfect will of God." These Societies inculcate 
the wisdom of pleasing the world: our 
Master tells all that are his, "Ye are not of the 
world, even as I am not of this world." "If 
any man love the world, the love of the Father 
is not in him." In a word he says to us, 
"Choose ye this day whom ye will serve." 
"Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." 

These observations apply as truly to religious 
societies, churches, etc., as to others: indeed, 
more so, because the latter affect to represent 
Christ and to speak for him, which, surely, they 
have no right or authority to do; for our Master 
still speaks to those that are his through the 
Gospels and the words of his inspired Twelve 
Apostles. See article on "The Twelve Apostles," 
in TOWER, May 1, '93, p. 131. 

Almost all denominations have formulated 
Confessions of Faith to which all who belong 
to them either directly or indirectly give assent. 
And these uniformly conflict with the doctrines 
of Christ. They demand consecrated time and 
money, as well as name and influence, for 
these, which are false doctrines, and hence in 
opposition to Christ's doctrines. If we "be 
Christ's" only and fully, we cannot compromise 
with the world, nor with its policy and 
spirit amongst Christ's disciples. Not to compromisers, 
but to "overcomers," Christ's very 
own, is given the promise of a share with him 
in his throne as fellow-members of the Seed of 
Abraham and heirs according to that promise 
or covenant. 

Finally, and most important of all, the Christian 
must learn that, "if he be Christ's" servant 
and disciple, he is not his own;— not his 
servant to do his own will in his own way and 
time, nor his own teacher to make his own 
theology and code of laws and philosophies. 
He is simply a disciple or pupil in the School 
of Christ, under instruction upon every subject; 



—he is a know-nothing, a fool, according to the 

R1697: page 277 

wisdom of this world, in order that he may gain 
the true, heavenly wisdom. He is to be emptied 
of self in every sense, that he may "be 
Christ's" completely— dead to self, and alive 
toward God through Jesus Christ, his Lord. 
Few such? Ah! yes; and this the Master 
foretold us, saying, "Fear not, little flock, it is 
the Father's good pleasure to give you the 
Kingdom." 

"Not my own, but saved by Jesus, 
Who redeemed me by his blood, 

Gladly I accept the message; 
I belong to Christ, the Lord. 

"Not my own! to Christ, my Savior, 

I, believing, trust my soul; 
Everything to him committed, 

While eternal ages roll. 

"Not my own! my time, my talent, 

Freely all to Christ I bring, 
To be used in joyful service 

For the glory of my King. 

"Not my own! Oh, not my own! 

Jesus, I belong to thee! 
All I have and all I hope for, 

Thine for all eternity." 

But what is it to be "Abraham's seed and 
heirs according to the promise" made to 
Abraham? 

The promise made to Abraham was the first 
distinct statement of the Gospel of which we have 
any record. It reads, "In thee and thy seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
This was good tidings to Abraham, as it would 
be indeed to all who have generous, godlike 
hearts; and hence the Apostle says that "God 
preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham, 
saying, 'In thy seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed.'" 

This gospel is still beforehand, in the sense 
that all the families of the earth have not yet 
been blest; but it may be said to be a present 
gospel to the few who now have "ears to 
hear,"— to appreciate it. 

To hear it fully and clearly is to appreciate 
the fact that a Millennium of blessing was provided 
for by the death of Christ as man's ransom 
or substitute, and that consequently a blessing 



is to come to all the families of the earth. 
This blessing will consist of a full opportunity 
to know God and to come into harmony with 
him under the conditions of the New Covenant 
(sealed with the precious blood), and thus to 
have everlasting life. 

To those who appreciate this gospel, and who 
thus judge that if one died for all, then were 
all dead [legally], and that we who live [through 
Christ's promise and work] should not henceforth 
live unto ourselves, but unto him who 
loved us and died for us;— to these the Lord 
makes known the exceeding riches of his grace, 
and offers a share with him in that work 
of blessing all the families of the earth, because 
they appreciate his work. And the further 
they go in obedience, self-denial and self-sacrifice 
in his service, the more he communicates 
of his gracious, loving plan, whose lengths 
and breadths and heights and depths are far 
beyond the comprehension of the natural man; 
but God reveals them by his spirit to those who 
are "Christ's."-2 Cor. 5:14,15; 1 Cor. 2:9,10. 



R1697: page 277 

"ONCE IN GRACE ALWAYS IN GRACE." 



THAT monstrous doctrine of "eternal torment," 
a blasphemy on the name and character 
of Jehovah God, has led God's people to 
some very illogical conclusions on other subjects 
as well; amongst others, to the view that whoever 
becomes a true child of God can never become 
a "castaway" from divine favor. Thus 
does Satan use the fear of torment to hinder 
love to God, while he operates reversely, through 
the same fear, upon the minds of the same people 
to make them feel secure and careless, though 
they so dread God that true love is impossible. 

The human mind is so constituted that it 
can by sophistry or false reasoning convince itself 
of error: hence the only safe position for 
any of us is to have absolutely no will or preference 
of our own, and thus to come to the 
Word of God free from all prejudice, intent 
simply upon knowing his will and plan: otherwise 
we are in constant danger of deceiving 
ourselves into whatever view we prefer; for "the 
heart is deceitful above all things." 

R1697: page 278 



Of course the Scriptures are appealed to as 
proof of this theory, that all are forever safe 
and sure of heaven who have been begotten of 
the spirit of truth. Hence we should examine 
carefully the Scriptures bearing upon this question, 
that we be not deceived. We read:— 

(1) "Whosoever is born [begotten] of God 
doth not commit sin; for [or because] his seed 
remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he 
is born [begotten] of God. In this the children 
of God are manifest, and the children of the 
devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not 
of God, neither he that loveth not his brother." 
--1 John 3:9,10. 

(2) "Whosoever is born [begotten] of God 
sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God 
keepeth himself, and the wicked one toucheth 
[catcheth] him not."— 1 John 5:18. 

(3) "Being born [begotten] again, not of 
corruptible seed but of incorruptible, by the 
Word of God, which liveth and abideth forever." 
-IPet. 1:23. 

(4) "No man can come to me except the 
Father which hath sent me draw him: and him 
that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out." 
-John 6:44,37. 

(5) "My Father, who gave them me, is 
greater than all; and no man is able to pluck 
them out of my Father's hand."— John 10:29. 

(6) "Whom he did foreknow, he also did 
predestinate to be conformed to the image of 
his Son."-Rom. 8:29. 

(7) "The Lord knoweth them that are 
his."-2 Tim. 2:19. 

(8) "It is God which worketh in you both 
to will and to do of his good pleasure."— 
Phil. 2:13. 

R1698: page 278 

(9) "If ye do these things, ye shall never 
fall; for so an entrance shall be ministered unto 
you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom 
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ."— 

2 Pet. 1:10,11. 

(10) "To deliver such a one unto Satan 
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit 
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus."— 
1 Cor. 5:5. 

The first four of these texts are supposed to 
teach that at our conversion we get from God 
an atom of himself, the seed of the new being; 
and this seed is presumed to be indestructible, 
incorruptible, unimpairable. It is claimed that 
although this seed may lie dormant awhile, or 



be hindered from development by a sinful course 
of life, it will ultimately, surely develop into a 
true and noble spiritual being. 

But these texts do not so teach. They do 
not teach that the new nature, begotten by the 
holy seed, the truth, cannot corrupt, cannot 
die;— that the convert cannot fall from grace. 
The contrary is the suggestion and lesson of 
the figure used— natural begetting. It shows 
us the possibility of misconception, miscarriage, 
still-birth, etc., after the spiritual begetting as 
after the natural begetting. Thus the figure 
used contradicts the theory sought to be built 
upon it. 

They do teach, that if our begetting is genuine, 
it must be a begetting or inspiring by the 
truth, and not by error; and that if we are 
really begotten by God's precious promises to 
new hopes, and new ambitions, and a new 
course of living, our natural preference for sin 
(by reason of the fall) having given place to a 
preference for righteousness, we cannot sin 
(wilfully);— and to them that are accepted in 
Christ nothing is reckoned sin that is contrary 
to their will, uncontrollable weaknesses, resulting 
from the fall, being covered from God's 
sight by the ransom.— Rom. 4:7,8. 

Hence, if any man sin (wilfully, intentionally), 
it is a sign that at that time he is not begotten 
of God by the Word of truth. If he 
ever were begotten to a holy, consecrated will, 
the seed of truth must have died; for so long as 
it remains he could not take pleasure in wilful 
disobedience. 

The truth-seed itself is incorruptible, but not 
so the newness of life begotten by it. The 
truth may be let slip, and leave us as though we 
had not known it. "We have this treasure [the 
spirit of the truth and the new wills begotten 
of it] in earthen vessels," as the Apostle says. 
(2 Cor. 4:7.) And our earthen vessels are all 
more or less cracked by the fall, so that we are 
unable to contain or to retain a full measure of 
the spirit of the truth,— with all the daubing 
and patching we can do; at best they are leaky 
vessels. Therefore, the Apostle again says, 

R1698: page 279 

"We ought to give the more earnest heed lest 
we should let these things slip [leak out]." 

The possibility of falling away, after having 
come into full fellowship with the Lord and 
been reckoned members of his "body," is very 
clearly taught by our Lord as well as by the 
apostles. In fact, the only ones in danger of 



falling away from divine favor are those who 
have been lifted up to that favor, and not the 
world still groveling in sin, "without God and 
without hope." The Apostle Paul says, 

"If we [the consecrated Church] sin wilfully, 
after that we have received a knowledge of the 
truth, there remaineth no more a sacrifice for 
sins [we having enjoyed our share of grace under 
the one sacrifice], but a fearful looking for 
of judgment and fiery indignation which shall 
devour [not preserve, nor purify, but destroy 
such wilful sinners as] the adversaries [of God]." 
--Heb. 10:26,27. 

Again, he declares, It is impossible to renew 
unto repentance those once enlightened, who 
have been made partakers of the holy spirit, 
etc., if they shall fall away. (Heb. 6:4-8.) But 
so infatuated and so deceived by their own 
hearts are those whose views we criticise, 
that to these words they reply, Yes, but the 
Apostle says if; whereas he knew that they 
could not fall away, and is merely citing an 
impossible case. Such people can only be left 
to the blindness which their own wilfulness and 
prejudice has induced. Whoever can read this 
citation, and still claim that the Apostle was 
teaching the impossibility of Christians falling 
from divine favor, is surely lacking either in 
intelligence or conscientiousness; and it would 
be useless for us to try to convince him. For 
he who could and would so distort the divine 
record would have no difficulty in getting rid 
of any arguments we or others might frame. 

The Apostle Peter speaks of this same class, 
saying, "For if, after they have escaped the pollutions 
of the world, through the knowledge of 
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ [i.e., by being 
"begotten by the Word of God"], they 
are again entangled therein, and overcome, the 
latter end is worse with them than the beginning. 
For it had been better for them not to 
have known the way of righteousness, than, 
after they have known it [been "begotten by the 
Word of God"] to turn from the holy commandment 
delivered unto them. But it is happened 
unto them according to the true proverb, 
The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and 
the sow that was washed to her wallowing in 
the mire. "-2 Pet. 2:20-22. 

Our Lord taught the same lesson in his parables. 
He represented the state of the justified 
who backslide, by a man out of whom the devil 
had been cast and which, returning, found the 
heart swept and garnished, but unoccupied, 
and, entering in with others, made "the last 
end of that man worse than the first."— 



Matt. 12:43-45. 

In the parable of the wedding guests (Matt. 22:1 1-13) 
the Lord shows one (who represents a 
class), who evidently came in among the others, 
clothed in the provided "wedding garment," 
and who was fully recognized as a guest and 
"friend" by the host until he removed the 
garment [which typifies Christ's imputed robe 
of righteousness]; and then he was cast out of 
the special light and favor into the outer darkness 
from which he originally came in. 

In the parable of the sower our Lord shows 
how the good seed (the Word of God that liveth 
and abideth forever) might be received upon 
stony ground and sprout into being, and that 
new being afterward die, and how the same 
good, incorruptible seed in other cases is choked 
by the thorns of worldly business, pleasure and 
ambition.-Matt. 13:3-9,18-23. 

In the parable of the Vine (John 15:1-8) he 
shows that one may be begotten by the Word 
of God, and even become a member of the elect 
Church, the true Vine, and be recognized as such 
by the husbandman, God, and that yet, if he fail 
to bring forth the fruits of the spirit, he will in 
due time be cut off from that elect Church or 
true Vine. For the present state of our membership 
is not final, but a probationary one,— 
His "house are we, if we hold fast the confidence 
and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end." 
(Heb. 3:6.) We are justified by God's grace 
and called to be his sons, and "he is faithful that 
promised." (Heb. 10:23.) If there be failure 
or unfaithfulness, it will be on our part. Hence 
in receiving us as sons he is taking us at our 

R1698: page 280 

Covenant: and whoever becomes a "castaway" 
must become such of his own wilful act,~"If 
we sin wilfully," etc. 

Our Lord mentions some such whom he will 
disown, saying, Many shall say unto me in 
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not done many 
wonderful works in thy name, and in thy name 
cast out devils. 

Again, he tells us of one fully recognized as 
a servant and entrusted with a talent for service, 
who, because unfaithful, will have it taken from 
him and be himself cast into outer darkness: 
not because he never was a real servant, but 
because, being really a servant, he proved unfaithful. 
--Matt. 25:14-28. 

Let us now glance at the other texts cited to 
prove this theory that a true Christian cannot 
fall from divine favor. 



The fourth is a simple statement that the 
Word and providence of God alone can draw 
men to Christ, the Life-giver, and that Christ 
will not refuse any coming as the result of 
such a drawing. It says not one word about 
his holding men who come so that they cannot 
go from him again, crucify him afresh and do 
despite to the spirit of God's favor. 

The fifth text merely asserts God's willingness 
and ability to shield and keep all who desire 
to be kept— who abide under the shadow of the 
Almighty. It does not at all imply an imprisonment 
of those in God's care, so that they 
cannot go from him as they came to him, by 
the exercise of their own free wills. 

The sixth text merely mentions that the class 
foreknown to the Lord as those who will be 
joint-heirs with Christ, he has foreordained 
must have characters like that of Christ— must 
be copies of him. See a further treatment of 
this text in Z.W. TOWER, Feb. 1, '94. 

The seventh text declares that God cannot 
be deceived. He knows those who become his, 
by being begotten by the Word, and he knows 
equally well whenever any lose the spirit of the 
truth and cease to will and to do according to 
his good pleasure. 

The eighth text shows our continual dependence 
upon the Lord, not only for our first impulses 
toward holiness when we are begotten by 
his Word to newness of life, but also when we 
need the encouragement and promptings to 
deeds of righteousness which his exceeding great 
and precious promises continually inspire. God's 
Word is "the power of God unto salvation [by 
which he works in us first to will aright and 
then to do right] to every one that believeth" 
—receiving the spirit of that Word into good 
and honest hearts.— Compare 1 Pet. 1 :23 with 
2 Pet. 1:4 and Rom. 1:16. 

The ninth text shows that our continuance 
in safety depends upon our own course of conduct 
after God has done his part through his 
Word and providences; if then we do these 
things, if we cultivate the spirit of Christ and 
are "not barren nor unfruitful," but "give diligence 

R1699: page 280 

to make our calling and election sure," 
then, under such conditions, we "shall never 
fall;" for God will not suffer us to be tempted 
above that we are able, but will with the temptation 
provide a way of escape.— See TOWER, 
Oct. 15, '92. 
The tenth text is the only one that gives even 



a slight support to the doctrine claimed. Here 
one of the begotten or consecrated Church has 
committed sin; not necessarily a wilful sin, but 
quite probably in part at least a sin of ignorance; 
the transgressor was probably a "babe" 
in Christ and in the knowledge of the divine 
will, or had mistaken the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free for license to sin, or both. 
At all events, the Apostle's language indicates 
that his case was not a hopeless one, as it would 
have been had the sinner transgressed against 
full light and knowledge, wilfully. For the 
same Apostle declares that such cannot be renewed 
unto repentance.— Heb. 6:4-6. Compare 
Uohn5:16. 

The Apostle would show the Church the importance 
of prompt and decisive action to correct 
such an error. The wrong-doer should 
not be temporized with, nor coaxed and advised, 
nor remonstrated against, but should be promptly 
disfellowshipped by all the pure-minded, refused 
all recognition and all privileges of fellowship, 
no matter what his professions or knowledge 
or talents: thus left to the world and the 
devil for fellowship, he would be the more likely 
to see his condition and reform. That in the 
case mentioned the man did not have a bad spirit, 

R1699: page 281 

but still had some love for God and his people and 
a desire for spiritual things, is shown by the Apostle's 
words, "That the spirit may be saved in the 
day of the Lord Jesus." If his spirit had been 
bad, the Apostle would not suggest its being saved 
—all that is evil must be destroyed. This man's 
spirit was good— his will was to do God's will, 
but from some cause he did not allow the exceeding 
great and precious promises of God's 
Word work in him to do right. The purity of 
the Church demanded that he be dealt with 
rigorously; and his own future depended upon 
whether or not the animal nature which was 
ruling him should be mortified— put to death. -- 
Rom. 8:13; Col. 3:5. 

The mortifying of the flesh implies that we 
cease to do evil and learn to do well; becoming 
dead as to sin, but alive unto righteousness. 
Only those who attain to such conditions will 
ever have everlasting life upon any plane of being. 

But there are two ways of reaching the same 
end. The more desirable and more noble of 
the two is this; viz., after justification and peace 
with God, by faith in the great atonement, we 
should consider ourselves as bought with a 
price, even the precious blood of Christ, and 



hence no longer our own, and should present 
our bodies living sacrifices to the service of the 
Lord— to be used, not according to our former 
will of the flesh, but according to the will (the 
Lord's will) to which we have been begotten 
by the word of truth. Such will not fulfil the 
desires of the flesh— sacrificed and reckoned 
dead, but the desires of their new spirit. The 
mind of Christ dwelling in them richly will 
control them more and more, and accomplish 
the sacrifice of the flesh in God's service. The 
class who so do, during this Gospel age, are 
called "Overcomers;" and to them will be fulfilled 
all the richest of God's promises; and, as 
joint-heirs with Christ, they shall inherit all 
things. These are in all a "little flock," because 
their path is a narrow one. 

The other way of reaching the same result, 
viz., of becoming dead to sin and alive toward 
righteousness is followed by many; but it is an 
ignoble way, an unsatisfactory way and in every 
sense undesirable. It is this: After gaining justification 
and peace through Christ, to make a 
covenant of self-sacrifice, and then by yielding to 
temptations and weaknesses to fail to overcome; 
and yet to hold tightly to the Lord, at the same 
time not resisting the desires of the flesh— not 
crucifying the flesh with its affections and desires, 
good and bad. This is the attitude of the 
majority of truly consecrated Christians— they 
are seeking to serve God and mammon, to 
please self and worldly friends as well as the 
Lord, some going to one extreme and some to 
another. The result of their course is that they 
please nobody. The world endures them, but 
despises their religious aspirations as "cant," 
and themselves as hypocrites. They are always 
dissatisfied with themselves, feeling conscience-smitten 
that they are violating the spirit of their 
consecration. They do not please the Lord, 
but he has pity on them. He sees that if right-doing 
were just as easy as wrong-doing, this 
class would choose the right; and in sympathetic 
pity he does for them the only thing that can 
be done further. He delivers them to Satan; 
he permits the great enemy of righteousness to 
attack them;— he permits their cherished ambitions 
to ensnare them and pinch them, their 
idols to fall, their earthly sweets to turn to 
bitterness, until, heart-sick and disappointed, 
the spirit may turn fully to the Lord, not an 
"overcomer," not a sacrifice, but one in whom 
the flesh has been destroyed by bitter experience, 
crying, 

"I have sought the world around, 

Peace and comfort nowhere found. 



Now to Christ my spirit turns, 
Turns a fugitive unblest." 

But such a result is by no means a certainty; 
instead of the buffetings and troubles turning 
the heart to the Lord, it may and often does 
result in utter loss of the spirit of Christ and a 
total cutting off and destruction of the unfruitful 
branch. 

The Apostle says, "that the spirit may be 
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." The result 
is at best an uncertainty— it may or may not be 
saved ultimately. The only way to save such as 
will not sacrifice is to put them through troubles 
which will destroy the flesh and develop the spirit; 
and this heroic remedy the Lord applies. 

This is the secret of much of the trouble 
through which God's people pass:— they are 

R1699: page 282 

not overcomers, and he is putting them through 

troublous experiences to destroy the will of the 

flesh and its control of them as "new creatures," 

and save them from their old selves. 

For the "great company" (mentioned in Rev. 7:9,10) 

refers not merely to some of this class 

now living, who, because not overcomers, not 

self-sacrificers, will not be saved from the great 

"time of trouble such as was not since there 

was a nation," but go into it and "have their 

portion with the hypocrites" and the world, in 

order that they may have the love of fleshly things 

—worldly ambitions, etc.,— entirely burned out: 

it refers as well to a similar class passing 

through trouble during all this Gospel age. To 

those rightly exercised a reward, a blessing, will 

be granted and everlasting life— although all 

such will lose the great prize to which all called 

in this age might attain, with far less pain and 

trouble, if obedient to their covenant,— self-sacrificers. 

But if, notwithstanding this discipline 

and experience, any still choose to live 

after the flesh, the Apostle's warning is that such 

"shall die" (Rom. 8:13); and he refers to the 

second death evidently, because the first death 

(Adamic death) passed upon all. 

But let it not be forgotten that the "overcomers" 
also "suffer," pass through "fiery 
trials" and "endure a great fight of afflictions," 
partly in their own persons and partly in their 
fellowship with others misused. (See Heb. 10:33,34.) 
There is a difference, however, a great 
difference between these sufferings of the sacrificers 
and those sufferings previously mentioned, 
of the class having their flesh destroyed. 
The sufferings of the self-sacrificing class are 



for godliness, for righteousness' sake, and in the 
interest of the Lord, his people and his truth, 
directly or indirectly: and such sufferings are 
accompanied by a joy and peace which make 
them, however severe, to appear but "light 
afflictions" and "but for a moment." (Compare 
Acts 16:22-25; 2 Cor. 4:17; Rom. 8:18; 
Acts 5:41.) But joy and rejoicing are properly 
lacking in the sufferings for correction in 
righteousness, and for unfaithfulness to the covenant 
of self-sacrificers: the destruction of the 
flesh is therefore doubly painful; and for every 
reason those who have been called to suffer 
with Christ as joint-sacrificers, and by and by 
to be his joint-heirs, should lay aside every 
hindrance and weight and run in the race,— 
that they may make their calling and election 
sure and win the prize. 

In this tenth text, therefore, there is nothing 
to indicate that all who obtain the grace of 
God will never fall from it: it does, however, 
show God's longsuffering mercy, his unwillingness 
that any should perish in whom an acceptable 
character can be developed at any cost. 

In conclusion, then, we exhort you, "that ye 
receive not the grace of God in vain." "Let 
us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us 
of entering into his rest, any of you should seem 
to come short of it." (2 Cor. 6:1; Heb. 4:1.) 
The crown of life is promised to those faithful 
until death.-Compare Ezek. 33:13,14; Rev. 2:10,11,26; 
3:5. 



R1700: page 282 

DISINTEGRATION IN THE CHURCH OF ROME. 

ORGANIZING AN INDEPENDENT CHURCH. 



A PROCLAMATION inviting the discontented 

Roman Catholics and Catholics 

other than Roman in the United States to unite 

has been issued in Cleveland. It is signed 

by Rev. A. F. Kolaszewski, president, and M. 

A. Chrostowski, secretary of the Polish National 

Church Committee. They headed the revolt 

from St. Stanislaus' Roman Catholic church in 

that city, which led to the establishment of an 

independent church on Fremont street. They 

propose not to limit the movement to any nationality, 

but to bring together all who desire 

to enter the independent fold. Fifty thousand 



copies of the proclamation will be distributed 

through the country, and in a short time a convention 

of delegates representing Polish congregations 

throughout the country will be held. 

After this convention has organized a new denomination, 

discontents of other nationalities 

will be invited to join it. The proclamation reads: 

R1700: page 283 

PROCLAMATION OF THE POLISH NATIONAL CHURCH 
COMMITTEE OF THE CATHOLICS IN THE 
UNITED STATES. 

Fellow citizens and co-religionists: The Poles 
of the United States, and all who have found 
out from years of bitter experience what a curse 
to their national interests, to their enlightenment 
and progress, their allegiance to the 
church of Rome is, have decided to throw away 
the hateful yoke covered with moss of ages of 
fanaticism and tyranny. Therefore, they have 
decided to establish the Polish Independent 
Catholic Church of America. Our religion, our 
faith, will remain essentially the same; but we 
want to be our own masters relative to the 
management of our worldly affairs. The principles 
laid down for the establishment of the 
Independent Catholic Church are as follows:— 

First. All the church property belongs to 
the congregation, and not the bishops. 

Second. The congregations will elect their 
own priests, or approve the ones sent by the 
bishop. 

Third. The congregations will exercise perfect 
freedom in regard to the education of their 
children. There should be no compulsion in 
regard to the sending of their children to parochial 
schools. The parochial schools should be 
furnished with American textbooks and the 
American system of teaching. 

Fourth. Perfect freedom of the press. 

These are the principles laid down by us for 
the establishment of an Independent Catholic 
Church in this country. We have already, upon 
these principles, established one church in 
Cleveland, O. Others are being organized in 
Baltimore, Chicago, Buffalo, Nanticoke and 
Reading, Pa. In a few years hence we are 
sure of having an independent congregation in 
every Polish settlement in this country. But 
our aim is broader still. We do not want to 
confine this work of reform to our nationality 
alone. We want to spread it all over the 
country; we want to reach every catholic citizen 
of the United States whose heart beats for 



freedom and who is opposed to the tyranny and 
fanaticism on which the church of Rome is 
founded. For the purpose of carrying on the 
propaganda of religious freedom among the 
Poles, the Polish National Church Committee 
was elected. This committee was authorized to 
confer with the catholics in this country, composed 
of other nationalities. This committee, 
representing about 125,000 Poles who are worshiping 
already in the independent spirit, makes 
an appeal to you, fellow citizens and co-religionists, 
and invites you to join in the movement. 
We have not the least doubt that many thousands 
of American catholics— Bohemian, German, 
Irishmen, Frenchmen, and others— are dissatisfied 
with the arbitrary rulings of the church of 
Rome, which is represented in this country by 
the whimsical, despotic, and shallow-minded 
American bishops. We have not the least doubt 
that many of you are opposed to the church 
property being owned exclusively by the bishops. 
This is simply absurd. This only shows 
to what degree extends the greed for money of 
our high church officials. 

We have no doubt, also, that you would be 
willing to have for your spiritual adviser a priest 
who would really care for his flock, and not 
for the bishop's interests, as it is at present. 
We draw the example from the state of matters 
existing among us. In our Polish congregations 
we have had many examples where our 
priests were treated in most unjust, most cruel, 
most diabolical manner by their superiors, the 
bishops. And we know that the only reason 
for this was that the priest really cared for the 
good of his flock, and did not want to enrich 
the bishop at the expense of his congregation. 
We presume that more or less the same state 
of things exists among all the catholics in this 
country. Therefore, when we say that we want 
the election of the priest to be reserved for the 
congregation— if not exclusively, then partially, 
at least— we are sure we touch the keynote 
of the question. Then come the schools. The 
superiority in everything of the public schools 
formed on the American system of school teaching 
is so apparent to everybody that we will 
not dwell upon this subject at all. 

So, fellow citizens and co-religionists, you 
can plainly see that we do not wish to change 
our faith— our denomination. We wish to remain 
as we are, catholics, but we want our 
church, just as all the institutions in this country 
are, to be governed by the spirit of freedom. 
We want it to be governed by the free and 
glorious Constitution of the United States. We 



will remain catholics, but the worldly affairs of 
our own church will be solely and exclusively 
in our own hands. We do not want to organize 
any other congregations but the catholic, 
but they must be self-governed, dictated to by 
the majority of the people, and not by the arbitrary 
bishop, despotic Satolli, or infallible 
pope of Rome. 

These are our principles, and they sooner or 
later will be recognized as a religious standard 
by all the noble, thinking catholics of America. 

On the road to the great religious freedom 
and deliverance, however, we will find many 
hard obstacles. The church of Rome is great 
and powerful even in this country. While the 
centuries passed away it remained the same, unchanged 
and unmoved, and now it is even more 

R1700: page 284 

grim, fanatical and arbitrary than centuries ago. 

R1701 : page 284 

Its power, as hundreds of years ago, is founded 

upon ignorance, superstition and fanaticism, 

and there is small wonder that even in this 

country it is so great. This church of Rome 

will do its utmost to stop our work of reform. 

It will beg, it will pray, or it will curse and excommunicate, 

or it will strain every nerve in 

its gigantic body to stop or crush us to the 

dust. 

Fellow citizens and brother catholics! United 
we would stand— withstand all the onslaughts 
of this mighty enemy of freedom— divided, separated, 
we would fall, accomplish nothing, or 
very little, at the end. We invite, therefore, 
most earnestly, every one of you who thinks 
more or less the same as we do, to join in this 
grand stride for religious liberty. Instead of 
having a committee composed of one nationality 
for the carrying on of this propaganda, we 
must have a national American church committee, 
composed of all nationalities, with different 
branches— that is, Polish, Bohemian, German, 
Irish, and others. To bring about this we must 
first have a convention, where all the plans for 
the future work of reform will be discussed and 
the above committee organized. Therefore, we 
invite all who will take interest in this proclamation 
to come to a convention which we propose 
to hold in Cleveland for the purpose of 
discussing all the matters pertaining to the establishment 
of the independent catholic church 
in America. We propose the city of Cleveland 



for the place of convention, because in this city 
the great movement was first begun a year ago. 
In this city, too, we have already established 
an independent catholic congregation, known 
as the congregation of the Immaculate Heart 
of the Blessed Virgin Mary. This congregation, 
in spite of the excommunication by the 
bishop of the Cleveland diocese, in spite of the 
repeated appeals by Satolli, whose despotical 
and whimsical inclinations are best shown by 
his order expelling all the saloonkeepers from 
the catholic societies, grows larger every day, 
gaining new members. We beg of all of you 
who are willing to take part in this great convention 
to notify of your intention one of the 
following officers of our committee, who, after 
the list of those ready to participate will be 
more or less completed, will name the clerk of 
the convention. 

All the newspapers in the country desirous of 
helping this good work along, we beg to copy 
this proclamation. 

In the name of the Polish National Church 
Committee, 

Rev. A. F. Kolaszewski, Pres., 
M. A. Chrostowski, Secretary. 

THE REVOLT SPREADING. 



A large Catholic congregation in Baltimore, 
Md., known as The Church of the Holy Rosary, 
and numbering about three thousand members, 
has decided to follow the example set at Detroit 
and Cleveland;— organize an Independent 
Church, place its affairs in the hands of a committee, 
engage its own pastor, etc. Two of its 
members were sent as a committee to Cleveland 
to investigate the conduct of affairs there, and 
made a glowing report of the success of the 
movement. They report that about thirty 
priests are ready to accept positions as soon as 
they are offered. It was to prevent just such a 
movement and keep peace in the Roman Catholic 
family that Satolli was sent here as the representative 
of the pope. His mission was only 
partially successful in the healing of the McGlynn 
schism. A similar Independent Catholic 
movement is on foot in Europe. 

A NATIONAL ORGANIZATION EFFECTED. 



In harmony with the foregoing a general Convention 



met at Cleveland on Aug. 20, at which 
were delegates from congregations of Polish 
Catholic secessionists in fourteen cities of the 
U.S.— those of Baltimore, Cleveland, Detroit, 
St. Louis and Buffalo being the largest. The latter 
was reported by its delegates as 8000 strong. 

Archbishop Vilatte was chosen the head of the 
new church; and while some favored a name 
indicating the Polish origin of the new denomination, 
it was finally decided that as Catholics 
of all nationalities would be invited to join it the 
name should be, The American Catholic Church. 

A resolution renouncing forever allegiance 
to the Pope of Rome was voted down,— the 
Archbishop declaring, "We will always recognize 
the primacy of the pope. That does not 
imply that we believe in his infallibility or supremacy. 
The pope is nothing, but we respect 
him for his primacy." 

Archbishop Vilatte in a speech said, "We 
are met together to exclaim, 'Great is the truth, 
and it shall prevail.' We are met to proclaim 
all over the land, 'Beware of despotism, if you 
love liberty.' The American Catholic Church 
will be composed of different nationalities." 



R1699: page 285 

RELIGION IN AMERICA: A JAPANESE VIEW. 



THE Nation's Friend, a leading Japanese 
monthly published at Tokio, has a paper 
by Professor K. Ukita of the Doshisha College, 
on "Religion in America," which has been 
translated for The New York Independent. 
Professor Ukita studied at Yale University for 
a period of two years, and he gives his opinion 
as the result of personal observation. 

R1700: page 285 

Mr. Ukita noticed that the lower classes in 
America do not attend church. This is not a 
phenomenon of one district only. After noticing 
the real condition of society, he found 
that there is a proper cause for this phenomenon. 
There is a custom in America of restricting 
the seats in the religious temples; they 
are sold to certain persons, and, even in the 
churches with free seats, it is generally the custom 
to take up collections for the maintenance 
of the services; and, moreover, it is the custom 



for ladies to wear fine dresses. Such being the 
custom, those who have not much money and 
wear coarse clothes are ashamed to enter the 
churches. Civilization is progressing, but it 
shows no mercy to the laborer. The Gospel is 
preached, but the laborers cannot hear it. Ah! 
the words, "Blessed are the poor," and "The 
Gospel is preached to the poor," are no longer 
true; they are simply recorded in a Bible which 
is chained to the pulpit. In some extreme cases 
the Christian Church excludes poor people from 
coming into the Church. The Gospel of the 
Saviour has become an almost exclusive possession 
of the rich and middle classes. 

The people by whom the present Church is 
organized are capitalists and people of the middle 
class. The day when they meet with people 
of the lower class is not on the Sabbath 
when the all-loving and merciful God and 
Christ are remembered. Although they give 
money to the Church on Sunday, on the weekdays 
they do not remember the golden words 
of Christ; they only know the economical principle 
that they should buy in the cheapest market 
and sell in the dearest market. 

It is not proper to say that those outside of 
the Church are not Christians. There are 
many people who make the true God and Christ 
their moral ideal, and yet who do not attend 
church. Even among the lower class of people 
whose names are not written on the church-rolls, 
there are many who hold the same ideal. 
In one society in New York, when a speaker 
pronounces the word Church, the audience hiss, 
but when he speaks the name of Christ they applaud; 
so that it is clear that the present Church 
has lost its power to attract men, and especially 
to attract the heart of the lower classes. But 
this is not a sign of the decline of Christianity. 
This fact simply shows that the creed and system 
hitherto prevailing are antiquated and do 
not keep pace with the general current of the 
Nineteenth Century. 

If the Christian Church cannot reform its 
creed and system very radically, it may come 
to stand in the same position in the coming 
revolution as it did in the time of the French 
Revolution. It is true that the Church in 
America is separated from the State; but, on 
the other hand, it makes a league with the capitalists, 
and the rich organize a church by themselves 
and the poor by themselves. Although 
there is no difference of Jew and Greek, slave 
and free, male and female, and even no difference 
of race in the Kingdom of Heaven, the 
present Church in America not only refuses to 



allow the poor to come in, but it is a fact that 
the white people and the black are opposing 
each other. The great future revolution of the 
world will be not merely religious and political, 
but also a great social revolution, consisting of 
economical and race reformation. 
—Literary Digest. 



R1701 : page 285 

"UPON THIS GENERATION." 



"That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed 
upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto 
the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom ye 
slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I 
say unto you, All these things shall come 
upon this generation."— Matt. 23:35,36. 

AT first glance it appears unjust on God's 
part to thus visit punishment for the sins 
of the parents upon their children, centuries 
after. Nor can we suppose that the evil-doers 
—Cain and his successors— would be excused 
from further responsibility even after their children 
had suffered, for it would be as unjust to 
let the real culprit go free of punishment as it 
would be to punish him and his children both 
for the same sins. Neither of these unjust and 
unreasonable views can be the proper explanation 
of these, our Lord's words. 

The thought is this,— That generation (the 
one in which our Lord lived) had so many advantages 

R1701 : page 286 

over every previous generation, in general 
intelligence, as well as from the special 
teachings of Christ and his followers, that its 

R1702: page 286 

responsibility was only proportionate. As it 
had more advantages than all previous generations 
combined, so the punishment for its 
course of sin must injustice be all and more 
than equivalent to the punishments visited upon 
past transgressions all combined. 

But let us not confuse these national and 
generational judgments with individual judgments. 
They were distinct. For instance, a 
certain immediate judgment came upon Cain for 



the murder of his brother; and so with every 

crime there seems to go a certain amount of 

present-life punishment, entirely distinct from 

the future retribution. What "stripes" may 

yet be due to Cain we cannot surely know, except 

that it will be "a just recompense." And 

so in the case before us in our text, only the 

immediate and visible consequences of sin are 

referred to. The outward and immediate consequences 

of the rejection and murder of Christ 

would be, and properly, more severe than all 

the outward and immediate punishments of all 

previous transgressions against God's people 

combined. 

This statement in no way involves the future 
retribution of the people of that generation. 
In that future retribution they will not be judged 
nationally, nor as a generation, but each individual 
will be held responsible for his own conduct 
in proportion as he transgressed against 
the light; and each, through the merit of the 
"ransom for all," will be offered a credit proportionate 
to the weaknesses he had sustained 
from the fall. These conclusions are sustained 
by the words of the Apostle Peter.— 
Acts 2:23,37-40. 

Our Lord's statement in our text was corroborated 
by the Apostle Paul, who declared, 
"wrath is come upon them to the uttermost" 
(1 Thes. 2:16); confirming the Prophet Daniel's 
words, "He shall make it desolate until 
the consummation, and that determined shall 
be poured upon the desolate." (Dan. 9:27.) 
And secular history estimates the trouble which 
came upon Israel, upon that generation, within 
forty years of our Lord's utterance above 
quoted, as the most awful that had thus far occurred 
amongst men;— thus attesting the correctness 
of our Lord's prediction. 

But when we remember that Israel according 
to the flesh was a typical people, and that 
God's promises to them, dealings with them 
and judgments upon them were typical or illustrative 
of similar promises, dealings and judgments, 
but on a wider and grander scale, made 
to the Gospel Church— the antitypical people 
of God, the true Israel— we are led to expect 
similar things upon the closing generation of 
the Gospel age. And we find it predicted of 
these two houses of Israel, by God through his 
prophets, that only a remnant, a "little flock," 
from each will prove worthy, while the majority 
will stumble; and that upon them will come 
an awful trouble in the end of the Gospel age, 
"a time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation. "—Dan. 12:1. 



As not all Israelites were Israelites indeed, 
so not all Christians in name are Christians indeed. 
As the true Israelites were gathered out 
of, or separated from, nominal Israel, first in 
spirit or intent and afterward literally, before 
the great trouble came, so here, in the end of 
this age, there must be a separation of true 
wheat from tare imitations, first in spirit and 
afterward actually, so that they be not partakers 
of the plagues or troubles predicted.— 
Rev. 18:4. 

And as a punishment equivalent to all other 
punishments combined for shedding of righteous 
blood was exacted of the closing generation 
of typical Israel, just so it will be with the 
closing generation of this Gospel age;— the 
present generation. The knowledge and advantages 
every way of the present generation, 
above those of all previous generations, make 
its responsibility correspondingly great; and 
its penalty for hardness of heart, unreadiness to 
receive the Lord and his Kingdom, and resistance 
of the truth, now shining out upon every 
side as never before, is to be equivalent to the 
combined judgments upon all who have despised, 
rejected and persecuted God's people, 
throughout the age. And thus we read, that 
when Babylon's fall is complete, after God's 
people, heeding his voice, have come out of her, 
then, in her overthrow, will be found— "the 
blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that 
were slain upon the earth." (Rev. 18:24.) No 
wonder, then, that her fall will mean a "time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation!" 



R1701 : page 287 
MISSIONARY LIFE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The following is 
a copy of a letter recently received by a friend 
of mine from another old, intimate, personal 
friend, who is now in India as missionary for the 
Baptists. It illustrates wonderfully the blind 
gropings of the spiritual leaders of nominal 
Christendom. (The italics are his.) 

Yours in Christian love, F. B. UTLEY. 
India, May 22nd, '94. 

My Dear Friend:— Every time I open my 
writing case, your letter is seen by me. I was very 
glad to get it and to learn so much of Y.M.C.A. 



work in Ontario. Every one who writes makes 
some such statement as follows:— "Well, I need 
not tell you of Y.M.C.A. affairs, as others will 
have written you on that subject;" and between 
them all they keep me well in the dark. 

A good many people in writing the missionary, 
too, imagine they must assume a commiserating 
air, or rather tone, and talk of self-sacrifice, 
burden, and all sorts of sentiment. I 
know people at home look on the foreign mission 
field as a horrible pit, into which, amid 
the supplications of home friends for his safety, 
the heroic missionary descends with only a forlorn 
hope of being spared to ascend again. 
And I know the missionaries largely like to 
have it so. But, as a matter of fact, it is one of 
the highest deceptions in all creation; and a very 
rude shock my wife and self received when we 
came to Madras, and afterwards to our own fellow-missionaries 
in Cocauade, Tuni, etc., and 
saw the comfort they lived in. [See Z.W. 
TOWER for January 1, '92.] Don't misunderstand 
me— the missionary has as much right 
(and certainly more need) to live comfortably 
as the workers at home; but my contention is 
that the truth should be told, and a little of the 
sentimental rubbish which pervades, at times, 
even that unique denominational paper which 
is published in T , should be "sat on." 

I am not in the least to be pitied here or 
commiserated with. Why, on Saturday evenings 
lately I have been literally howling with delight. 
People are coming in in large numbers, 
young men sit down and hear me through attentively. 
Then we lack nothing, have abundance 
of food, a house suited to the hard climate, and 
plenty of servants to do the running for us. 
We live not like niggers here: we live and dress 
as Europeans, and are looked up to by the people; 
though our truth is not believed. And in 
these days of fast and cheap travel we may entertain 
a reasonable expectation, if the Lord will, 
of going home at fair intervals in life to see old 
faces and places. If I'm spared to come home 
ever, I'll tell up mission life as it is, or else forever 
hold my peace. The church is very ripe 
for judgment. The world is uneasy. Europe is 
an armed camp. Society shakes in its shoes— 
the clay and iron has proved itself thoroughly 
wanting in cohesive qualities, as per the divine 
Record. The Jews, God's heritage, are casting 
longing eyes toward the city of David, and God 
is certainly drawing attention to the ancient 
land in ways that are marvelous— railways, increased 
commerce, amazing immigration, increasing 
fertility, all around us expectancy of a 



great something, the world cannot tell what. 
What does it mean? Is he, the Beloved, at the 
doors? At any rate, it becomes us to gird up 
our loins as men who wait for their Lord. 

Yours in the one body, and in hope of his 
coming, F. W. G . 



R1702: page 287 

ANOTHER BRANCH OF THE WORK. 



THE Editor receives frequent urgent requests 
to visit various little groups and preach, especially 
for the benefit of outsiders who might be 
awakened. We are obliged to decline these 
invitations—for the present at least— believing 
that the general work of the TOWER office which 
demands our attention is still more important, 
because it is for a larger number. Besides, it 
is a part of your work and privilege to tell the 
glad tidings wisely and lovingly to your fellow 
Christians and neighbors who have not yet 
learned the present truth. Love for them and 
for the truth and of the Lord's approval should 
take you into Y.M.C.A. Meetings, Class Meetings 
and Prayer Meetings regularly to scatter 
the truth by word or by printed page, or as 
best you can— but always wisely and lovingly, 
so as not to stumble and offend, but to bless. 

But realizing that you may need help in preparation 
for such work of ministry, we have arranged 
lately to have several brethren travel, 
some giving a part, and some all of their time 
in visiting you for the purpose of building you 
up in the truth and in its spirit. 

We have sought to choose for this work 
brethren of (1) unexceptional character, polished 
with the truth; (2) of meekness— that 
they might not be puffed up and thus be injured 
themselves, while seeking to help you; (3) of 
clear conception of the Lord's great plan and 
fully imbued with its spirit; (4) of ability to 
impart the truth to others in its own power 

R1702: page 288 

and simplicity (not necessarily orators); (5) of 
known fidelity to the ransom; (6) of humble 
mind who seek not to preach themselves, but 
Christ— not to air their own knowledge, but 
his Word in its simplicity and power; (7) students 
of the Word, of cultivated thought, well 



founded and settled;— not wondering novices— 
not teachers of speculations and fancies, nor of 
Anglo-Israelism, Socialism, Politics, astronomical 
theories, etc., but (8) teachers of the One 
Lord, One Faith and One Baptism— the one 
gospel authorized by and based upon the one 
sacrifice, given once for all. 

If any of these Brethren come your way they 
will introduce themselves by showing a printed 
and signed Certificate from the Watch Tower 
Tract Society (renewed yearly); whereupon we 
are sure they will be granted the leadership of 
the meetings. Nevertheless prove all things 
they may say by the only infallible authority— 
the Word of God. Should you deem their 
teachings in conflict with the Word in any particular, 
the differences should be promptly and 
clearly stated in a letter to the WATCH TOWER. 
The question would receive attention either by 
letter or, if of general interest, would be treated 
in the TOWER. 

Some of these Brethren are so situated as to 
be able to give fragments of their time to this 
work, and that free of expense to the Tract 
Fund; others will receive some assistance; and 
still others, giving all of their time, will be 
wholly at the expense of the Tract Fund;— a 
portion of your "Good Hopes" donations to 
the Tract Fund being thus used for the benefit 
of yourself and others. We desire to divest the 
truth of all subserviency to money and begging 
—often so injurious to such work. And consequently 
let it be understood from the first that 
collections or other solicitations of money are 
neither authorized nor approved by this Society. 

This branch of the work is only an experiment 
and we shall watch for results and for the 
Lord's further leading. While you and the 
Colporteurs and the O.T. Tracts and the 
Dawns are arousing attention and interest, and 
the TOWER and you are strengthening and upbuilding 
the "body," this new feature should 
further assist in the same great work;— the 
Bride making herself ready for joint-heirship 
with the Bridegroom.— Rev. 19:7. 

Of course all cannot be visited; and it is 
purposed that for the present it will be unwise 
to stop at any place having less than five TOWER 
subscribers; for we esteem that any one at all 
interested in present truth will want the TOWER; 
as its terms make it possible for all to be on 
our list. 



page 288 



STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. -- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1702: page 288 

JESUS AT JACOB'S WELL. 



III. QUAR., LESSON XII., SEP. 16, JOHN 4:9-26. 

Golden Text— "Whosoever drinketh of the water that 
I shall give him shall never thirst."— John 4: 14. 

As we read these gracious words of the 
Master, and especially his reply to the 
woman's reference to the Messiah, the hope 
of Israel— "I that speak unto thee am he"— 
our hearts also thrill with a solemn gladness; 
for the blessings of his advent and the water 
of life which he gives have come to us also. 

Several points in this lesson are worthy 
of special notice. (1) Observe the simple 
condescension of the Lord in thus endeavoring 
to make plain the way of life to one 
who had strayed far from the path of rectitude; 
(2) the natural and earnest manner 

R1703: page 288 

of introducing the subject and pointing the 
lesson; and (3) the teaching. 

He offers the water of life— the refreshing 
hope of life through faith in him as the 
Redeemer, which hope would be like a 
perennial well-spring continually rising up 
in her heart. (Verse 14.) So it is now; but 
by and by when the hopes of the believing 
Church are realized and God's Kingdom is 
fully established, these wells will flow together, 
and a mighty river of the water of 
life will come forth from underneath the 
throne of God for the refreshment of all 
who will partake of it.— Rev. 22:1. 

Then— in that Millennial age of glory and 
blessing— all who worship God will worship 
him in the spirit of the truth.— Ver. 24. 



We who have partaken of the water of 
life and truth which Christ has furnished 
us can truly say, It satisfies our longing souls 
as nothing else could do. And those who 
are drinking of it have no cravings for the 
vain philosophies of men which make void 
the Word of God. We are still drinking; 
but according to our Lord's words we shall 
soon be satisfied (Matt. 5:6)— when we 
awake in his likeness, in the first resurrection 
-Psa. 17:15; Phil. 3:11. 



page 290 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



"WHY HAST THOU FORSAKEN ME?" 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-One of our 
dear friends writes of disappointment, in a 
small town, among strangers; and of lonesomeness, 
with no companionship but the 



Savior. Christians must follow Christ. He 
trod the wine press alone, absolutely alone: 
without companionship even of the Father, 
who hitherto had been one with him. Happiness 
in the society of many sympathizing 
friends may be taken as indication of weakness, 
and of necessity for such sympathy. 
The wind is tempered to the shorn, weak 
lambs. 

Some, who appear to have much company, 
really do not. Some, earnest for the 
truth, appear to stand in the midst of large 
and ever increasing groups of friends. But 
they really each stand alone; snow-capped 
and clear above the clouds, like bleak 
mountain tops, towering their grand, neighboring 
but isolated peaks above, and always 
higher than the aspiring, friendly, 
lesser mountains and hills composing their 
chain. 

Alone! What an awful significance! 
And to think that he whose righteousness 
was not imputed did really agonize alone. 
Absolutely without companionship! In his 
excruciating despair he cried, "My God! 
My God! Why hast thou forsaken me!" 
What wonder, then, that he who was justified 
to live, but was permitted to lay down 
his life, should thus cry out in agony when 
he yielded up the spirit of life! 

Why should any who aspire to be with 
and like him, in the glorious immortality of 
the Divine Nature, hope to escape similar 
experience? The thorns, the cross and the 
piercing nails may not be from the bush, 
the tree or the mine; but they will, none 
the less, be real, tangible and terror striking. 
We may pray that, if possible and without 
drinking, this cup may pass from us, assured 
also that, if possible, the request will be 
granted; but we must also add with resignation, 
if not with cheerfulness, "Nevertheless, 
not as I will, but as thou wilt." 
W. M. WRIGHT. 



TRACT NO. 21 --DO YOU KNOW?-is being 
prepared in German. Order in advance what 
you can use judiciously. The English edition is 
exhausted; but a new lot is under way, which 
will run the total above half a million copies. 



R1703: page 291 


