Announcements
“JUBILEE TRUMPET” WITNESSING PERIOD—Leviticus 25:9, 10
The time is here for sounding liberty among all of earth’s inhabitants, to all races and nations. As conditions worsen and grow more unbearable, why should not people want to be free from such? The great Liberator has decreed that evil will not always prevail. No, his Word of promise offers freedom even now. This good news of liberation must be sounded out as though by trumpet blasts. This is being done by God’s faithful servants world-wide through the distribution of the Watchtower magazine. The “Jubilee Trumpet” Witnessing Period during April affords opportunity for many to take part in this fourth and last month of the Watchtower campaign. The Watchtower magazine is offered at $1 for a year’s subscription. New subscribers receive three Scriptural booklets free. To those already subscribers for The Watchtower, the Awake! magazine may be offered on the same basis. Single copies may be left with those who do not subscribe. Regular house-to-house distribution of the magazine will aid many. So make April a magazine month.
RELIGION’S ACCOMPLISHMENTS
For the past six thousand years religion has played a prominent part in the affairs of men and nations. Many and various have been the things done in the name of religion, both good and bad, and arousing strong sentiment for and against. Just how clear is your concept of religion’s value? Can you, if called upon, give an intelligent and correct answer to the question: What has religion done for mankind? You will find a wealth of informative material on the subject in the book What Has Religion Done for Mankind? enabling you to have an authentic answer. It furnishes reliable proof for all the interesting and absorbing information supplied. Learn the facts and be equipped to give a satisfactory answer to any and all with whom you come in contact. A copy of the handsomely and durably bound 352-page book will be mailed postpaid for 50c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 20: Are You Choosing Life or Death? Also, Choosing Now to Live Then, ¶ 1-3.
Week of April 27: Choosing Now to Live Then, ¶ 4-21.

