Announcements
● Literature offer for May: Watchtower and Awake! subscriptions. June: Mankind’s Search for God. July and August: Any 32-page brochure, except the School brochure.
● It is important that groups of 30 or more persons planning to visit the Society’s facilities first correspond by mail with the central tour desk at 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, NY 11201. This includes those groups that will be visiting Brooklyn Bethel, Watchtower Farms, the Watchtower Educational Center in Patterson, and the Jersey City Assembly Hall. Please provide information on the number coming and the dates and times for each location. The Society will provide a description of the tours that are available as well as a map giving directions to each location. Information on lodging may be obtained through the congregation elders.
● When a custody, divorce, or visitation suit is filed against a Kingdom publisher, a packet of court decisions and information concerning the right of Jehovah’s Witnesses to have custody of and visitation with their children is available. The body of elders may obtain this information from the Society’s Legal Department. Upon receiving this information, the individual publisher may wish to reimburse the Society for mailing costs. The packet contains decisions and materials that should be given to one’s attorney before the case goes to court so that the attorney can prepare to meet any issues that may arise. The body of elders should not request this information for their files but should only request this information when an actual case is pending.
● The Society is now accepting requests for reprinted Watchtower bound volumes in SPANISH for the years 1975 through 1979. If any are interested in obtaining the reprinted Spanish Watchtower bound volumes, such should be requested through the congregation on the next Literature Request Form. Since the volumes are being reprinted one time only, we urge all to consider their needs carefully. Please bear in mind that these bound volumes are special request items.
● A summary of the Watchtower Study for the week will be featured on the program of the “Lovers of Freedom” District Convention. In this way, the brothers will not miss out on the spiritual food scheduled for the week they attend. All are encouraged to follow along with the speaker in their personal copy of The Watchtower. In most cases, congregations will be able to schedule the regular Congregation Book Study during the early part of the convention week.
● New Publications Available:
“All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial” (1990 Edition)​—Portuguese
Happiness​—How to Find It—​Thai
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Tamil, Twi
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Large size)​—Bulgarian, Catalan

