Assisting Others While in Field Service
1 From its beginning, the Christian congregation has been an organization of evangelizers. Jesus personally trained his disciples in the preaching activity and “initiated sending them out two by two.” (Mark 6:7; Luke 8:1) The apostle Paul made mention of his “fellow workers” in the Philippian congregation who had ‘striven side by side with him in the good news.’ (Phil. 4:3) Although it is not always necessary to have a partner in the ministry, most of us appreciate being accompanied by others. (Eccl. 4:9) How, then, can we be encouraging and helpful to one another as we preach?
2 One of the purposes of our meetings for field service is to give assistance to newer and less experienced publishers. (om pp. 77, 97) Even newly appointed pioneers may want to work with more experienced publishers or with an elder or a ministerial servant. What a fine opportunity for “an interchange of encouragement”!​—Rom. 1:12.
3 For safety reasons, it may be advisable for publishers to work together in some areas. Or at times it may be necessary to alter previous plans to work with someone so as to accommodate the less experienced publishers who are at the meeting for service. If we are called upon to do so, it would indeed be the course of love for us to make any needed adjustments in order to “assist those who are weak,” even though we may customarily work with a certain companion.​—Acts 20:35.
WORK HARMONIOUSLY
4 Whenever we accompany others in field service, we want to work harmoniously as a team. (Compare 1 Corinthians 3:6, 9.) Both can share in giving the witness, perhaps taking turns initiating conversations at the doors. Good manners would dictate that we listen politely and attentively while our partner is talking.
5 Although it may be appropriate at times to join in the discussion when our partner is taking the lead, this requires good judgment. We do not want to interrupt a line of reasoning being used to good effect with the householder. Of course, if a less experienced publisher begins to experience difficulty handling an objection, no doubt he would appreciate well-directed assistance.​—Eccl. 4:12.
6 We can make good use of the time between doors to discuss ways our presentation might be improved. Perhaps using one of the introductions in the Reasoning book or a suggestion outlined in Our Kingdom Ministry would prove more effective. Working together also affords us opportunity to get to know one another better, strengthening the bonds of our Christian brotherhood.
7 Our ministry is indeed a highly valued treasure. (2 Cor. 4:1, 7) As we have opportunity to work with others in the field service, we can build in one another a deep appreciation for our sacred work. At the same time, we will receive encouragement and learn from each other. The result will be increased joy, greater effectiveness in giving a witness, and a satisfying sense of unity with our brothers and sisters.​—Ps. 133:1.

