How the Index Can Benefit the Family
1 Speaking of family members, 1 Timothy 5:4 states: “Let these learn first to practice godly devotion in their own household.” Indeed, the practice of godly devotion in our dealings with family members is something to be learned. In this we need divine guidance, since caring for family members is part of our Christian obligation. The Watch Tower Publications Index can help us find guidance for a variety of circumstances that arise in family life.
2 A family comes into existence when a man and a woman wed. (Gen. 2:24) Are you seriously contemplating marriage? Under the heading “Marriage,” you will find the subheading “selecting a mate.” The references will direct you to helpful advice on this sometimes difficult endeavor. The Index also has subheadings for “husband’s role” and “wife’s role,” each providing references to information that will benefit those desiring to marry and those already married. Additionally, subheadings such as “communication,” “closeness in,” and “peace” point to material that can enrich marriage. When difficulties arise, the subheading “problems in” can direct you to effective counsel on how to resolve these.
3 Children are an inheritance from Jehovah. (Ps. 127:3) How can parents bring up their children “in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah”? (Eph. 6:4) Of great importance is the guidance Jehovah provides through his Word and the faithful slave class. Parents need insight into their children’s feelings and needs. Helpful counsel and suggestions can be found through the Index headings “Children” and “Youths.” And what about inculcating Jehovah’s law into their young hearts? The heading “Child Training” leads to perceptive discussions of every aspect of rearing children, including how to help them develop a personal relationship with Jehovah and form a longing for the truth.​—1 Pet. 2:2.
4 Prearranged family Bible discussions are essential to family success. (Deut. 6:6-9; Isa. 54:13; Eph. 5:25, 26) References to ideas for holding enjoyable family discussions can be found under the heading “Families.” In the current Index, the subheading “Bible study” has such sub-subheadings as “making it effective,” “making it enjoyable,” and “making it interesting.” Also, why not consider from time to time one of the life stories of Jehovah’s Witnesses? Under the heading “Full-Time Ministry,” you will be referred to life stories with such titles as “A Choice I’ve Never Regretted” and “Receiving the Requests of My Heart.” Still other such accounts are listed under “Missionaries.” A complete listing is found under “Life Stories of Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
5 The Watch Tower Publications Index is a marvelous tool for gathering counsel and concepts for family life. May it help you find great pleasure in fulfilling your responsibilities within the family.

