Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MAY 6
Song 63
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Outline field service arrangements. Share experience or two on subscriptions obtained thus far.
25 min: “Turn Men From Darkness to Light.” Question-and-answer discussion. On paragraph 6, have at least two personal experiences from audience on how The Watchtower has benefited them or their family. On paragraph 7, outline from May 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8, how to determine interest before offering subscription. Helpful suggestions were also given in April 1991 Our Kingdom Ministry.
10 min: Question Box. Question-and-answer discussion. Stress the blessings that come from following theocratic recommendations.
Song 192 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 13
Song 221
 8 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Include donation acknowledgments. Warmly commend congregation for their financial support of Kingdom interests both locally and worldwide.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—During Evening Hours.” Question-and-answer coverage. Outline arrangements in congregation for evening witnessing. A brief local experience may be used to highlight value of witnessing during evening hours.
22 min: “Arrange Now to Attend the 1991 ‘Lovers of Freedom’ District Convention”​—Part 1. Audience discussion of paragraphs 1-9, and a brief review of “District Convention Reminders” as time permits. Publishers may want to discuss appropriate points with their Bible students who will be attending the convention.
Song 65 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 20
Song 181
 5 min: Local announcements. Highlight one or two talking points from current magazines. Mention any special arrangements for witnessing on worldly holiday, May 27.
15 min: “Assisting Others While in Field Service.” Talk, with some audience participation. Brief interview of exemplary publisher who explains personal benefits from working with others in field service.
25 min: “Arrange Now to Attend the 1991 ‘Lovers of Freedom’ District Convention”​—Part 2. Audience discussion of paragraphs 10-25. Include appropriate reminders based on information in The Watchtower of June 15, 1989, pages 10-20. Encourage family groups to review points in these articles before attending the convention.
Song 115 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 27
Song 170
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Review offer for June and how it can be tied in with new Topic for Conversation, “Now Is the Time to Search for God.” Scriptures suggested are Isaiah 55:6, 7 (the true God can be found) and Acts 17:26, 27 (man must seek God now).
20 min: “Use the Bible in Field Service.” Question-and-answer discussion. In connection with paragraph 6, have brief demonstration presenting June offer. Use just one of the scriptures from new Topic for Conversation.
15 min: “How the Index Can Benefit the Family.” Question-and-answer coverage of material. When considering paragraph 2, have a married couple demonstrate use of Index, citing various subheadings of interest under the main heading “Marriage.”
Song 151 and concluding prayer.

