Turn Men From Darkness to Light
1 Spiritual darkness covers the earth. (Isa. 60:2) Since mankind’s fall into sin, Satan, “the god of this system of things,” has kept people in spiritual darkness, and moral degradation has been the result.​—2 Cor. 4:4.
2 Now that we have been enlightened by the truth, do we feel pity for people as Jesus did? (Matt. 9:36) If so, we will appreciate the significance of the commission he gave the apostle Paul to ‘open people’s eyes and turn them from darkness to light and from the authority of Satan to God.’​—Acts 26:16-18.
ENLIGHTEN MINDS AND HEARTS
3 Since Satan blinds the mind and desensitizes the heart of his victims, what can we do to help them? We need to reach their mind and heart with God’s Word. Paul prayed that the Ephesians would have the eyes of their heart enlightened. (Eph. 1:17, 18) Nothing is more powerful than God’s Word for reaching the heart. (Heb. 4:12) Knowing this should motivate us to develop skill in using the Bible when speaking with others.
4 Your answers to the following questions may help you to become more efficient in the ministry. Do you prepare well for field service? Do you have practice sessions to familiarize yourself with conversation openers that catch the interest of householders? Do you make it a point to learn the current Topic for Conversation and try to use it? Do you endeavor to reason persuasively on the Scriptures at the doors?​—Acts 17:2.
THE WATCHTOWER AN AID
5 The Watchtower has helped millions to turn from darkness to light. It shows us how to apply the Bible’s moral principles, understand its prophecies for our day, and differentiate between true and false religion so as to walk in the way Jehovah approves.
6 What has Bible truth as championed in The Watchtower produced? All sorts of men are being helped toward salvation through an accurate knowledge of God and his Son. (John 17:3; 1 Tim. 2:4) One reader wrote: ‘How I appreciate The Watchtower! The articles should help all to see clearly the times and seasons in which we live. Thank you very much for the vast amount of research, study, and work that goes into the preparation of The Watchtower, which is indeed spiritual food.’
USE DISCERNMENT
7 During this second month of the Watchtower subscription campaign, we need to search out opportunities to turn men from darkness to light. Bible discussions with people we call on from house to house help us do this. When we find people who show genuine interest in the Kingdom message, we can point out the benefit of reading The Watchtower regularly. The May 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry gave pointers on how to recognize interest. It would be good to reread this. If the householder is familiar with the magazine and appreciates it, you might ask him if he would like to subscribe to it. You may wish to start a new subscriber with a six-month subscription if that seems appropriate at the time. As you continue visiting the person to cultivate the interest, you can determine whether the subscription should be renewed.
8 As we go from house to house, engage in street witnessing, or witness informally to workmates, schoolmates, and relatives, we share in spreading the truth that can set people free. (John 8:32) The Watchtower is a special instrument that can help them gain freedom and realize the hope of eternal life, turning them from darkness to light.

