Why Are Some Babies Born Deformed?
AFTER giving birth, the mother was told that her son had a birth defect and would soon be totally blind. The mother reported: ‘The shock caused me to start questioning God’s justice. Why should a helpless little child suffer? I looked after myself healthwise before and after pregnancy. Why did it happen to me?’ Earth wide it is estimated that one out of every 20 babies is born with some deformity. Many anguished parents wonder . . .
Does God Cause It?
Absolutely not! Though many feel that such tragedies are “God’s will” or that he is punishing the parents for some past sin, the Bible, God’s Word, shows that such is not the case.
For instance, Jesus’ disciples asked why a certain man was born blind. They asked Jesus: “Who sinned, this man or his parents, so that he was born blind?” Jesus then made clear that birth defects are not a punishment from God, saying: “Neither this man sinned nor his parents.”​—John 9:1-3.
What Is Responsible?
There is a variety of causes of birth defects. At times they occur because of a mix-up in the baby’s microscopic chromosomes or genes. This may or may not have been inherited from the parents. However, the Textbook of Medicine states: “In most malformations no major factor can be identified, and it can be presumed that their existence is due to the complicated interaction of genetic and environmental influences or to special rare genetic combinations.”
Some factors believed to play a role in causing birth defects include: illness or exposure of the mother to certain diseases during pregnancy, radiation injury, chemical pollution, drugs (even some considered safe during pregnancy), excessively large quantities of some vitamins, malnutrition, improper diet, certain living conditions, age of mother, race, and even the season of birth. Frequently, wars and greedy commercialism have caused conditions that led to birth defects.
On the other hand, certain actions by a parent can increase the risk of birth defects. Some lead loose and immoral lives to the detriment of their unborn offspring. The baby can be deformed because the parents contract a venereal disease or are in an incestuous relationship. Also, parents may hurt their developing fetus by indulging in narcotics and tobacco.
However, the basic cause of deformed children is the disobedience of the first couple, Adam and Eve. Their sin against God caused them to lose their perfection of mind and body and produce “defective” children. Each succeeding generation progressively drifted farther away from perfection. Therefore, even if there were no adverse technology, war, malnutrition or immoral behavior, there would still be deformed children by virtue of the fact that we are born of imperfect parents.
What Can Be Done if It Happens?
Depending on the type of deformity, often much can be done. Medical researchers are daily developing new techniques to help cure deformities or to make it easier to bear up with them. Mechanical arms and legs have enabled many born without such to have a more enjoyable life.
There are institutions that are doing much to rehabilitate deformed children. Many child psychologists are proving that when specialized training is started early enough “infants of any intelligence level can develop and learn.” At times a parent may have no alternative but to have the child placed in an institution. Yet parental love is vital. “Love will do more than all the special training,” stated the father of a child born with mongolism.
Many children who were born hopelessly crippled have been assisted and now, as adults, live productive lives. Even some women without arms have raised their own children. Despite their handicaps, they are glad to be alive.
Will such children ever become sound? Yes, they will. Jesus demonstrated the “works of God” by healing a man born blind. This miracle by God’s power shows that God truly cares about the plight of those born deformed. These “works of God” will become even more manifest in the near future. God promises to remove this present selfish system and to bring in “new heavens and a new earth” wherein “righteousness is to dwell.”​—2 Pet. 3:13; John 9:3.
Just as Jesus, while on earth, healed blind eyes, deformed legs, a withered hand, so in the “new earth” eyes and ears closed from birth will be opened. Those with useless or missing limbs will joyfully regain their use! Every tear of sadness will pass away under the heavenly rule of Jesus. Even death will disappear!​—Mark 3:1-5; Rev. 21:3, 4.
This hope gives incentive to those who have deformed children. The mother of a 15-year-old retarded son who has been a deaf-mute from birth admitted: “There were times when my daughter and I felt like throwing up our hands and quitting, but knowing Jehovah God and realizing that in the future he will rid my son of this condition gave us something to look forward to. This is what kept us going.”
Learn more from the Bible about this inspiring hope and how you and your family can enjoy it. Jehovah’s Witnesses will be glad to help you free of charge.
[Box on page 10]
WHAT SOME PARENTS OF DEFORMED BABIES SAY
  “Before he was born I was very short tempered, but by caring for him I learned patience and kindness. This even helped me to be more considerate in dealing with other people.”​—Mother of a 15-year-old deaf, speechless and retarded boy with skeletal deformities
  ‘We have often thought about the doctor who wanted permission to let her die. What a blessing our little girl has been to us! While limited in so many ways, a retarded child seems endowed with a superabundance of love.’​—Father of a 10-year-old girl with mongolism

