How to Use the “God’s Love” Book to Conduct Bible Studies
 1. What is the purpose of the “God’s Love” book?
1 How thrilled we were at our “Guided by God’s Spirit” District Convention to receive the new book “Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”! As announced, this publication is designed to help us know and love Jehovah’s standards of conduct and not for teaching basic Bible doctrines. We will not be offering this book from door to door.
 2. How will this publication be used, and with whom?
2 This book will serve as the second publication to be studied with Bible students after completing the Bible Teach book. Keep in mind that people have different rates of spiritual growth. Each study should be conducted at a pace comfortable to the student. Make sure that the material considered is clearly understood. In most cases, this book should not be used to start Bible studies with people who may have already studied several books in the past but who are not attending congregation meetings and clearly are not interested in conforming their lives to the Bible truths they were taught.
 3. What should we do if we are currently conducting a study in the Worship God book?
3 If you are presently conducting a study in the Worship God book and are in the last few chapters, you may decide to complete that publication and to encourage the student to read the “God’s Love” book on his own. Otherwise, it would be best to transfer to the new book and start from the beginning. As with the Bible Teach book, discussion of the topics in the appendix is optional.
 4. What should we do if our student gets baptized before completing the Bible Teach and “God’s Love” books?
4 If a student gets baptized before completing both books, then the study should continue until the “God’s Love” book is finished. Even though the student is baptized, you may report the time, the return visit, and the study. A publisher who accompanies you and participates in the study may also count the time.
 5. How may the “God’s Love” book be used to assist publishers who have not shared in the ministry for some time?
5 If you are assigned by a member of the Congregation Service Committee to conduct a Bible study with someone who has become inactive in the preaching work, you may be asked to consider specific chapters in the “God’s Love” book. Such studies need not be conducted for a prolonged period of time. What a fine provision we have in this new book, which has been designed to help us remain “in God’s love”!​—Jude 21.

