Questions From Readers
● Is there any objection to celebrating wedding anniversaries?—I.S., United States.
In ancient times birthday celebrations were associated with astrology. No doubt this is why the Scriptures tell only of pagans celebrating them. However, there is nothing in the Scriptures in support of the celebration of one’s wedding anniversary, to make it obligatory. Marriage is something for couples to remember every day as to its obligations. Of course, the day of marriage is a joyful occasion—a fact that Jesus recognized by his presence at the wedding feast at Cana. Where the marriage turns out successfully, it would be but natural for a couple to take note of such a happy event annually. In fact, this may be conducive to strengthening the marriage relationship.—John 2:1-11.
Just what arrangements should be made to mark the anniversary and how extensive these would be is for those involved to decide, although it is well to note that here also the rule applies: “Whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything else, do all things for God’s glory.”—1 Cor. 10:31.
● Habakkuk 3:3 reads: “God himself proceeded to come from Teman, even a Holy One from Mount Paran.” This has been used as an argument to show where God came from. Is this the right understanding of this text?—J. F., United States.
No, it is not. Jehovah God is not shown as coming from Teman in the sense of his originating from there or as if this was his place of abode. Jehovah God is without any origin, either on earth or in heaven. He is “from time indefinite to time indefinite.” His abode, however, is in the heavens: “The heavens are my throne.”—Ps. 90:2; Isa. 66:1.
The prophecy here foretells the coming of God with destructive fury at the battle of Armageddon, which the prophet compares to God’s acts in days of old. In vision the prophet sees God coming from Teman, or, as the footnote “e” shows in the New World Translation, God is coming from the south. Actually Jehovah in the past did lead his people triumphantly from Mount Sinai to Jerusalem through the land of Teman. Moses’ blessing at Deuteronomy 33:2, and Deborah’s song at Judges 5:4, 5, refer to the same thing: “Jehovah came from Sinai and flashed forth from Seir [of which Teman is a part] upon them. He beamed forth from the mountainous region of Paran.” “Jehovah, at your going forth from Seir, at your marching out of the field of Edom, earth rocked, heavens also dripped, clouds also dripped with water. Mountains quaked at the face of God, this Sinai at the face of Jehovah, Israel’s God.”

