The Bible’s Viewpoint
Is Your Religion Good Enough for God?
“HERE everyone can get saved in his own fashion,” bragged Frederick the Great of Prussia about the religious tolerance in his country. Now, two centuries later, Germans quote his words as though they were Holy Writ, to prove that all religions are just different avenues of approach to the same God.
‘After all,’ they argue, ‘there’s only one God, isn’t there?’ But if so, why do these various ways supposedly to the same God teach such contradictory things about him? How does this harmonize with his being “a God, not of disorder, but of peace”?​—1 Corinthians 14:33.
Many “Gods” and Many “Lords”?
True, the Christian apostle Paul did say: “We know that . . . there is no God but one.” But notice his explanation: “For even though there are those who are called ‘gods,’ whether in heaven or on earth, just as there are many ‘gods’ and many ‘lords,’ there is actually to us one God the Father.” (1 Corinthians 8:4-6) Clearly, Paul’s argument is that some people worship nonexistent gods. But Christians consider only one God deserving of worship, the one “whose name is Jehovah.”​—Psalm 83:18.
“One God the Father”
A human father interested in the welfare of his children and desirous of protecting them from danger sets down guidelines and principles for them to follow. While lovingly taking into consideration their individual needs and limitations, he will nevertheless require all of them to obey the same set of standards.
While viewing each person as a different individual, mankind’s heavenly Father requires all his creatures to obey the same laws and to live according to the same principles. These principles do not vary from person to person or from country to country. After all, if it is a sin for a Catholic to have an abortion, is it any less so for a member of a liberal Protestant church? Or if it is a sin for an American fundamentalist to drink alcoholic beverages, is it any less so for the European Catholic who drinks beer or wine with meals?
Fruitage Determines the True Religion
After the ten-tribe northern kingdom of Israel fell to Assyria in the eighth century B.C.E., people from other parts of the Assyrian realm were transplanted into Samaria. These new residents continued “doing according to their former religions.” But were these religions different avenues of approach to the true God Jehovah? No, for the text plainly states: “There were none fearing Jehovah and none doing according to his statutes and his judicial decisions.”​—2 Kings 17:34.
Logically, religions that ignore God’s laws cannot be pleasing to God. This includes the principle expressed by Jesus: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.” How can a religion possibly represent the “God [who] is love” if its members lack this identifying fruit of true religion?​—John 13:35; 1 John 4:8.
A religion that really represents the one true God must produce people that are like him: loving, joyful, peaceable, long-suffering, kind, good, mild, and possessing self-control. (Galatians 5:22, 23) It must produce people with strong faith who firmly uphold his standards of conduct and morality. “By their fruits you will recognize them,” said Jesus, using the example of a tree. ‘Only those doing the will of God can enter the kingdom of the heavens.’ If a religion produces people who bring forth bad fruitage, what recommends it as being good?​—Matthew 7:16-23.
Ask yourself: Most religions teach that it is wrong to kill, but what do their members do in time of war? Most teach that marriage is a sacred institution, but what record do their members have as regards divorce and premarital and extramarital sex?
Words Versus Actions
In 1982 a professor of physics at an Eastern European university said upon becoming one of Jehovah’s Witnesses: “I have discovered that there is only one religious organization on earth capable of clearly defining the boundaries of relative freedom. What particularly convinced me during my study with Jehovah’s Witnesses is the fact that this organization has the strength to require of its members that they stay within these boundaries.”
Can other religions say as much? For example, during his 1986 Christmas message, Pope John Paul II called for an end to hatred, saying that “love alone can change the face of our planet.” But how successful has the Catholic Church been in accomplishing this within its own ranks? And if all religions are only different avenues leading to “the God of peace,” why is so little peace to be found among their members?​—Philippians 4:9.
They Found the Answer
Kurt became discouraged with his religion because it “condoned almost everything and neglected serious study of God’s Word.” Dieter was shocked to discover that his pastor does not even believe the Bible. Günter felt that “serving God must involve more than just listening to sermons and singing hymns.” All three now find satisfaction by participating in the extensive Bible training program carried on by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Do not allow worldly thinking to mislead you into believing that ‘everyone can get saved his own way.’ Bible study will help you learn more about Jehovah, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, his Son. It will also lead you to the one true religion that worthily represents Him.

