R2749 : page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. JANUARY 1, 1901. No. 1. 
CONTENTS 



Views from the Watch Tower 3 

Salutations, Greetings and Good 

Wishes 3 

The Spiritual Health of the Lord's 

Flock 6 

Pressing Toward the Mark 6 

What is the Great Mark of Character 

Set Before Us by Our Lord? 8 

Christ the Magnet— "I will Draw 

AUMen" 11 

"The Hour is Come" 11 

The Prince of this World 13 

"What Think Ye of Christ?" 14 

Items: Home Embellishments, etc 2 

R2750 : page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (1 Pet. 1:19; 

1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:1 1-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 

Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 

the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 

God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 

him.-l Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 
That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 

in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 

"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 

the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 

and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 

place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 
That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 

"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 

for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 

cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 
That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 

as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 

his joint-heir.- 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 
That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 

the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 

witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of the 

next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 
That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 

to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 

of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 

hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the wilfully 

wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



PLEASE ACCEPT OUR THANKS FOR YOUR KIND LETTERS. 

It rejoices us greatly to hear from so many of you. We received 
1856 letters and cards during the last week of 1900. 
Please accept WATCH TOWER articles as our replies. We send 
postal card or letter receipts for all Money Orders, etc., received: 
so if you do not receive such acknowledgement within two 
weeks apply for a duplicate Money Order and repeat letter-order. 

R2747 : page 2 

HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 

The mention, in our Nov. 15 issue, of the motto and text 
cards for home decoration brought us a flood of orders, for 
which we were only partially prepared. More mottoes are on 
their way to us from London, and all orders will be filled 
as quickly as possible. We are glad to think that these good 
words, meeting the eyes of your families will continually 
exercise a silent yet potent influence for good. 

page 2 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 

These patent binders permit the insertion of each copy of 
the WATCH TOWER as received. Each binder holds two years' 
issues. Very durable and cheap— 40 cents including postage: 
British money Is. 8d. Binders, etc., for Great Britain, can be 
had through our London branch. 

R2750 : page 2 

ABOUT RENEWING YOUR Z.W.T. SUBSCRIPTION. 

We want all interested in "present truth" on our lists, that 
thus they may share with us the spiritual food now being 
dispensed by our present Lord. We do not urge you to renew, 
tho we will be glad to have you continue with us: all we feel it 
proper to do is to make our terms so reasonable as to leave no valid 
excuse for any to go without this spiritual food if he has an 
appetite for it. If you cannot conveniently send the cash you 
may have it on credit, and should you never be able to pay you 
can have the debt canceled upon request. 



R2751 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



AS THOSE living at the close of the first century, 



on January 1, 101, looked back upon 

a full hundred years called the first century, and looked 

forward to a full hundred years called the second century, 

into which they had just entered, and which 

would continue until Dec. 31, A.D. 200, so we, on 

Jan. 1, 1901, look back upon nineteen completed centuries, 

and look forward into the twentieth, upon which 

we have just entered. 

Few, if any, who read these words ever saw a new 
century born, and it occurs to us that as the Lord's 
people, daily and weekly and yearly, turn over new 
leaves of experience and repeatedly start afresh in 
their endeavors to copy the great character-pattern 
set before us by our heavenly Father in Jesus, so, 
too, we may specially profit by the thought that 
a new century has dawned, to encourage ourselves 
in fresh resolves to be and to do more than ever as 
would be pleasing and acceptable in the sight of our 
Lord. What more appropriate sentiments could we 
have than these! How could we hope better to please 
him who has called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light, him who has lifted our feet out of the 
horrible pit and the miry clay, and set them upon the 
rock Christ Jesus, and established our goings, and 
shown unto us the path of life, and made us full of 
joy with the light of his countenance! The Lord's 
own expression on the subject is, "If ye love me keep 
my commandments;" and the Apostle, in the same 
strain, assures us that we are acceptable children of 
God if we do those things which please him, and do 
not find them grievous— if we do them gladly and of 
a willing heart— rejoicing both to know and to do the 
good pleasure of our God. 

SALUTATIONS, GREETINGS AND GOOD WISHES. 



We salute with Christian love and recognition all 
who trust in the precious blood of Jesus, justified by 
faith in his blood, and reckoned as members of the 
household of faith the world over— known to us and 
unknown to us. And even beyond these, we salute 
with loving sympathy those who yet in darkness are 
feeling after God, if haply they might find him (Acts 17:27) 
—who are seeking peace and righteousness, the 
ways of the Lord. Our best wish for these is that 
they may find the Lord, and obtain through his grace 
the peace of God which passeth all understanding, to 
rule in their hearts and to shed abroad in them the 
light of the knowledge of his goodness as it shines in 
the face of Jesus Christ our Lord.— 1 Cor. 4:4. 

But specially we salute and greet the brethren in 
Christ, members of the Royal Priesthood, heirs of 
God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord prospectively; 
—all those who, having believed in the Redeemer 



to the remission of their sins and their justification 
before God, have taken the next step of presenting 
their bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God, 
and their reasonable service. We know and are in 
communication with a goodly number of these dear 
"brethren" (Heb. 2:1 1); yet we doubt not there are 
many others to whom we are as yet strangers; whom 
not having known we nevertheless love, knowing well 
that all who have this spirit of the Head of the Church 
must be indeed members of his Body, and therefore 
fellow-members with ourselves. We wish all such 
great blessing during the year beginning, and as it is 
now the harvest-time, in which the great Chief Reaper 
is gathering together into one barn of safety all the 
true wheat— as it is now the time when the messengers 
are gathering together the elect from the four 
quarters of the heavens (the nominal church) it is 
our hope that many of these dear brethren may be 
gathered during this year.— Matt. 24:31; 13:30. 
Not gathered into another denomination, with 

R2751 : page 4 

merely a change of name or change of creed or change 

of form of worship, but gathered to Christ, into oneness 

with him, in fellowship of spirit through the 

knowledge of his Word. And we are to expect this 

gathering to progress more and more, because two influences 

are at work, both calculated to effect the separation 

of these brethren from Babylon. (1) The 

increasing deflection of the nominal church people 

from the true standard of religion which God has provided, 

the Bible, into various subversive unbeliefs; 

viz., into Higher Criticism infidelity, Evolution infidelity, 

Christian Science infidelity, etc., etc. The 

further and the more rapidly these leave the Word of 

God, the greater will be the influence upon the Israelites 

indeed, who are in heart-union with the Lord, and 

full of faith in his Word; for they will perceive more 

and more clearly what they have endeavored heretofore 

to ignore; viz., that we are in the great day of 

trial of which the Apostle wrote: "Every man's work 

shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because 

it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try 

every man's work of what sort it is."— 1 Cor. 3:13. 

We are in this day of trial, have been in it for 
over twenty years, and each day brings us nearer to 
the culmination of testing, and tends to separate more 
and more widely between those who are really God's 
people begotten of the holy spirit, and those who are 
merely nominally and outwardly his, naming the name 
of Christ, and drawing nigh with their lips, but in 
heart are out of sympathy with him and his Word of 
righteousness. 

(2) As this true class is being thus forced 
out of sympathy with Babylon and the masses of all 



denominations, they are hungering and thirsting after 
righteousness— desiring the spiritual food, which the 
Lord has been meantime preparing for them, and 
which now, by his grace, is indeed "meat in due season" 
to all who belong to the true household of faith. 
Such, having been considerably weaned from the spirit 
of Babylon, will frequently be found in just that attitude 
of heart and mind in which the truth will appeal 
to them quickly and thoroughly, and sometimes 
accomplish as much in one year as was accomplished 
with others at an earlier period in several years of 
study and development. 

For these reasons we are expecting great things 
in the way of progress of the truth in the near future. 
We believe it the duty, as well as the pleasure, of all 
who have been enlightened of God through the harvest 
message, to spread the good tidings abroad,— to 
hand out to famishing brethren the meat in due season 
which has so strengthened our own hearts. And 
this seems to be more and more the spirit of the Lord's 
brethren, as they receive of the Lord's grace and truth 
and become more and more copies of God's dear Son, 
and have more and more of his spirit of willingness to 
serve the brethren, and, as the Apostle suggests, are 
willing to lay down their lives for the brethren (1 John 3:16) 
—not literally, but day by day and opportunity 
by opportunity— willing to sacrifice the comforts 
and advantages which, to the natural man, go to make 
up the sum of earthly life and happiness. They 
take pleasure in renouncing earthly privileges and 
luxuries, and even some of life's comforts, that they 
may spend the more of their substance and be the more 

R2752 : page 4 

spent themselves in doing good unto all men, especially 
to the household of faith, and especially in the higher 
spiritual good things which they have the inestimable 
privilege of dispensing as servants of our present 
Lord.-Matt. 24:45. 

And since this commendable spirit seems to be growing 
amongst the dear friends of the truth, everywhere, 
we may reasonably expect that the coming year will 
be one of still greater activities and still greater successes 
in the dispensing of the truth and the bringing 
of brethren out of darkness into the marvelous light, 
now shining for all who are the Lord's people. Just 
how this will be accomplished we do not yet see clearly; 
but we are encouraged by fresh proposals for the Colporteur 
work and an increasing interest in the Volunteer 
work both at home and abroad. If all of the 
deeply interested will join us in praying the Lord of 
the harvest to send forth more laborers into the harvest 
work, we may expect, as one result, that all who 
thus pray will themselves be granted fresh and larger 
opportunities for service. 



As we consider it not to be the Lord's will that 
we should beg for money, but merely that we should 
use as wisely as possible whatever he shall supply, so 
we feel that it would not be the Lord's will that we 
should press or urge upon any the matter of service 
to his cause. We merely call attention to the opportunities 
for service and the privileges connected with 
these, and to the advantages and blessings which accrue 
to those who embrace them. We can, however, 
speak confidently of a fact that experience has demonstrated, 
and to which many of our readers could testify; 
viz., that the Lord specially blesses those who, 
having received the light of truth, do not put it under 
a bushel, but let it shine, fearlessly and wisely, to all 
the household of faith. Many letters indicate that 
great blessing was received and spiritual progress 
made during the past year; and these came chiefly 
from those who have engaged in the Volunteer work 
—preaching the present truth Sunday after Sunday, 
to those professing to be children of God, by distributing 
to them literature as they returned home from 
their churches. So great has been the blessing upon 

R2752 : page 5 

many of these Volunteers that they have written to 
us urging that some kind of literature may be prepared 
so that they may engage in similar service during the 
year 1901. One dear sister, who was at first deterred 
by criticism (from one who should have helped instead 
of hindered her), declares that nothing she ever did 
in the Lord's service was so heavy a "cross" at first; 
but that having taken it up as a service to the Lord 
and his "brethren" she had received from it more 
blessing than from any other service ever performed. 
She and associates have thoroughly distributed the 
"Volunteer" TOWER to the Protestant church attendants 
of their city and even surrounding towns, and 
like true soldiers of the cross are waiting and calling 
for more of the love-and-truth ammunition which, under 
God's blessing, routing the powers of darkness, 
from some hearts at least, will deliver "brethren" and 
bring them into the clear sunlight of grace and truth. 

In compliance with these requests and suggestions, 
and with the belief that this is one of the best 
ways of reaching the professed "household of faith" 
with the meat in due season, we are preparing for 
another campaign in this holy war against the enslaving 
errors which hold so many of our dear brethren 
captive,— human traditions which both dishonor 
God and stultify those who in any degree give them 
allegiance. 

We are not seeking to have any engage in this 
work who do not love the truth, and desire at heart 
to serve it; for we believe that such service would not 
be very acceptable to our Lord, the Chief Reaper. But 



we do seek to encourage all those who have a heart's 

desire to serve our King, and who know of no better 

way of engaging in his service, and who have thus far 

been deterred, and have missed the blessing which goes 

with it, through fear of man, which bringeth a snare 

—through shame for the cross and the true Gospel, 

which are not popular now. We want to assure such 

that this will be a part of their "overcoming" which will 

probably help them more than anything else they have 

ever done to become strong in the Lord and in the 

power of his might as overcomers of their own weaknesses. 

It will assist them in making their calling 

and their election sure, by assisting them in the development 

of the character of overcomers, to whom the 

Lord has promised the crown of glory and the heavenly 

blessings.— Rev. 2:26-29. 

All who volunteer in this service during the coming 
year will be supplied with a booklet, entitled, 
"Food for Thinking Christians; Our Lord's Return, 
etc.," a neat, attractive little pamphlet, which, we 
trust, will feed many hungry brethren and sisters in 
Babylon, and thus give them strength to follow the 
Lamb whithersoever he goeth. But whether we shall 
find many hungry ones, and learn of their refreshment 
with the truth or not, we are sure that those who dispense 
this food will have the Master's blessing, and 
that they themselves will become strong by the exercise 
of their wills, and the bringing of their bodies into 
subjection in service and sacrifice to the Lord and his 
cause. And loving you all, and realizing that such a 
service will be the greatest blessing to you all, we are 
desirous for this reason alone that so many as wish 
this service may have the opportunity, and may be encouraged 
to engage in it; but we are confident that 
good will be accomplished also for some yet bound in 
Babylon;— that God will use this means for calling 
them out.-Rev. 18:4. 

We are not urging this as instead of other means 
of work, as for instance, the Colporteur work, and the 
endeavor to interest friends through special tracts 
suited to their conditions, etc., etc. What we are suggesting 
is in addition to the other things. It is a 
method of preaching the Gospel— the true Gospel, of 
which no reasonable person need be ashamed. It appeals 
to all who know of no other way of preaching 
more likely to be effective in finding and assisting the 
brethren. While, therefore, we pray the Lord of the 
harvest for laborers in the vineyard in the Colporteur 
branch of the service, still, we remember that not all 
of the Royal Priesthood are so circumstanced in life 
as to be able to offer their sacrifices in this form. We 
thank the Lord, therefore, for the opportunity for their 
engagement in this preaching of the true Gospel 
through the printed page to church people; and we 
rejoice especially that in this service almost all of the 
Royal Priesthood can find opportunities for self-sacrifice, 



following closely in the footsteps of Jesus, and rejoicing 
proportionately as they follow; and proportionately 
growing stronger in the Lord and in the power 
of his might, and being made "meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light." 

Samples of the new literature mentioned will be 
sent to each one on our lists, as No. 52 of the OLD 
THEOLOGY series. We trust it will please you both in 
contents and in appearance; and we believe that it will 
be attractive to others who may through its perusal be 
led to "choose the better part," and to be taught of 
God, and refreshed in heart by the glorious things he is 
now dispensing to his faithful. We offer the suggestion 
therefore, that in every little group of the Lord's people 
meeting for the study of his Word, this Volunteer 
service be taken up and discussed; and that those who 
have not yet entered the work shall seek to do so (that 
they may have a part of the blessing), "while it is 
called day, for the night cometh wherein no man can 
work." Appoint one of your number as the captain, 
and let him bring to his assistance as many lieutenants 

R2752 : page 6 

as he may please to counsel and assist in the division 
of the work, the appointment of distributors, etc., that 
the work may be done systematically and thoroughly. 

Those who are without companionship and assistance 
in this work may engage in it, and we will be 
pleased to hear from them also; but let each little circle, 
so far as possible, act in harmony in the matter, not 
all attempting to be directors, but each willing to submit 
to the will of the majority and to act through 
whomsoever the majority may appoint the captain of 
the group. The responsibility falling upon one will 
be much more likely to be well discharged than if 
divided amongst many. Those who engaged in the 
work last year and the year before no doubt have memoranda 
which will be valuable to them in judging of 
the quantities of pamphlets needful for this work the 
coming year. We will be pleased to supply printed 
blanks useful in the guiding of the various distributors 
to the places of service to which their captains 
may appoint them week after week. We are pleased 
to hear from these captains at the close of each campaign, 
respecting the number of churches served, the 
average attendance, etc., and especially respecting any 
evidences of blessing, either amongst the distributors 
or on the part of those who receive the literature. 

THE SPIRITUAL HEALTH OF THE LORD'S FLOCK. 



Through our correspondence with the dear friends 
of the cause throughout the world we, so to speak, 



have our finger upon their spiritual pulse, and we are 

glad to inform you all that the indications are that the 

spiritual condition is good— better than ever before. 

During the past few years we were impressed with the 

thought that some of the dear readers of this journal 

had received more knowledge than they were making 

use of in their daily lives— that some of them were 

more interested in the letter of the truth, in the knowledge 

of God's plan, than in conforming their lives to 

the spirit of the Truth. In harmony with this conviction 

we have sought, during the last three years 

especially, to draw attention to the necessity for receiving 

not the grace of God in vain, but on the contrary 

permitting the truth which we so dearly love to 

work in our hearts both to will right and, so far as possible, 

to do right— God's good pleasure respecting us. 

-Phil. 2:13. 

Apparently the Lord has blessed these efforts, as 
no doubt he guided and led toward them. To him we 
gladly render the praise for the evidences we see 
through your correspondence that you are appreciating 
more and more not only the heavenly prize, but also 
the trials and difficulties which, under divine providence, 
are intended to develop our characters, and 
make us copies of our Lord, and thus to prepare us for 
the Kingdom and for the great privileges and work of 
blessing others through it. It is our desire, and we 
believe yours also, to still progress in this "narrow 
way" of self-sacrifice; to still recognize the Lord's 
hand in all of life's affairs toward "the called ones 
according to his purpose;" and the advantage of every 
trial and discipline rightly received; and to still be 
helpful to all who are in the way, assisting them to 
put on the armor of God, and to be clothed with all 
the graces of the spirit, and to be shod with the preparation 
of the Gospel of peace, that they may tread 
faithfully this royal way opened up by our Redeemer, 
walking in his footsteps, until the heavenly Kingdom 
has been attained. 

We do not mean to say that there are no drawbacks, 
no difficulties, no discouragements, in any part 
of the field. Quite to the contrary, there are many 
such; but these also, interpreted in the light of the 
divine Word, are encouragements to us, since we know 
that they are needful. We realize that the Lord himself 
is pruning his "Vine," taking away the branches 
that will not bear fruit, and that unto perfection, fully 
ripe. When we say, therefore, that the outlook is 
encouraging, we mean the broad view of the harvest-field, 
rather than every little microscopic view of a 
particular point in it. 

We have learned, too, that sometimes matters 
which seem to be dark clouds and troubles amongst 
the brethren are really, under divine providence, messengers 
of blessing, which, rightly received, do good 
in showing the brethren their own weaknesses and imperfections, 



and in leading them to seek more and 
more of the grace of God to overcome these, that they 
may be filled with all the fulness of God. It is along 
this line, then, that we congratulate you and bid you 
be of good courage and continue to press along the 
line toward the "mark" of perfect character— perfection 
in love: assured that if faithful we shall ultimately 
obtain blessings far beyond our present conceptions. 



R2753 : page 6 

PRESSING TOWARD THE MARK. 



"Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I 
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forward 
to those things which are before, I press toward the mark 
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus." 
-Phil. 3:13,14.- 

FEW IN the nominal church see any particular 
mark or any particular prize with definiteness; 
—to be sought and to be attained. The majority are 
merely fleeing from an imagined eternal torment, 
which pursues them as a fear, a dread, a nightmare, 
a horror, from the cradle to the tomb. Others of the 
Lord's people (chiefly of "this way") have had the 
eyes of their understanding illuminated by the holy 
spirit through the divine Word, and have gotten a 
glimpse of the great prize which God has set before 
the elect Church of this Gospel age. No wonder if 
these are enthused with the glorious spectacle which 
(the natural) eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither 
hath entered into the heart of man to conceive of, but 
which "God hath revealed unto us by his spirit!" 
No wonder, either, if they have given more attention 
to the prize than to the mark which must be attained 
ere the prize is won. 

R2753 : page 7 

Full of enthusiasm and appreciation of divine 
love, these have entirely lost the fear of eternal torment, 
and have learned that this doctrine is of Satan, 
and not of God; from man, and not of the holy spirit; 
from the dark ages, and not the teachings of the inspired 
words of Scripture. They have learned, too, 
that what scriptures seem to give any color of sanction 
to this blasphemy against God's character and 
plan are certain parables, symbols and dark sayings 
which misinterpretations have more or less glossed and 
colored in the common translations of the Scriptures. 

It is quite common for this latter class to think 



and to speak of "running for the prize," and to measurably 
lose sight of the fact that it is not the prize 
that we run toward, but the mark: that the prize is 
entirely beyond our grasp;— as the Apostle expresses 
it above, "I press toward the mark." Whoever reaches 
the mark of character which God has established for 
the elect will receive the prize; and whoever fails to 
reach that mark of character will fail to get the prize. 
It is therefore a very serious error to run for the prize 
and forget or ignore or disregard the "mark," which 
must first be attained. 

The thought that a certain standard or mark of 
character is necessary to all who will pass divine approval 
as "overcomers," and hear the Lord's "Well 
done!" is an astounding one to many. Many have 
thought of the Christian race as merely an avoidance 
of open sin; others have included an avoidance of 
secret faults; others have gone still further, and have 
included a general disposition to sacrifice many interests 
of the present life; others have gone still further, 
and have understood the test of discipleship to be full 
self-surrender to the Lord, a full sacrifice of earthly 
life and all of its interests to the will of our Head, the 
Lord;— but almost none have the thought that all our 
sacrificings and experiences and self-denials must lead 
up toward and eventually bring us to the "mark" of 
character which God has set for the "elect;"— else 
they will not get the prize of joint-heirship with Christ 
in the Millennial Kingdom. Nothing, probably, has 
contributed so much to this oversight of a "mark" or 
fixed standard of character than the false interpretation 
given to our Lord's conversation with the dying 
thief on Calvary.* 

It is indisputably reasonable, that God has some 
standard or test by which he will determine who are 
worthy to receive the great blessings and honors offered 
to the elect— who are worthy to be members of 
the body of Christ and to share his Millennial Kingdom 
—what shall constitute faithfulness in those who 
"seek for glory, honor and immortality," and who 
are "the called and chosen and faithful." The Apostle, 
in our text, unquestionably declares that there is 
such a mark, and that all who are running with any 
hope of attaining the desired prize must be running 
toward that mark, and must attain it or lose the prize. 
And we see, too, that the Apostle judges himself according 
to this standard, and declares that at the time 
he wrote he had not yet reached this mark or standard 
of character-development. Such reflections cannot 
but awaken in the hearts of all who are in this race 
earnest desires to see distinctly the mark toward which 
we must run: and it should stimulate each and all of 
us to run the more patiently and the more perseveringly, 
and to watch day by day the measure of our 
progress toward the grand mark which the Lord our 
God has set before us. 



We notice that the Apostle has in mind foot-races, 
and we see the forcefulness of the illustration: (1) 
As the racers must enter the race-course in a legitimate 
manner, so must we get on our race-course in 
a legitimate manner, through the only door— faith in 
the precious blood which redeemed us and justified us 
before God. (2) Those who enter the course must 
be regularly recorded or registered as runners; they 
must positively declare their intention, else they will 
not be in the race. So with us: having been "justified 
by faith," and having been informed of our privileges 
in connection with this race, and the attainment 
of its prize, it was incumbent upon us to declare our 
intention— to make a covenant with the Lord, and to 
thus be regularly entered— our names being written, 
not upon earthly church rolls, but in the Lamb's book 
of life— "written in heaven."— Heb. 12:23. 

With foot-racers there is a prize offered also, but 
it is not the prize that is hung out to their view while 
on the race-course; it is not the prize toward which 
they run, but the mark. There is the quarter-mile 
mark, the half-mile mark, the three-quarter-mile mark, 
and the mile mark at the close of the race; and each 
racer watches for and encourages himself as he passes 
one or another of these marks by the way, until finally 
he reaches the last one, the mark for the prize. 
And this watching of the marks by the way, and 
reckoning up to the standard, is a great incentive to 
him— an encouragement as he speeds along, a reminder 
if he is going slackly. So, too, it is with the 
Christian runner in the narrow way toward the mark 
of the great prize which God has promised— join t-heirship 
with his Son, the Lord of glory. It will encourage 
us to note the marks on our way, and to 
perceive our progress— if we are coming nearer and 
nearer and nearer to "the mark for the prize"— the 
mark which wins the prize. And if any be careless, 
indifferent, slack, in his running, nothing could be a 



*See our issue of June 1, 1896, "The Thief in Paradise." 

R2754 : page 8 

greater stimulus to him than the knowledge that only 
his own carelessness or slackness can lose him the 
prize. 

WHAT IS THIS GREAT "MARK" OF CHARACTER SET 
BEFORE US BY OUR GOD? 



We answer, it is stated under various names; as 
for instance, our Lord Jesus mentioned it when he 



said, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in heaven 
is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) The same mark is mentioned 
by the Apostle when he says that God predestinated 
that all who will be of the elect must be "conformed 
to the image of his Son." (Rom. 8:29.) These 
two statements differ in form, but are the same in 
substance. The same mark is mentioned again by 
the Apostle when he says, "The righteousness of the 
Law is fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but 
after the spirit." And again he tells us that "Love is 
the fulfilling of the Law." (Rom. 8:4; 13:10.) Here, 
then, we have an aggregated definition of what constitutes 
the "mark" of Christian character, in the 
elect: it is godlikeness, Christ-likeness, Love. The 
requirement, therefore, would seem to be that the 
Lord's people, holy and elect, must attain to the same 
character or disposition of love that God possesses and 
that was manifested also by our Lord Jesus. 

But some one will say, How can we, "who by 
nature are children of wrath, even as others," ever 
hope to attain to so high a standard or mark of character 
as this, that we should love as God loves, as 
Christ loves? We answer, that we need never hope 
to attain to this high standard as respects the flesh, 
for so long as we are in these mortal bodies, and 
obliged to use their brains, we will necessarily be more 
or less opposed by the selfishness which through the 
fall has come to have such complete possession of our 
race through the mental, moral and physical derangements 
incidental to six thousand years of depravity. 

The attainment of this mark of perfect love is to 
be an attainment of the heart, of the will— the new 
will, "begotten, not of the will of the flesh, nor of the 
will of man, but of God," through the holy spirit. 
Nor do we find, nor should we expect that the new 
mind would come up to this standard at the beginning 
of our Christian experience. The new mind, altho 
inspired of God through the exceeding great and precious 
promises of his Word, is nevertheless our own 
will, and more or less circumscribed by its channel 
and instrument, the human brain. Hence the Apostle 
informs us that the new mind must constantly 
fight a battle against the flesh, and that its victory 
means the death of the flesh— that it cannot be actually 
perfect until the "change" shall come, by which this 
newly begotten will shall receive its spiritual body in 
the first resurrection. But since the receiving of a 
spiritual body in the first resurrection will be the receiving 
of the prize, we see that the race toward the 
mark and the attainment of that mark must be made 
by the new mind while it is still in this mortal body 
or "earthen vessel."— 2 Cor. 5:2-4. 

In a word, the new mind must grow, must develop. 
As the Apostle exhorts, we, as new creatures, 
must grow in grace and in the knowledge and love of 
God— the growth here corresponding to the running 



in the figure under consideration. We must run or 
press nearer and nearer to the mark day by day, week 
by week, year by year, until it shall be attained,— if 
we would gain the prize. Nor is it merely a question 
of time, for we all know some who have been a long 
time in the race and have made comparatively little 
progress in the cultivation of the gifts of the spirit, 
the sum of which is comprehended in the one word, 
perfect love— the mark. 

And we probably all know some others who have 
been a comparatively short time in the narrow way who 
have made great progress,— going from grace to grace, 
from knowledge to knowledge, from glory to glory- 
rapidly nearing the mark. And we know some who, 
so far as human judgment can discern, have reached 
the mark; but of these more anon. 

That we may clearly comprehend this subject, let 
us notice how small were the beginnings of this grace 
of love in our hearts; and let us hope that many, as 
they trace the matter here, and compare it with their 
own experiences, will be able to find large developments 
in their own characters— that they have passed 
one after another of the quarter-mile marks in the 
way, and that they are rapidly nearing, if they have 
not already reached, "the mark of the prize." 

(1) The beginning of our experience as Christians 
the Apostle expresses, saying, it was not that 

we first loved God, but that "he first loved us"— that 
attracted us to him. (1 John 4:19.) A sense of justice 
told us that since God had so loved us as to redeem 
us at so great a cost, and to provide for us so great 
salvation, it would be as little as we could do— it 
would be our duty to love and serve him in return. 
This beginning of love we will designate as duty-love. 
It lacked in many respects qualities which now permeate 
our love for God, which is of a higher, a more 
advanced character, because we have grown in grace, 
and in knowledge, and in love. The Apostle seems to 
speak again of this same duty-love, when he says, 
"The love of Christ constraineth us [draws out our 
love in return]; for we thus judge that if one died for 
all, then were all dead [under divine sentence, the 
curse]; and that we who live [who have been justified 
to life through faith in Jesus' redemption] should 

R2754 : page 9 

henceforth live not unto ourselves but unto him who 
died for us." (2 Cor. 5:14,15.) Here again it is the 
"should"-love or duty-love,— the first, the crudest, 
the simplest development of our love toward God, our 
starting-point in the race toward perfect love. 

(2) After we had exercised the duty-love and 
sought to obey God, not only in the avoidance of sin, 
but also in sacrificing our earthly interests and rights 
for his sake and the truth's sake, in obedience to his 



will— in obedience to duty-love— we began to find in 

our hearts an appreciation of the principles of righteousness; 

we began to love righteousness— justice, 

mercy, love: not at first with a fervency of love, but 

rather with respect for the glorious qualities of the 

divine character, plan and law. This was our first 

quarter-mile mark, so to speak— love of principles of 

righteousness. 

(3) The more we learned to love these elements 
of divine character, the principles of righteousness 
which find their perfect representation in the divine 
being, and through which the divine being is revealed 
to the eyes of our understanding— in that proportion 
the true love to God (based upon principles rather than 
upon duty), comes into our hearts. So to speak, here 

in the race-course we had gained the second quarter-mile 
mark— love of God's character; even tho we had 
not yet discerned the length and breadth and heights 
and depths of that character, we had begun to love the 
Lord in the true way— from appreciation not only of 
what he had done for us, but also and specially for 
what he is;— from appreciation of his character. 

(4) Love of God from this latter standpoint as 

the representative of every grace and every virtue, as 
the representative of righteousness, and the opponent 
of every injustice and inequity, led us to seek and to 
follow out these principles amongst our fellow-men, 
as well as in our own characters. As we began to 
love truth, purity, nobility of character, wherever it 
could be found, we found some of it in a mottled 
and streaked condition even in the world of mankind: 
we found that the original law of God, written in the 
heart of father Adam, altho largely erased and obliterated 
from the hearts and consciences of his children, 
is not wholly gone;— that to some extent, especially 
under the influence of Christianity in the past 
eighteen centuries, some features of this perfect law 
may be dimly discerned amongst men. 

But our scrutiny, backed by our increasing love 
of these principles of righteousness, found nothing 
satisfactory amongst natural men— nor even amongst 
those professing godliness— professing to be followers 
in the footsteps of Jesus. We found these all, like 
ourselves, far short of perfection, far short of the glory 
of God. But as the true love, of right principles, 
burned in our hearts more and more fervently, we 
learned to sympathize with the entire "groaning creation," 
and to "love the brethren;" for in the latter 
we perceived a class inspired by the same spirit by 
which we ourselves had been begotten of God, the 
spirit of the truth; we saw some of them struggling 
as we had struggled, with appreciation only of the 
duty-love; we saw others who had gained a higher 
conception than this, who had learned to appreciate 
the principles of righteousness and to love them, and 
to hate iniquity, and further, to love the God who is 



the embodiment of these. And the realization that 

these "brethren," like ourselves, were gradually approximating 

the divine standard— "pressing toward 

the mark"— filled us with interest in them and in 

their battle against sin and its weaknesses, and against 

the Adversary and his beguilements. We became 

more and more interested in their welfare and overcoming 

in proportion as we were striving and making 

progress in the same "narrow way." This love of 

the brethren we did not have at the beginning; it 

marks a distinct progress in our race toward the 

"mark;" we might term it the third quarter-mile 

mark. But altho a grand attainment was achieved 

when this love of the brethren reached the point of 

R2755 : page 9 

willingness to "lay down our lives for the brethren" 
(1 John 3:16), yet it was not the full attainment of 
the "mark" for which we are running. 

(5) The "mark of the prize" is a still higher 
attainment in love;— the one which we understand the 
Scriptures to point out as the very highest attainment 
is that of loving our enemies— not merely tolerating 
them, abstaining from injuring them, etc., while thinking 
evil of them; but far beyond this, it signifies the 
full purging out of all anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife, not only from our actions but also from our 
words, and even from our thoughts, our sentiments. 
It means such a complete triumph of love in our hearts 
as not only loves God supremely and delights to sacrifice 
in his service from love of the principles represented 
in his character, and love for the brethren, 
which makes us careful of their feelings and interests, 
and ready to lay down our lives on their behalf, to 
deliver them from evil, or to avoid putting a stumbling 
block in their way, but it means additionally that the 
love of God has been so thoroughly shed abroad in 
our hearts that we can love and do love every intelligent 
creature, and delight to do good unto all men, 
and to serve all men as we have opportunity, especially 
the household of faith.— Gal. 6:10. 

This does not mean that the love which we have 
for the world must be of the same kind that we have 
for the Lord, who is the personification of righteousness, 
and for the "brethren," who are striving to have 

R2755 : page 10 

Love, the righteousness of the Law, fulfilled in them 
through Christ. It means rather a sympathetic love; 
a benevolence such as God himself exercised toward 
the whole world of mankind. It does not mean that 
we are to love the world in the sense condemned by 
the Apostle when he said, "Love not the world, 
neither the things of the world." (1 John 2:15.) It 



does mean the attainment of the condition indicated 

in the expression, "God so loved the world that he 

gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever should 

believe on him might not perish, but have everlasting 

life." (John 3:16.) It is a love for the world, which 

will not only be glad to see them lifted up out of degradation 

and sin to holiness and purity and righteousness, 

but which will be glad to cooperate to these 

ends as opportunities may offer— not, however, anticipating 

God's love and the development of his plan 

of the ages; but co-working with God in that great 

plan which he has promised shall eventually bring, 

during the Millennial age, blessing to every creature 

through the elect class now running in this race for 

attainment of the "mark," to win the great prize of 

joint-heirship with his Son. This perfect love, which, 

including the other developments, extends even to 

enemies and those who injure us and speak evil of us 

falsely for Christ's and righteousness' sake, is the 

fourth mark in the race— "the mark for the prize." 

While it is well for us to notice these various steps 
in the progress of our race toward the "mark," we 
are to remember that the illustration does not fit perfectly, 
but that rather while there is this order of 
progression it is less distinctly marked in our experiences, 
in which duty-love but gradually leads into 
the higher forms, remaining, but subordinately, 
to the end. It is a part of the blessed arrangement 
of God that those who are running in this race are 
not reckoned with according to the flesh, but as "new 
creatures," according to the spirit, the mind, the will, 
the intention. We may never hope to attain to this 
grand "mark" of perfect Love in our flesh, so that 
every act and every word would give full proof of the 
real spirit of love which fills our hearts. Some may 
have greater weaknesses and defects in the flesh than 
others, and hence may be less able than others to uniformly 
and thoroughly show the real sentiments of 
their hearts. But God looketh at the heart; it is the 
heart that he sees running in this race; it is the heart 
which is to attain to this "mark" set before us in the 
Gospel— this mark of perfect love, which includes 
even our enemies. "Blessed are the pure in heart, 
for they shall see God." 

If now we see clearly that perfect love is "the 
mark of the prize," we see something to strive for in 
our daily lives; a condition which we can by God's 
grace attain, and which must be obtained if we would 
be counted worthy a place in the Kingdom. The 
Lord is not selecting the members of the Bride of 
Christ by an arbitrary election; neither is he selecting 
them on the lines of a mere sentimentality; he is selecting 
them on the lines of character, heart-development; 
and those who attain this likeness to his Son, 
this "mark" of the prize, this standard of what is pleasing 
and acceptable to the Father— these, and these 



alone, may have confident hope of joint-heirship with 
our Lord. How important, then, that each runner in 
this race follow closely the Apostle's injunction to lay 
aside every weight and hindrance, and to run with 
patience the race set before us in the Gospel— "looking 
unto Jesus," the author of our faith, until he shall 
have become the finisher of it (Heb. 12:1)— giving us 
grace to conquer, and keeping us through his Word 
and through his providence unto the end of the race. 

Each one on this race-course should examine 
himself, rather than examine others, in respect to 
progress in this narrow way; for each knows his own 
heart condition and the weaknesses of his own flesh 
better than any other knows these, the Lord alone 
excepted. Let us each note just where he is in the 
race-course, rejoicing that he is in the race at all; 
considering it a great privilege to be thus called and 
privileged to enter in this race. If we find that we 
have passed the first quarter-mark, let us rejoice and 
press on. If we find that we have passed the second 
also, let us rejoice so much the more, but not slack 
our running. If we find that we have passed the third 
quarter we may properly rejoice so much the more, 
and press with vigor on; and if we have attained to 
the fourth mark, of perfect love, which includes even 
enemies, we have indeed cause for great rejoicing. 
The prize is ours, if we but remain faithful. But, as 
the Apostle says, "Having done all, stand"— with all 
the armor on; stand in various testings which will 
then, as much as ever along the race-course, be brought 
to bear against us to divert us away from the mark, 
before the great Inspector and giver of rewards shall 
say, "Well done, good and faithful servant; enter 
thou into the joys of thy Lord."— Eph. 6:13-17. 

It is indispensable to those who have reached the 
mark of perfect love that they shall keep actively engaged 
in the service of the Lord, laying down their 
lives for the brethren; because he who loveth not his 
brother, whom he hath seen, what assurance hath he 
that he really loves God, whom he hath not seen? 
(1 John 4:20.) Such must stand, not only as representatives 
of God and of the principles of righteousness, 
but as representatives of those strong in the 
Lord and in the power of his might, and in the faith 
of his Word,— ready and willing and efficient in the 
encouragement of other runners in the race-course, 
that they likewise may attain to the "mark." As the 
Apostle says: "As many, therefore, as are perfect, 
should be of this mind; and if in anything you think 
differently, God will reveal this to you; but to what 
we have attained, let us walk by the same line. Brethren, 
become joint-imitators of me, and watch those 
who are thus walking, as you have us for a pattern." 
-Phil. 3:15-17, Diaglott. 



R2757 : page 1 1 

CHRIST THE MAGNET--'! WILL DRAW ALL MEN." 

JOHN 12:20-33.~JAN. 20. 

GOLDEN TEXT:-"We would see Jesus." 

OUR LORD continued his teachings in the Temple 

daily after his triumphal entry into Jerusalem 

on the ass,— going to Bethany at night, and returning 

to the Temple each morning during the few days that 

intervened prior to his arrest and crucifixion. It was 

at this time that certain Greeks sought an interview 

with Jesus, and made known their desires through Andrew 

and Philip, who were probably the only two of 

the disciples who spoke the Greek language, they coming 

from a city (Bethsaida) in which the Greek language 

was considerably used, and their names are of 

Greek origin. It was most natural, therefore, that these 

two should be the mouthpieces of the visitors, to communicate 

their wishes to our Lord. The reason for the 

request doubtless was that our Lord at this time was 

in a part of the Temple inaccessible to any except Jews 

by birth, and these Greeks were Jewish proselytes, 

hence were not permitted to approach nearer the holy 

places than the Court of the Gentiles. Their request 

therefore meant that Jesus should come out to where 

they were for an interview. 

What may have been the object of their visit we 
are not told; nor do we presume that our Lord's words 
recorded in the succeeding verses of our lesson were addressed 
to the Greeks, but rather that a break in the 
narrative occurs. Our Lord doubtless responded to their 
request for an interview, but the substance of their converse 
has not been considered necessary for the Church, 
and hence has not been recorded. It may not be amiss, 
however, to mention that Eusebius, a church historian 
of early days, relates that an embassy was sent to Jesus 
by the king of Edessa, Syria, inviting him to take up 
his abode with him, and promising him a royal welcome. 
It would not be surprising if there were truth 
in this statement, but we know well that our Lord would 
refuse any such overtures, for he himself had plainly 
declared to the disciples when he sent them forth, "I 
am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of 
Israel." 

God had blessings in store for all the families of 
the earth; but not yet, and not in this way. All things 
must be done in a divine order and according to the 
divine plan, which provided for the selection of the 

R2758 :page 11 

Seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:16,29) before the general 



blessings could come upon the world; and the offer of 
membership in this Seed of Abraham must, according 
to divine arrangement, be to the Jew first. 

It was probably after the interview with the Greeks 
had ended, and while the hearts of the apostles were 
beating fast with anticipation that finally the world was 
waking up to recognize their Master in his true light, 
and would shortly exalt him to the high position foretold 
for the Messiah, and while their hopes on their own 
behalf were also running high that they should be joint-heirs 
with him in the Kingdom, that Jesus uttered the 
words constituting the remainder of the lesson. It was 
a good opportunity for him to show them how his sufferings 
of the immediate future were the foundation 
upon which all the future glory must rest. He well 
knew what bitter disappointments and heart-aches would 
come to his faithful few when they would realize the 
literalness of what he had already told them respecting 
his death. He would give them some suggestions which 
would be helpful to them subsequently, and enable 
them to look through the sufferings to the glories in 
reservation, unseeable except with the eye of faith. 

It was, we believe, with this thought in mind that 
our Lord declared, "The hour is come that the Son 
of Man should be glorified." The disciples at first 
would take this as intimating his earthly exaltation; 
but he speedily drew their attention to the fact that 
while the beginning of his glorification was near, it must 
be preceded by the suffering of death. His glorification 
began in his resurrection from the dead, when he was 
raised in incorruption, in power, a glorious spiritual 
body— "a quickening spirit," as the Apostle explains. 
(1 Cor. 15:42-45.) This glorification was enhanced 
when he was received up into glory in the Father's 
presence, there to appear on our behalf, and at the right 
hand of divine power to wait for the appointed time 
when he should take unto himself his great power and 
reign as King over all the earth, which he had redeemed 
with his own precious blood. 

"THE HOUR IS COME!" 



The expression, "The hour is come," is not necessarily 
to be understood as signifying sixty minutes; just 
as the word "day" does not always signify twenty-four 
hours, but a comparatively short period or epoch, as, 
for instance, "Noah's day," "Moses' day," "Jesus' 
day," etc. As compared with "Jesus' day" the experiences 
referred to were properly enough said to be occurring 
in that "hour," or short time. 

Having thus assured them that the beginning of 
his glorification was not far distant, our Lord makes 
very impressive the necessity of his death, by saying, 
"Verily, verily,"— that is, Truly, truly, most positively, 



emphatically, I give you the illustration that my glorification, 
according to the divine arrangement, must 
come through my death, even as a grain of wheat would 
remain but one grain unless it were planted, and through 
the dying of one grain life and being were given to a 
number. Had our Lord chosen to do so, he at one time 
had the privilege of remaining alone,— of not dying on 
our behalf. Had he followed this course we would still 
have been unredeemed and he could have brought forth 

R2758 :page 12 

no fruitage. But he had consecrated his life; he had 
voluntarily engaged to sacrifice himself on behalf of 
Adam and his race, in compliance with the Father's 
will, and hence he declares that if now he would love 
his life he would lose it; that on the contrary, instead 
of seeking to save himself he must indeed hate or despise 
the present life in comparison with the future and 
eternal one which the Father had promised him as a 
reward for obedience unto death. 

It will be noticed that in this understanding of it, 
this 25th verse is applicable to our Lord alone, and not 
to his followers, for they had no life to lose; they and 
the whole world were dead, under condemnation of 
death, because of father Adam's transgression. Our 
Lord alone had life, which he had a right to lay down 
or exchange in order to keep it unto eternal life. Such 
privileges could not come to his followers until first 
Jesus had given his life "a ransom for all." Then as 
soon as the ransom was given and had been accepted 
of the Father, the redeemed ones (believers justified by 
their faith) could be reckoned as having life-rights 
which they would be privileged to consecrate upon the 
Lord's altar, and to exchange for the heavenly life, following 
in the footsteps of Jesus. 

And in full accord with this interpretation is the 
next verse, which distinctly speaks of Jesus' followers, 
saying that all who desire to serve him, and to be with 
him, must follow him— follow him in this experience, 
which he, as the Forerunner in this way, was already 
passing through; viz., the consecration and then the despising 
of his earthly existence, as compared with the 
spirit life and heavenly glory promised. 

It is to their great disadvantage that Christian people 
so generally fail to discern that there are to be several 
different classes of saved ones— the overcomers, the 
great company and the restitution class. The benevolently 
disposed of those seeking to walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus, in earthly self-denials and sacrifices, and in 
despising the present life in comparison with the future 
one promised, are robbed of much of their joy and peace 
and consolation by the thought that only such footstep-followers 
can ever be with the Lord and honored by the 
Father; for they realize that such servants constitute a 
"little flock" indeed. The effect of their ignorance of 



the divine plan is, with many, a hardening of heart in 
an attempt to be more like what they understand God 
to be, as expressed in what they believe to be his plan 
of eternal torment for all except the little flock. Others, 
on the other hand, cultivating their benevolence, refuse 
to believe that the way to this association with Jesus 
and the divine glorification is so narrow— they widen 
it more and more to take in their friends, their families, 
their neighbors, and as many as possible of the 
heathen; and thus, unconsciously perhaps, gradually 
but surely they lower the standard of true discipleship, 
not only for others but also for themselves: they become 
more and more satisfied with outward forms and 
ceremonies and platitudes and moralities, and come 
more and more to consider that their former views were 
incorrect— when they supposed, in harmony with our 
Lord's words, that all who would be with him and be 
honored of the Father, must take up his cross and follow 
in his footsteps. 

The light of this harvest-time now shining upon 
the divine Word and plan makes clear to us, not only 
the height of the calling of the "elect" Church to joint-heirship 
with her Lord in his glory, but also the reality 
of the fact that all who would share that glory in the 
future, must suffer with him in the present life— must 
be crucified to sin and to self and to the world; must 
rise to newness of life in Christ Jesus reckonedly now, 
actually, if faithful, in the first resurrection. But this 
harvest light makes clear to us also that the class now 
called, now intended of the Father to be joint-sacrificers 
with his son and joint-heirs with him of his glory, is 
altogether but a small fraction of the human family, 
and that the others who receive not this high calling 
are to be otherwise blessed in due time under the Millennial 
Kingdom, by the glorified Jesus and his glorified 
Church and Bride. 

Those who have this light and appreciate it are saved 
from the discouragements common to others. They can 
see the reasonableness of making the way to so high a 
station as that to which they are called a very narrow 
one, which will admit at its opening only those who 
are justified through faith in Christ and who are desirous 
of pleasing and serving God, and which, at its 
furthest end, will admit to glory only those who have 
passed faithfully through the experiences of this time, 
and are found in heart and character copies of God's 
dear Son.— Rom. 8:29. 

"Now is my soul troubled"— my feelings are turbulent; 
I am in a commotion. Shall I pray, Father 
deliver me from this hour? Shall I not, on the contrary, 
remember that for this very cause I am come to 
this hour, that I might endure, and that willingly, 
rather than ask to be delivered? I might ask the Father 
for a certain kind of deliverance which would not invalidate 
the engagement which I made, that I would 
give my life in obedience to his will. I might ask him 



to permit some calamity to befall me which would result 

in my death and thus save me from the peculiarly 

trying and ignominious conditions incident to my apprehension 

and execution as a criminal— as the worst 

kind of a criminal, a blasphemer against my Heavenly 

Father. Such a deviation would seem to me not an 

unreasonable concession for one who has shown his 

faithfulness to the Father's will in all things. And yet 

R2758 : page 13 

I will not ask even this concession. Rather, I will 
submit my will to the Father's will most absolutely, 
and carry out to the very jot and tittle the spirit as well 
as the letter of my covenant. Let the Father's will be 
done in every particular; it must be the wisest and 
best, else it would not be his plan. It is for this very 
purpose that I came to this hour, that I might manifest, 
demonstrate, to the Father my devotion, my most 
implicit obedience to his will. Proceed, Father! Glorify 
thine own name and in thine own way, at whatever 
the cost to me! 

Then a voice was heard, a voice which some understood 
and which others misunderstood, as is always 
the case with the voice of God. The world heareth no 
message; believers hear the message partially; but the 
begotten sons, in perfect accord with the Father, hear 
and understand fully. No doubt our Lord received a 

R2759 : page 13 

blessing through this message from the Father, and yet 
he assures us that it was not specially sent for him, but 
rather as a demonstration for the benefit of the disciples 
—that they might note that God attested his teachings. 
God does not today speak to his people by such 
an audible voice; but he speaks none the less forcibly 
to us— through his Word and through his providences. 
Yet now, as then, some hear and appreciate more than 
others. Some, who have the word of God in their 
hands appreciate it only as another book, and likewise 
discern not God's providences in the affairs of his people. 
Others see in the Lord's Word a message, a good message, 
and reverence the book and see in his providences 
something of the divine care and provision in connection 
with the body of Christ. But only the spirit-begotten 
sons, the members of the body of Christ, today, like the 
Head eighteen hundred years ago, hear the Father's 
Word, with distinctness and clearness and understanding. 
These also note divine providences, and are enabled 
to rejoice in them, and to realize that all things are 
working together for good to them because they love 
God, and have been called according to his purpose, and 
are in the way of responding to that call, seeking to 
make their calling and their election sure. 



THE PRINCE OF THIS WORLD. 



When our Lord said, "Now is the judgment of this 
world,— now shall the prince of this world be cast out," 
he evidently meant by now the same as in his previous 
expression, "The hour is come." But a little space of 
time now intervened until this would be accomplished. 
The judgment of this world, so to speak, was in the balance 
and would speedily be decided. The first trial 
took place in Eden, father Adam being the one who 
was on trial, and the world of mankind, still in his 
loins, was in a certain sense on trial, in the balance, 
with him. That trial, as we know, resulted in disaster 
to Adam and all his posterity. "By one man's disobedience 
sin entered into the world, and death as a 
result of sin, and so death passed upon all men for all 
[through inherited weaknesses] are sinners." (Rom. 5:12.) 
That judgment (trial and sentence) of the world 
was unto death; and Adamic death had reigned up to 
the time that our Lord spoke, for 4161 years. But 
now under divine providence, under the grace of God, 
a substitute or ransom had been found, acceptable to 
God, and willing to give his life a ransom for Adam and 
his race. This one was now on trial, and the fate of the 
whole world was in the balance and depended upon his 
victory. Hence, as our Lord expressed it, now the world's 
krisis, or trial, was at its climax, and his decision to be 
faithful to the Father's will, and to despise the present 
life in obedience to that will, determined that trial 
favorably to the world; for the Apostle declares that as 
the world's condemnation was unto death through 
Adam, so the world's justification is unto life through 
Christ— that so far as the divine law was concerned 
Jesus paid the full penalty for the whole world, and 
hence will have both the right and the opportunity, not 
only to rescue mankind from the tomb by an awakening, 
but also to rescue fully and completely so many as will 
accept the favor, by raising them up fully out of sin 
and death to perfection and harmony with God during 
and at the close of the Millennial age.— Rom. 5:18,19. 

Our Lord's other statement is quite in accord with 
this: "Now shall the prince of this world be cast out." 
That is to say, the trial now in progress in my own person 
will result not only in a reversal and cancellation 
of the divine sentence of mankind unto death, but it 
will also result in the overthrow of the present rule of 
evil in the hands of Satan, the prince of this world. He 
shall be cast out; he shall be chained for the period of 
my Millennial reign, and shall subsequently be destroyed. 
Since the whole matter of the world's judgment 
and the removal of its present captor through sin 
was dependent upon our Lord's victory, it was quite 
proper that he should date all those results from that 
"hour," notwithstanding the fact that it would be centuries 



before these things would be accomplished;— the 

binding of Satan, the release of mankind from the 

Adamic sentence through the instrumentalities of the 

Millennial Kingdom (Christ and the glorified Church), 

into the glorious liberty (from these things) which 

belongs to all sons of God,— whatever their plane of 

being. Not that we are to suppose that all men will 

avail themselves of these heavenly mercies and privileges, 

but that all are to have a full opportunity to do 

so; so that whosoever will die the Second Death will 

die for his own sins and not through inherited imperfections 

—not because the fathers ate the sour grape of 

sin.-Jer. 31:29,30; 1 John 5:16. 

WHEN CHRIST WILL DRAW ALL MEN. 



The statement of the next verse is in absolute accord 
with this: "I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men 
unto [toward] me." While, as the narrator records, 
these words signified by what manner of death Jesus 
should die— lifted up on the cross— nevertheless, they 
meant more than this. They meant, also, If I shall 
faithfully give my life according to my covenant, and 
shall receive of the Heavenly Father the high exaltation 
or lifting up which he has promised, that exaltation will 
bring with it the power to bless all the families of the 
earth; first, according to the Father's will and prearrangement, 

R2759 : page 14 

he himself will draw unto me a Church or 

Bride; I will not draw these, but the Father: "No man 

can come unto me [in the present time, in the narrow 

way] except the Father which sent me draw him, and I 

will raise him up [exalt him] at the last day"— the Millennial 

day, "early in the morning" of that day.— 

John 6:44; Psa. 46:5. 

And when these shall have been thus exalted as 
members of my body, raised up as sharers with me in 
the first resurrection, then I will begin my drawing work, 
which will not be confined to a special class, a Royal 
Priesthood, like the Father's drawing. Mine will be a 
general drawing: I will draw all men; it will be a universal 
opportunity to come unto me and receive from 
me, as the Father's representative, full remission of sins 
that are past, and such instructions in righteousness, 
such chastisements, such experiences, such judgments, 
as will tend to lift them up, up, up, to the glorious condition 
of human perfection from which all fell through 
Adam's transgression, and the right to restore to which 
I gained for them by not counting my earthly life precious 
unto me, but instead by despising it, that I might 
redeem men and gain this high heavenly condition in 
which, according to the divine arrangement, I and my 



servants who will be with me, and whom the Father 
will honor also, and whom I will call my Bride and 
brethren, and joint-heirs, shall bless all the families of 
the earth.-Rev. 22:17; Rom. 8:17; Gal. 3:16,29. 



R2755 : page 14 

"WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST?" 

--MATT. 22:34-46.-JAN. 27.- 

OUR LORD'S public teaching evidently ended 

with the Tuesday prior to his death, and with 

the teachings of that day our lesson has to do. The 

incidents of the two days preceding tended to bring 

matters to a climax: the leaders realized that the new 

Teacher was undermining their influence with the people. 

They considered him a false claimant to the Messiahship, 

yet could not deny his purity of life, the high 

standard of his teaching, and his wisdom. Now they 

saw him boldly teaching in the Temple day after day, 

and altho his teachings were in parabolic form their 

significance was undoubtedly recognized by many of the 

people. This very morning he had given three forceful 

parables, which, if received by many, would correspondingly 

weaken the influence of those who "sat in 

Moses' seat," the doctors of the Law and the Pharisees. 

One of these parables represented God as a father, 
and two classes in Israel as sons: the one avowing his 
obedience to the Father's will, nevertheless was disobedient, 
and represented the Scribes and Pharisees; 
the other son, who, refusing to do the Father's will, but 
subsequently obeying it, got the Father's blessing and 
approval, represented the class of publicans and sinners 
who were now flocking to Jesus and becoming interested 
and seeking to do the divine will, and who were 
accepted of the Father, notwithstanding that previously 
they had shirked and even publicly denied their 
allegiance. 

R2756 : page 14 

The second parable represented Israel as the Lord's 
vineyard, and the Pharisees and doctors of the Law as 
the husbandmen, whose duty it was to care for the vineyard, 
that it should bring forth much fruit to the owner; 
but who appropriated the fruits to themselves— seeking 
honor one of another and not God's glory. The result 
the parable showed to be the complete overthrow of 
those husbandmen, and the giving of the vineyard into 
the care of others— the overthrow of the Jewish system 
or polity, and the establishment of a new order of things 
through other servants— our Lord Jesus and his apostles, 
who did not seek honors to themselves, but sought 



the glory of God and the welfare of his vineyard. 

The third parable, the marriage of the king's son, 
pressed home the truth still more strongly, indicating 
that Christ was the King's Son, and that the heavenly 
Father had sent forth the invitation to the wedding-feast 
first to the officials of the Jews, as the representatives 
of that people, the Doctors of the Law, the Pharisees, 
etc., and upon their refusal he found others to 
take their place at the feast, which was not at all 
interrupted. 

A consultation of the leading Jews showed that 
they were in accord in thinking that this Teacher must 
be interrupted in some manner; otherwise his influence 
would be too great; but the question was, who could 
meet him in argument? Who would confute and refute 
his propositions, and thus break his influence with the 
people? The counsellors were of different factions, quite 
opposed to each other, but they were drawn together 
by mutual interest in their opposition to Jesus. And 
thus it ever is with error; the most contrary theorists 
are ready to cooperate with each other in opposition to 
the truth. Nevertheless, truth is mighty and shall ultimately 
prevail against all its opponents; not always 
so quickly, however, as in the case before us, when the 
Truth himself, with superhuman wisdom, confounded 
and overthrew the machinations of error. 

Apparently the religious leaders, after conferring, 
decided that they would attempt to confuse the Lord 
and confound his teachings, and thus make a division 
amongst the people, getting some of them against him. 
First came the Herodians, who were not Jews at all, 
but, like Herod, Ishmaelites— sons of Abraham, through 
Hagar, as the Jews were his sons through Sarah. The 
Herodians, we may presume, were not very religious, 
but in considerable measure politicians; nevertheless, 
the desire to break the influence of Jesus was sufficient 
to unite with these Ishmaelites the Pharisees, who 
claimed to be the most strict and holy of the Jews. 
They had thought of a method of entrapping the Lord, 
which they felt sure would be a success. It was a simple 
method: they would ask him a question respecting 
taxation in which all the people were interested, high 
and low, rich and poor, publicans and Pharisees. They 
felt sure that in answering this question he would either 
lay himself open to the charge of teaching sedition, and 
therefore himself liable to arrest as an opponent of 
Herod and of Caesar, or by approving the taxes they 
esteemed that he would alienate from himself many of 
the Jews who were now regarding him favorably. Hence 
their question: "Is it lawful to pay tribute [taxes] to 
Caesar or not?" 

It would scarcely be right to say that our Lord 

R2756 : page 15 

avoided their question. Rather, we would say that he 



gave it a much broader and more comprehensive answer 

than they or anyone else would have supposed possible. 

He said, in the hearing of the people, "Why 

tempt ye me?" thus in a word showing that he perceived 

the real animus of the question, that it was an 

endeavor on their part to entangle him. Then he asked 

for a coin of the kind generally used for taxes, and having 

their assent to the authority which issued it, he 

said, "Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, 

and to God the things which are God's." What a lesson 

in these words! How clearly they indicate that 

God's people are to be subject to the powers that be, 

and to wait for God's Kingdom, rather than to attempt 

opposition, insurrection, conflict with the laws of earthly 

authorities! 

In this respect our Lord's words are a lesson to his 
people today, to the effect that they should keep their 
religious affairs, which are of God and toward God, 
separate and distinct from worldly politics, which are 
of the Gentiles, during this period of the "Times of the 
Gentiles." "Ye are not of this world, even as I am 
not of this world." On the other hand, the Lord's 
people are to remember that, as originally created, man 
bore God's image stamped upon his very nature; and 
the persons addressed should have remembered also 
that God's superscription was upon them, that he had 
accepted them as his people,— Israel. The thought is 
that the heart, the life, the affections, belong to God, 
and should be rendered to him, and this being done the 
rendering of a little tribute-money to some earthly 
prince would be of comparative insignificance, and the 
will of God recognized in the heart would cause all 
things to work together for their good. 

The questioners found themselves answered in a 
manner they had never dreamed of; they were put to 
silence; they could take no exceptions to such an answer. 
It had lifted their quibble to a plane of thought 
which they must confess was far higher than had ever 
entered into their minds, and had settled it effectually. 

Next came the Sadducees, no doubt boastfully 
saying, We alone are competent to deal with this man, 
and to show up his faults, tho at the same time we will 
be showing up the errors and faults of you Pharisees 
respecting a future life through a resurrection. The 
Sadducees were what we might term the Agnostics or 
Rationalists of that time. They denied that there were 
any spirit beings, and denied a future life for mankind, 
claiming that there would be no resurrection of the dead, 
—that faith in a resurrection was not warranted by any 
satisfactory Scriptures, and that reason also repudiated 
the thought. 

By their question they would endeavor to show 
that Jesus' teachings as a whole were built upon a false 
foundation;— that the present life is everything, instead 
of nothing, and to be sacrificed to attain a future life 
by a better resurrection, as Jesus taught. They put 



what they supposed would be an unanswerable question 
respecting the condition of things in the resurrection 
age. Our Lord's reply was that the difficulty was 
with them, and not with the divine plan; that they had 
failed to understand the Scriptures, and did not properly 
understand the power of God, who is abundantly able 
to arrange for all the exigencies which will arise in the 
perfecting of his own gracious plans and promises. 
Then, going beyond this answer to their question, our 
Lord demonstrated to them that the resurrection is 
taught in the Old Testament Scriptures— not in so many 
words, but indirectly— that God's language with reference 
to the patriarchs implies that they are not annihilated, 
—implies that they are to be resurrected, to live 
again, because God would not use such language as he 
did use respecting beings who had passed totally out 
of existence, and were never to be in existence again. 
The answer was a complete one, as the first verse of 
our lesson shows. 

But our Lord's opponents still hoped that they 
might find some one capable of vanquishing in argument 
him who "spake as never man spake." And so 
we read that when the Pharisees heard that he had 
"muzzled the Sadducees" they were gathered together. 
Their disappointment at not seeing Jesus confounded by 
the Sadducees was off-set by their pleasure in having 
their Sadducee opponents thus effectually silenced. 
Then one of the Pharisees, who was a Doctor of the Law, 
a scribe, bethought him that he would test our Lord 
with a theological question much discussed amongst the 
Jewish rabbis; a question upon which they were very 
generally divided. He would at least get this great 
Teacher confused and show the people that, while the 
Scribes had such contentions amongst themselves respecting 
the Law, this Teacher also, when treating theological 
subjects, would be confused. Altho it is said that 
he propounded the question temptingly, this does not 
necessarily mean that this scribe was dishonest or in 
affiliation with others of the rulers who were conspiring 
merely to entrap Jesus; for our Lord himself testifies of 
him that he was "not far from the Kingdom of God." 
-Mark 12:34. 

His question was, Which one of the Ten Commandments 
is the most important, the greatest? Our Lord's 
answer was most direct. He divided the Law into two 
parts, as on the two tables of stone; the one part relating 
to God and man's obligations to his Creator; and the second 
part relating to man's responsibilities toward his 
fellow-men. Man's duty to God our Lord placed as 
supreme, yet the other as linked with it and necessary to 
perfect harmony with God. The force of our Lord's 
words is found in the fact that they are mainly a quotation 
from the Jewish Law.— Deut. 6:4,5. 

Matthew's account does not include all the words 
which our Lord spoke, as recorded by Mark, beginning, 
"Hear, O Israel! The Lord [Jehovah] our God is one 



Lord [Jehovah]." This declaration the Jews were in 
the habit of calling, "The Shama," because the first 
word in the sentence in Hebrew is Shama, translated in 
English, "Hear." This Shama declaration was considered 
a sacred one amongst the Jews and was enclosed in 
their phylacteries, repeated in their prayers, etc. The 
Scribe, therefore, could have not the slightest objection 
to our Lord's answer: it was conclusive, and, as recorded 
by Mark, he acknowledged the truth saying, 
"Well, Master, thou hast said the truth, for there is one 
God, and there is no other but he; and to love him with 
all the heart and with all the understanding and with 
all the soul [being] and with all the strength, and to 
love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole 
burnt offerings and sacrifices."— Mark 12:32-34. See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. V., Chap. 2. 

R2757 : page 16 

No wonder, then, the inspired Apostle declares that 
"Love is the fulfilling of the Law!" We can readily 
see that only in proportion as love is in the heart can 
the divine law be fulfilled by any. This does not interfere 
with the Scriptural declaration that "the righteousness 
of the Law is fulfilled in us, who walk not 
after the flesh but after the spirit." The reason why 
the Jews could not keep the Law was that they did 
not have perfect love in their hearts, and the same difficulty 
would stand in the way of us who are of the 
New Covenant, were it not that our Covenant makes 
for us the favorable arrangement through the precious 
blood of Christ, that our intentions as new 
creatures are accepted of God as instead of our natural 
hearts. Those who have entered into covenant relationship 
with God through Christ, to follow in the footsteps 
of Jesus, are walking "after the spirit," following after 
love, even tho they be not able to walk up to the spirit 
—up to the full standard of love in every thought and 
word. Their efforts in this direction are accepted as 
tho they were perfect, and day by day, week by week, 
and year by year, under the Lord's instruction and 
leading by his Word, and providence, they are making 
progress in this good way— learning more and more 
what love is, as they see it exhibited in the Lord's 
Word and plan and character, and seeking and attaining 
more and more to the likeness of God's dear Son, 
whose perfect love was a copy of the Father's. 

As shown elsewhere, it is this "mark" of perfect 
Love, which must be attained in the heart, so that our 
wills will be fully in accord with it (however imperfect 
our expression of those wills in words and deeds, by 
reason of imperfections of the flesh). And to grow in 
this grace of love to God necessarily implies a growth 
also in love toward mankind; and especially toward 
those who are in sympathy and harmony with righteousness. 
(1 John 4:8,20,21; 5:1). Truly the divine 



Law is grandly beautiful to those who see it; and none 

can see it fully except as he has gradually come to appreciate 

its lengths and breadths and heights and depths. 

And each additional step of knowledge and appreciation 

must be accompanied by efforts toward obedience 

in the practice of love toward God and fellow-men, 

otherwise progress is impossible. Our Lord's declaration 

is that all of the teachings of the Law, as well as 

all the teachings of the prophets, are in harmony with, 

and made dependent upon this Law;— that God's promises 

are not intended for any others than those who are 

in heart-accord with his Law, and if in heart-accord 

they will desire and endeavor to be good and do good 

in every sense of the word, as far and as rapidly as 

possible. 

Seeing the number of Pharisees in his audience, 
gathered by the question before mentioned, our Lord 
considered this a favorable opportunity to turn the 
tables, and to ask them a question— not that he was 
endeavoring to trap them as they had been endeavoring 
to do with him; but because there is no better method 
of presenting a truth strikingly to the attention of a person 
than through a wisely directed question. He saw 
that the difficulty of the Pharisees in respect to himself 
was, (1) that as a man he did not have the outward 
evidences of ability to establish himself as the King 
of Israel, the Messiah— he lacked wealth and soldiers 
and influence; and he lacked also that fierceness of disposition 
and haughty domineering manner recognized 
as the usual accompaniments of successful generals. 
(2) Their chief objection to him was, as they would 
put it, that he was bolstering up the weaknesses of his 
earthly conditions by claiming that he himself was of a 
heavenly origin, and that somehow or other the establishment 
of his Kingdom would be by spirit-power. 

When our Lord asked the question, "What think 
ye of Messiah? Of what family should he be expected?" 
he well knew what the answer would be;— that they 
would acknowledge that they were expecting Messiah 
to be of the tribe and family of David: and no doubt 
the Pharisees, while answering this question, expected 
that the next question would be, Do you not acknowledge 
that I am of the tribe and family of David, etc.? 
But our Lord desired to bring out another point. His 
earthly genealogy they knew, or could easily prove: 
he wished to show that the Scriptures taught that Messiah 
must be something more than the son of David, 
that he must be both the Son of David and Lord of 
David. Hence, when they answered that Messiah would 
be the Son of David, he enquired, What then is David's 
meaning when he makes use of the expression, "The 
Lord [Jehovah] said unto my Lord [adon, master], Sit 
thou at my right hand [associated with me in the 
Kingdom, highest in my favor]"? (Psa. 110:1.) The 
Pharisees had not studied the Scriptures sufficiently, 
else they would have seen this feature before, that 



Messiah was to be not only the son, or offspring of David, 
but also greater than David, the Root of David. No 
wonder they were unable to answer; there was nothing 
for them to say; the matter thoroughly upheld our 
Lord's claim that Messiah must have a divine origin, 
divine authority, and be backed by divine power in 
whatever he would do. 

It should be noticed in this connection that both 
this quotation from the Psalms and the previous quotation 
from Deuteronomy by our Lord, are against the 
Trinitarian view of several persons in divine power, 
"equal in power and glory." They are in full accord, 
however, with the Scriptural teachings of a heart-oneness 
between the Father and the Son, and the high origin 
as well as the high exaltation of the Son,— "that all men 
should honor the Son even as they honor the Father;" 
yet nevertheless keep the two distinctly separate, as our 
Lord did in his teachings. See "The At-one-ment Between 
God and Man," Chaps. 2 and 6. 

"From that time forth no man durst ask him any 
question." They were afraid to question him further 
in the sense of endeavoring to entrap him, having learned 
that he always got the advantage; the answers only resulted 
in greater honor to Jesus and the confusion of 
those who sought to entrap him. And so it is sometimes 
with the Lord's people today when armed with 
the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; it is 
so sharp that their adversaries stand in fear of it. And 
yet this sword should be always used as our Master 
used it, not in bitterness nor in wrath, nor with sarcasm; 
but in meekness in gentleness and patience and love, 
"In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, 
if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging 
of the truth, and that they may recover 
themselves out of the snare of the devil."— 2 Tim. 2:25. 


