Vol. XXXLX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MARCH 1, 1918 


No. 


'This do 


in remembrance of me. 


IN MEMORY OF OUR KING 

For ax oft a* ye eat this bread, and drink this cwp t ye do show the Lord's death till he 
come" — 1 Corinthians 11:25,26. 


The truly consecrated Christian, walking in the light of 
present truth, looks forward with the keenest interest to the 
approaching Memorial celebration. This Passover season holds 
a peculiar interest, because it may mark the last for the 
church on earth and may mark the drinking of the wine anew 
with the Lord in glory. Sint:e Pentecost the followers of the 
Lord have been waiting with joyful expectancy for his return 
ns the King of glory. For many years the best-informed of his 
followers have known that he is present and that he will soon 
be fully revealed to all who are his. Soon ho will take unto 
himself his completed bride and reign in glory. It was his expressed
 desire that the bride class should have him in memory 
until he call for her. Whether the coming Memorial will be the 
last on earth, we do not. of course, know; but we do know that 
we are one year nearer the full consummation of our hopes. If 
it please the Lord to have us celebrate this Memorial other 
years, then we shall do so gladly. If it please him to take all 
the members of the church home this year, then our joy will be 
full and we shall have pleasures for evermore. His will, not 
ours, be done. Glad we are to assemble together again to remind 
each other of that wonderful event that transpired so many 
centuries past. 

When a man of the world has risen to fame, he desires to 
leave a monument, so that future generations may know of his 
greatness. Of course there is selfishness in this desire. Jesus 
of Nazareth, the greatest man that lived on earth, when he 
approached the time of his crucifixion, prepared a monument 
that will endure forever. Unselfishly ho acted in this regard, 
as he did in all others. He was about to perform the greatest 
work of the ages— to make himself an offering for sin on 
bnhaJf of the human rare. T9iis Memorial wa.s a means whereby 
his followers should remember him until they should see him 
again. He knew that the fully consecrated would appreciate 
this more than anything e se. He knew that the world would 
not appreciate it; and therefore his death would be sweetly 
kept in the memory of those who had received the benefit of 
his great ransom-sacrifice. None but the truly consecrated 
have ever appreciated the Lord's death and its meaning. The 
time is near at hand, however, when even the world will begin 
to understand why he suffered and why he died. The Lord 
Jesus knew that the time from Pentecost until his kingdom is 
established would lx> occupied in the selection of his bride 
and he desired that she should keep fresh in mind the importance
 of the great sin-ofTuring and likewise approbate 
tier privilege- of participating in his sufferings, in order 
that she might reign with him in glory, for the regeneration 
and reconstruction of the world. 

Many of the members of the bride class are already with 
the Lord. Those remaining this side are eager to be with, 
him, yet biding his own good time. It is reasonable, then, 
that as we approach each Memorial season, as we come nearer 
to the time of seeing our great King and Lord, our hearts are 
thrilled with the prospect that this is perhaps the last this 
side the vail and that soon we may see him face to face. 
"LOUD, IS IT I?" 

When Jesus was about to take leave of his disciples, his 
associates for three and a half years, he marked that they 
were troubled, and said: "Let not your heart be troubled. 
.... I go to prepare a place for you; and if I go and prepare
 a place for you. I will come again and receive you unto 
myself, that where I am, there ye may be also." And now 
the day draws near when this sweet promise from the Master's 
lips will have complete fulfilment. Is it any wonder, then, 
that the truly eon^e<T.ited are hx>king forward with great 
desire to the approaching Memorial and to that which may 
follow after! 

It was after Jesns and his disciples had eaten the Passover 
according to the Jewish Law, that he instituted the Memorial 
Supper as a reminder of his death. Judas was present at that 
time and was given a sop and went out from the others before
 the supper was ended, fully bent upon betraying the 
Master; and this he did. This incident may represent the 
fact that in the close of this age, and just before the bride is 
completed, the sop of truth will become so strong that it shall 
drive forth from the company and communion of the faithful 
all those who do not have a full and proper appreciation of 
the blood of Jesus, shed by the Lamb of God for the taking 
away of the sin of the world. It -'m not for anyone ihi« «hlr. tin* 
vail to judge who may be of that class. It is sufficient that 
each one carefully examine himself or herself, saying, "Is it 
I?" Truly this is a time for careful self-examination, for seeing
 to it that we are pure in heart toward all. 


That we may more fully appreciate the importance of 
that great event which transpired at Calvary, we do well to 
remind ourselves again of the events that took place just 
preceding that time. 

THE OBIGINAL PASSOVER 

The Hebrew year begins on the day of the first new moon 
nearest the Spring equinox. The Hebrew Passover marked a 
wonderful event in Jewish history and foreshadowed the death 
of the great Ransomer of humankind. St. Paul tells us that 
the things pertaining to the Law were shadows of greater 
things to come. (Colossians 2:17; Hebrews 10:1) Looking, 
then, from the type to the antitype, we find much food for 
thought. The Israelites had been held in bondage to the 
Egyptians for years. From time to time their tasks were increased
 and their burdens made grievous to be borne. God 
sent Moses to deliver them and sent Aaron with him as his 
mouthpiece. They appeared before Pharaoh and requested 
him to permit the children of Israel to leave Egypt. This 
Pharaoh denied. God sent punishment upon him for refusing 
to let them go. Time and time again he promised to let 
them depart from Egypt; time and time again he broke his 
promise. 

Nine times had the Lord sent plagues upon the Egyptians 
and as many times, at the instance of Moses, had relieved 
Pharaoh and his people therefrom. Then the tenth plague was 
sent — the death of the first-born. Pharaoh was devoted to his 
son, his first-born ; and the smiting of him would touch Pharaoh
's heart as nothing else could do. God informed Moses 
that at midnight of the fourteenth of Nisan the death messenger
 of the Lord would pass through Egypt and every firstborn
 of every family should die. He then directed Moses to 
make provision for the saving of the first-born of Israel. The 
arrangement was that each family or household should, on the 
tenth day of Nisan, take a lamb into the house ; that the lamb 
should be a male of the first year and without blemish; that \x> 
should be kept in the house" until the fourteenth day of the 
same month, when it should be killed and the blood sprinkled 
upon the door-posts and upon the lintel; that the lamb should 
then be roasted with fire ; that no bones of it should be broken ; 
that it should be eaten with unleavened bread and bitter herbs, 
and that those eating it should do so with their loins girded, 
their shoes on their feet and their staves in hand, and that 
they should eat with baste ; that when the messenger of the 
Lord should pass through Egypt the first-born of each household
 would be spared where the blood of the lamb appeared on 
the door. Moses carried out these instructions and the faithful 
Jews acted upon his advice. They killed the lamb, sprinkled 
its blood as directed and, in due season, ate it. At midnight 
of the fourteenth of Nisan, all the first-born of Egypt died, 
including Pharaoh's beloved son. Great consternation followed 
and Pharaoh immediately summoned Moses and Aaron. He 
now not only promised that they should go, but thrust them 
out, and Moses led the children of Israel to the Red Sea, across 
it and on to Mount Sinai. 

TYPE AND ANTITYPE 

In this picture the first-born represent the church of the 
first born whoso names are written in heaven. These are the 
heirs of the exceeding great and precious promises of Jehovah
. Like the first-born in Egypt, they are subject to the 
second death, but escape from it by complying with the Lord's 
fixed rules. All who during the Gospel age come under the 
protection of the blood of Jesus, and there remain, are safe 
from this great penalty. 

In this picture the lamb represented Jesus, slain for the 
cancellation of the Bin of mankind. (John 1:29) A door is 
a place of entrance. Hence the blood sprinkled upon the doorposts
 of the Israelitish homes signifies the fact that the way 
to safety and life is through faith in the blood of Jesus, who 
declared: "I am the door." The Passover night pictured the 
Gospel age when sin and darkness prevail, and during which 
time the bride of Christ is gathered out from mankind. And 
now we see this time of suffering drawing to an end and 
amidst a time of great confusion. Loth political and ecclesiastical
 ; and soon the sufferings of the Christ will end. 

No animal could more fitly represent the lowly Nazarene 
than could the lamb. It is noted for its defenselessness and 
its innocence. The antitypieal Lamb, tin- Man Jesus, true to 
the picture, was "holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from 
sinners." (Hebrews 7:^6) "A lamb without blemish and 
without spot, who verily was foreordained before the foundation
 of the ^vorld, but was manifested in the last times." "He 


(67-68) 


T6218] 


March 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(69 f>6} 


was brought as a lamb to the slaughter; and as a sheep before 
her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth." 

Born under the Law, Jesus must fulfil its terms; and since 
the Passover was a part of the Law arrangement, he must 
eat it at the appointed time; viz., the fourteenth of Nisan. 
As he was the great antitypieal Lamb* now to be slain, be must 
eat this Passover just preceding his death. It must be apparent
 to all that it would be inappropriate to celebrate the 
Lord's death more than once a year, and that the time of this 
celebration should, as nearly as possible, correspond with the 
date at which he instituted the Memorial. 

THE PURPOSE OF THE MEMORIAL 

After eating the Passover Supper, Jesus instituted the 
Memorial. This he did that his followers might remember 
him until he come again. "And as they were eating, Jesus 
took bread and blessed it and brake it, and gave it to his 
disciples and said, Take, eat; this is my body." That is to 
say, the bread represented his flesh, his humanity, which was 
broken on behalf of mankind. "And he took the cup and 
gave thanks and gave it to them, saying, All ye drink of it; 
for this is my blood of the new covenant which is shed for the 
remission of sins." The cup there represented the pouring out 
of his life blood as the great sacrifice on behalf of all who 
s-hall accept the benefits of the ransom. 

It was the will of God that the members of the bride of 
Christ should fill up that which is behind of the sufferings of 
Christ Jesus. Hence those who will compose the bride are 
privileged to suffer with him. The celebration of the Memorial
 once each year not only reminds the celebraters of the 
death of their great Master, but also brings vividly to mind 
that each member of the body has covenanted to be dead with 
him. Clearly the Apostle expresses this thought when he says: 
"The cup of blessing for which we bless God, is it not the 
participation of the blood of the Anointed One; the loaf which 
we break, is it not the participation of the body of the Anointed
 One; because there is one loaf, we the many are one 
body, for we all partake of the one loaf," — 1 Cor. 10:16, 17, 
Diaglott. 

Coming, then, to the celebration this year, let each one have 
in mind the privilege of suffering with Christ Jesus. Whatever 
may be our experiences, however joyful or however trying, all 
shall come to us by the Lord's permission and as a great favor. 
"For unto you it "is given in behalf of Christ not only to believe
 on him, but also to saifTer for his sake." (PHiilippians 
1:29) We know not what awaits us; but we do know that all 
who are abiding in the shadow of God's wing are safe and 
that no evil shall befall the new creature in Christ. Whatever 
anyone may do to us in the way of persecution, it is of the 
utmost importance to see to it that we ourselves do no persecuting
. It is vital to us that we keep a pure heart. We do 
well personally to examine self as we approach the hour of the 
celebration of the Memorial. Let us remember the words of 
Brother Paul, "Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the 
whole lump? Purge out, therefore, the old leaven, that ye 
may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ 
our Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the 
feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice 
and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity." 
Leaven is a symbol of sin and old leaven signifies sins of long 
standing. Malice means ill will, hatred and a wrong condition
 of heart. These should all be put away and each one, 
upon self-examination, see to it that he has clean hands and a 
pure heart. "Let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of 
the flesh and mind, perfecting holiness in the fear of the 
Lord." 

LET US EXAMINE OUBSELVES 

It was jealousy, ill will and malice that led Judas into his 
wrongful course in betraying the Lord to the ecclesiastics of 
that time. Judas knew that the ecclesiastics were anxious, to 
destroy Jesus; hence he betrayed the Master into their hands. 
The civil powers saw the innocence of the Lord, but permitted 
their scruples to be overruled by the clergy and thus falsely 
and without just cause or excuse convicted the Son of Man 


and sent him to an ignominious death. It is not at all improbable
 that the very closing scenes of the Gospel age shall 
witness something of a similar kind. He whose zeal and faithfulness
 and loyalty to the Master brings him to the point of 
persecution because of such faithfulness will be greatly favored
. No one should act foolishly nor put himself in a way 
to be persecuted, but with calmness of mind and sobriety of 
heart should diligently and faithfully represent the Lord, trusting
 him fully as to the results. 

If there be strife among any of the Lord's people (and 
such there is among some of the classes), this is the time 
above all times to cease such strife and to seek diligently to 
establish peace and harmony. It has been the rule that such 
strife is usually caused by the desire of a few to be more 
highly honored than others. And such it was in the Lord's 
time. ''And there' was also strife among them, which one of 
them should be counted the greatest. And he said unto them, 
The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and 
they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors ; 
but ye shall not be so. But he that is greatest among you let 
him be as the younger; and lie that is chief, as he that doth 
serve." If we find that injustice has been heaped upon us, 
that we have not been favored in the cede si a as much as we, 
in our judgment, should have been; if we feel that wo should 
have been more highly honored, let us remember the danger of 
insisting on what we believe are our rights and the great privilege
 of humbly submitting to the Lord's will. No trial could 
come without his permission, and the one which hurts us most 
has probably come to test the faith and love of those involved
. "By love serve one another.'* May we, then, be able 
to see through our trying experiences that all of these things 
are evidences that the Lord is still dealing with us, and may 
we appreciate the privilege of overcoming them and manifesting
 our unselfish love for the brethren and therefore for the 
Lord and his cause by serving in a humble and Moving manner 
in whatsoever place the Lord puts us. Our great desire is and 
should be to see the King of glory. Everything else should 
be made subservient to that. Let us have in mind that the 
eating of the Passover lamb was with bitter herbs and that 
this sharpened the appetite and created a greater desire for 
more of the flesh to remove that bitter taste. This fitly illustrates
 tthat the bitter experiences and trials that come to in. 
if we are properly exercised thereby, cause us to flee to the 
Master that we might partake of more of his merit and his 
loving-kindness. Feeding, then, upon our precious God-given 
promises and upon the prospects of soon seeing the King and 
being with him in glory, will make us forget the bitter trials 
and we shall rejoice with great joy, giving thanks that we 
are permitted to have such trials as make sweeter our joys. 

One may ask: "Shall I decline to partake of this Memorial
 because of some difficulty T have had with a brother?" 
Our answer would be, if possible try to bring about a reconciliation
 by talking over the differences in the spirit of love. 
Effect a reconciliation, if possible; but if not, examine your 
own heart and see to it that there is no bitterness there. If 
you have been wronged, then see that you freely forgive, even 
as the Lord forgives us; and then go and keep the feast. 
All who have made a full consecration to the Lord should 
partake. If some have made a consecration and have not 
symbolized this consecration by water immersion, such should 
be done, if possible, before* partaking. But the mere fact that 
one has not been baptized since making a consecration should 
not preclude him from partaking of the Memorial. 

Let us all have in mind that "the end of all things is 
at hand; be of sober mind and watch unto prayer." How 
glad should be our hearts that we have come to the end of 
this dark night and that soon the light of the Lord shall fill 
the earth! Having in mind our great desire to see our King, 
let us also remember the admonition of the Apostle, "Above 
all things have fervent love among yourselves." Having this 
love, we will cover each other's defects; and nothing enables 
us so much to have this love as looking with expectant joy 
to seeing the Lord and our beloved brethren who have gone 
before. 


DEMONS TO WRECK SOCIETY 


Psychic phenomena are attracting the attention of some of 
the greatest men of the land. These men claim that they are 
able to communicate with the dead. That they receive messages
 from some hidden source cannot be questioned. This 
psychic science is called Immortalism. In truth and fact it 
is deraonism. And these demons, exercising greater power 
over the human mind, will, as the Scriptures foreshow, soon 


wreck all society. It is of great importance that every person 
acquaint himself with the Scriptural teaching upon the subject
. We issue a little book, "What say the Scriptures About 
Spiritism V* that, throws a flood of light upon this occult science
. Everybody should read it. Postpaid, 10c. But if any 
one who desires to read it will send us a post card stating he 
is too poor to purchase, we will mail him a copy free. 


[6219] 


QUALIFICATIONS OF ELDERS 


Some of the ecclesias at recent elections have declined to 
elect anyone to the otfice of elder or deacon until such an 
one answered in the affirmative questions of the following import
: (1) Have you answered the V. D. M. questions and 
have you passed that examination! (2) Are you in harmony 
with the Watch Tower Bible attd Tkact Society and the 
work in which it is engaged? (3) Do you accept "The Finished
 Mystery" as the Seventh Volume of Studies in the 
Scriptures, and are you willing to teach the same? 

Some have raised objection to these questions, insisting 
that they require an additional qualification for one to be an 
elder or 'a deacon, and are therefore contrary to the Scriptures
. In our judgment such contention is without merit. The 
Apostle Paul set forth what are the qualifications of an elder. 
(1 Timothy 3:2-6; Titus 1:6-10) There is nothing in the 
above questions that is in any manner out of harmony with 
the requirements announced by the Apostle. On the contrary, 
they are exactly in harmony with the qualifications there 
named. 

The first question relates particularly to one's knowledge 
of the Truth, such knowledge as would modestly qualify one 
to teach. St. Paul says an elder must be "apt to teach." "In 
addition to the foregoing limitations,, it is required that an 
elder shall be apt to teach; that is to say, he must have ability 
as a teacher, explainer, expounder, of the divine plan, and 
thus be. able to assist the Lord's flock in word and in doctrine." 
(Studies in the Scriptures, Vol. Six, page 249) The V. D. 
M. questions relate to doctrinal matters and are intended to 
indicate the process of determining one's aptness to teach. One 
who is unable to answer them would demonstrate that he did 
not have a sufficiently accurate knowledge of the divine plan 
to teach a class. Any ecclesia must be the judge of who shall 
be its elders and it is clearly within the province of oa^b such 
ecclesia to require them to show that they are qualified and 
are apt to teach, before electing them to office. 

As to the second question: the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society has long been used of the Lord. Clearly it is 
the messenger mentioned in "Revelation 14:18. It has been the 
channel for the dispensing of the harvest message. The various
 ecclesias have long since adopted its publications as helps 
to study the Bible. Any one, therefore, out of harmony with 
the Society would hardly be a proper person to be a leader 
or teacher of an ecclesia which uses the publications of the 
Society as its helps to Bible study. The Apostle is emphatic 
in his statement as to what is the proper relationship between 
class and teacher, declaring that "if any man teach otherwise 
and consent not to sound words, the words of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness," 
such is not a proper teacher and from such the others should 
withdraw. {1 Timothy 6:8-5) A leader of a class who is 
openly opposed to the work in which the Society is engaged 
would tend to cause dissension and trouble, instead of peace 
and harmony. Hence it becomes the reasonable duty of the 
class to know the attitude of its teachers. 

As to the third question: the Society has published and is 
widely distributing "The Finished Mystery" — Volume Seven 
of Studies in tiie Scriptures. There is nothing in it out 
of harmony with the divine plan as revealed. The doctrines 
there taught are wholesome and clearly in harmony with that 
of the Lord Jesus Christ and the other six volumes of Studies 
in the Sckiptukes. It is a part of the work of the Society 
to give this volume a wide distribution, because it is believed 
the duo time has come for the message to be given against 
Babylon. A teacher that is opposed to the Seventh Volume, 


therefore, would be opposed to the Society's work, out of 
harmony with the Society; and, as a leader, such an one 
would breed discontent and trouble, rather than establish harmony
 and peace and development among those of the Lord's 
people who had already expressed themselves as being in harmony
 with such Seventh .Volume. Hence such an one should 
not stand for election to the position of elder. 

This does not mean that such persons who would not answer 
the foregoing questions in the affirmative should be disfellowshiped
. On the contrary, they should be encouraged to study 
the Lord's Word and grow in knowledge and the fruits and 
graces of the Spirit. 

We remember when the Vow was promulgated by Brother 
Russell through the Society, there was some decided opposition
 to it. Brother Russell then held that any one out of 
sympathy with the Vow and the work of the Society in general 
should not be elected as an elder of the class. Concerning this 
subject he said: 

"Question : Is it proper or wise for a Pilgrim en route 
to be entertained by those who are out of sympathy with the 
Vow and with the work of the Society in general, even though 
he be an elder of the classf" 

"Answer: Most decidedly not. Furthermore, the Pilgrim 
should make clear to the class that they had greatly erred in 
selecting such an one for an elder, and should help them to 
rectify the matter as quickly as possible. If the class likes 
the elder who is out of accord with the Society's work, it 
should not make a request for Pilgrim service. Some of the 
Lord's dear sheep are very stupid. Meekness and gentleness 
are commendable, but there are times when they would mourn 
disloyalty to God."— Z. '13-14. 

The above quotation from the pen of Brother Russell puts 
the matter in clear, terse language, about which there can 
be no doubt. It will be noticed especially that he said that 
one who is out of accord with the Society's work should not 
be elected an elder, and a class which would not follow that 
rule should not even request the Society to send Pilgrims. 
The purpose of Brother Russell and the Society clearly was 
and is not to lay burdens upon the brethren, but to point out 
the privilege of the various ecclesias in determining whether 
their elders possess the qualifications, and furthermore emphasizing
 the importance and necessity of working together in 
harmony. By way of illustration: Suppose the general of an 
army should give an order to be executed, the colonel should 
pass it on to his sub -officers and each one would decide to 
execute the order according to his own ideas. The result 
would be disorganization of the worst kind. We recognize the 
Lord Jesus as the great General and Director of the harvest 
work, and his people as workers together with him, some occupying
 one position and some another. Then all who have his 
spirit will desire to work in harmony with him and his approved
 way of putting forth the message. Any one, then, who 
would refuse to answer in the affirmative that he accepts "The 
Finished Mystery" and that he will teach it would thereby 
declare himself out of harmony and opposed to the Society's 
work, and any one opposed to the work of the Society would 
hardly be qualified to be a teacher of a class which by its 
request for Pilgrim visits, or otherwise, had indicated its desire
 to cooperate with the Society. We believe that wi.en the 
dear friends see the principle here involved they will readily 
agree that the questions that some of the ecclesias have adopted 
and required to be answered by those standing for election as 
elders and deacons are entirely right and proper and in full 
harmony with the Scriptures. 


WAIT ON THE LORD 

f Reprint of poem in issue of September, 1882, which please see.] 


JESUS REQUIRES CONFESSION AND LOYALTY 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Good Confessions and Later Trials," published in issue of June 1, 1906, 
which please see.] 


JESUS TRANSFIGURED 

["The first paragraph of this article was reprinted from article <nfith-d, "V\*t Beheld the Glory ; n tiho Ho!v Mount." published
 in issue of April 1, 1898. The last two paragraphs were reprinted from an article entitled, "A Vision of Coming 
Glory," published in issue of July 1, 1900. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "A Vision of the Kingdom," 
published in issue of June 15, 1906. Please see the articles named. J 


JESUS REBUKES SELFISHNESS 

[The first throe and the last four paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Least and Greatest in 
the Kingdom, 3 ' published in issue of July 1, 1900. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Only the Humble Shall 
Share the Kingdom," published in issue of February 1, 1895. Please see the articles named.] 


(69-75) 


[6220] 


RELIGIOUS INTOLERANCE 


On February 12 the public press contained the following 
dispatch from Ottawa, Canada: "The Secretary of State, 
under the press censorship regulations, has issued warrants 
forbidding the possession in Canada of a number of publications
, amongst which is the book published by the International
 Bible Students Association, entitled 'Studies in the 
Scriptures — The Finasrhed Mystery/ generally known as the 
posthumous publication of Pastor Russell. 'The Bible Students
 Monthly/ also published by this Association at its office 
in Brooklyn, New York, is also prohibited circulation in Canada
. The possession of any prohibited books lays the possessor
 open to a fine not exceeding $5,000 and five years in 
prison." 

Winnipeg papers had previously announced that certain 
clergymen had denounced these publications from theiT pulpits 
and stated that the attention of the Attorney General had 
been called to the matter. Later, the Winnipeg Tribune, after 
mentioning the order issued by the public censor, said, "The 
banned publications are alleged to contain seditious and antiwar
 statements. Excerpts from one of the recent issues of 
'The Bible Students Monthly' were denounced from the pulpit 
a few weeks ago by Rev. Charles G. Patterson, Pastor of St. 
Stephen's Church. Afterward Attorney General Johnson sent 
to Rev. Patterson for a copy of the publication. The censor
's order is believed to bo the direct result." 

A large number of the copies of "The Finished Mystery" 
were confiscated; houses were searched and the books taken 
away from the people; and several of our brethren were arrested
. Some have been tried and fined all the way from one 
to five hundred dollars. The sale and distribution of the book 
in Canada has been stopped of course. One of the leading 
lawyers of Canada has delivered a written opinion on the case, 
from which we quote : "There is no doubt that the Secretary 
of State has the power to put any publication under the ban. 
Once he does this, the wisdom of his act and the nature of the 
publication cannot be reviewed in any court. On the contrary, 
the courts must hold that the publication is objectionable. 
This, of course, is exceedingly arbitrary, but it is nevertheless
 the state of the law. To illustrate how absurd it is, I 
mention that the Secretary -of State could put Webster's Dictionary
 or the Bible under the ban, and immediately any one 
found in possession of either would be subject to very severe 
penalties without any recourse to the courts. My suggestion 
to you, in view of the unsatisfactory condition of the law, is 
that a strong publicity campaign be started to secure the rescinding
 of the ban order. To this end petitions, similar to 
the one I drew up for you, should be vigorously circulated. 
Meetings should be held and suitable advertisements inserted 
in magazines having a wide distribution in Canada. This 
should, at a seasonable time, be followed up by an influential 
deputation waiting upon the Government and members of Parliament
 at Ottawa." 

Shortly thereafter, acting upon information from Canada, 
the Army Intelligence Bureau at New York began an investigation
 of the Brooklyn headquarters. The public press announced
 that the headquarters were raided, which is entirely 
untrue. Some one had misrepresented to the authorities that 
our Society is carrying on a German propaganda and retarding
 the draft, which, of course, is also untrue. 

On February 24, the President of the Society delivered 
a public lecture in the city of Los Angeles, California, to 
fully 3,500 people, as many more being turned away. The 
Los Angeles Tribune tihe morning following carried a full-page 
report. This very much aroused the indignation of the clergy 
there. The ministerial associations held a meeting on Monday 
morning and sent its president to the managers of the paper, 
demanding an explanation as to why they would publish so 
much about the lecture. On Thursday following the Army 
Intelligence Bureau of Los Angeles took possession of the 
Los Angeles headquarters, taking away many of the Society's 
publications. Since then, a number of these have been returned
. 

On Monday, March 4, several of our brethren at Scranton, 
Pennsylvania, including Brothers C. J. Woodworth and M. L. 
Herr, were arrested, charged with conspiracy and put under 
bond for their appearance for trial next May. Without a 
doubt, the prosecution of these brethren has been instigated by 
some nominal ecclesiastical adherents. The Bible's terrible 
arraignment of the Papacy, which Brother Woodworth has 
been instrumental in bringing to the attention of many, is 
quite probably the cause of this action against them. 

CONCERNING THE WIBELESS OUTFIT 

Following their wicked course of persecution, it was reported
 in the public press that Government agents had seized 
a wireless apparatus which was erected on the Bethel Home 
and ready for use. The facts are these: Some two or three 


years ago, a wireless outfit was presented to Brother Russell. 
It was erected on the roof to enable some of the younger 
brethren to see if they could learn to operate it. When this 
nation was about to be engaged in war, all wireless instruments 
were required to be dismantled. The one on the Bethel Home 
was taken down and the poles sawed up and used for other 
purposes; and the instrument was carefully packed away in 
the Art Room, where it has been ever since. The apparatus 
consisted of a receiver only, no transmitter, and has not been 
in use for more than two years. When two Army Intelligence 
men were in conversation with a member of the Home, the 
wireless was mentioned. They were taken to the roof and 
shown where it formerly was and then were shown the instrument
 itself, packed away; and by consent the instrument was 
taken away by these gentlemen because we have no use for it. 
There never was a sending instrument at Bethel, hence impossible
 to transmit a message anywhere. 

It seems that the objectionable language of Volume Seven 
is that on pages 248 to 253, inclusive, which is chiefly quoted 
from statements made by Rev. C. E. Jefferson and Rev. John 
Haynes (not Hayes) Holmes. All of this matter was written 
prior to the time that the United States entered the war. 

Upon notice being brought to us that the above mentioned 
pages were objectionable, the Society took immediate steps 
to stop the sale of "The Finished Mystery" until further information
 could be obtained. Our President then, at the instance
 of the Board, appointed a representative to visit the 
Government officials at Washington and ascertain, if possible, 
how the objection could be removed. The Seventh Volume 
— -"The Finished Mystery" — was submitted by Brother Robison
, the Society's representative, to the proper authorities at 
Washington; and he was advised that there was no disposition 
on the part of the Government in interfere with our work in 
general and that if pages 247 to 253, inclusive, were removed, 
there would be no known objection to the volume. 

We immediately sent out a letter to the colporteurs and 
class Secretaries, advising that the pages above mentioned be 
deleted and that the distribution of the volume be proceeded 
with. This was done in many instances, as we are advised, 
and the work went on. Later, on the 14th day of March, the 
Department of Justice at Washington, instructed the District 
Attorneys that a further distribution of "The Finished Mystery
" would be a violation of the Espionage Act. The Department
 of Justice, however, declined to state whether or not 
this violation related only to pages 247 to 253, or to something 
else, and according to the custom of that Department declined
 to render an opinion as to what part of the volume 
does trangress the law. We are having the entire book gone 
over carefully by able counsel in order to be fully advised before
 taking further action. We are convinced that there is 
nothing in the volume at all that in any wise violates the 
Espionage Act; but we believe that the action is inspired by 
other influence which desires to suppress the message with 
reference to the ecclesiastical systems. We are preparing a 
statement to present to the Department of Justice, that our 
side may be heard and hope to be able to advise the friends 
later. 

We suggest that the colporteurs proceed with the sale of 
the other six volumes of Studies in the Scriptures until further
 word from ua, and that every one who can give a public 
address do so ea,eh Sunday, or often er, if possible, using the 
subject, "The World Has Ended — Millions Now Living May 
Never Die." We have a quantity of Pastor Russell's Sermons
 and we advise the colporteurs to push the sale of these 
at this time. Daily the evidences grow stronger that the kingdom
 of heaven is at hand. Let us be faithful in announcing 
it. We are not at all responsible for what is in the Bible. 
There is no book that so strongly arraigns dishonesty, and 
especially with reference to those who claim to be the representatives
 of the Lord. We feel quite sure that no part of 
Volume VII has in any wise interfered with the Government's 
prosecution of the war; but the clergy have sought to make 
it thus appear, in order that they might protect themselves 
from being- exposed before the people. 

NOT AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT 

These clergymen who object to the teachings of the Bible 
concerning themselves being laid bare before the public have 
raised a great deal of dust, and cried loud and long thaft our 
Society is against the Government and that its work is retarding
 the progress of the war. Nothing is further from the 
truth. We are not against the war. We are not against the 
Government in any sense of the word. We recognize the Government
 of the United States as the best government on earth* 
We recognize that the governments, being political and economic
 institutions, have the power and authority, under the 
fundamental law, to declare war and to draft their citizens 


VII— 26 


[6221] 


(77-78) 


(78 79) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


into military service. We have not the slightest disposition to 
interfere with this, nor to speak against it so far as the governments
' power or authority is concerned. We recognize that 
it is the duty of every citizen to obey the laws of the land, 
and the duty of every citizen, who can conscientiously do so, 
to participate in the defense of the country. All should be 
respectful to officers of the law. (Acts 23:5) The law of 
the land recognizes that there are Christian people who cannot
 engage in military service without doing violence to their 
conscience. Hence the Congress of the United States, in 
passing the Selective Draft Act of May 18, 1917, inserted a 
clause providing that certain ones, under certain conditions, 
should not be compelled to engage in combatant military 
service. We hold that the members of our Society come 
within the purvue of this section of the law and are entitled 
to its protection. And none of our members, so far as we 
know, have done more than to claim the benefit of the provisions
 of this Act of Congress. 

For forty years the attention of the people has been called 
to the unrighteous practices of the ecclesiastical systems and 
how they have kept the people in ignorance. In that time the 
clergy- have been called upon repeatedly to explain to the 
people the Scriptures, and they have industriously avoided 
making either answer or explanation. The Lord long ago, 
through his prophet, foretold that this would be their course, 
and that, refusing themselves to answer the people, the clergy 
would attempt to shield themselves behind the civil powers 
and, if possible, induce the latter to prevent a free and uninterrupted
 proclamation of the message of the Lord. The 
Scriptures designate these ecclesiastical systems as Babylon. 


The Lord says: "The mighty men of Babylon [the clergy J 
have forborne to fight; they have remained in their holds 
[shielding themselves behind civil officers] ; their might hath 
failed; they became as women." — Jeremiah 51:30. 

Plainly and clearly, then, our position is: We would not 
do injury to any one, not even the clergy; and certainly not 
to the Government. Our mission is to preach the Gospel of 
Jesus Christ and his kingdom. Jesus taught that when the 
Gospel age ended, present institutions would go to pieces 
and that upon the ruins thereof his kingdom would be established
. He taught his followers to pray, "Thy kingdom come; 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 51 If, then, 
it is disloyal to call attention to the unrighteous ecclesiastical 
systems that have been blinding the peoples of earth for so 
long, it is disloyal to repeat the Lord's prayer. We are convinced
 that all difficulty which has arisen has been local, and 
instigated by those clergymen who could not answer the great 
truths set forth against them in the Bible and who have sought 
to stir up the civil authorities against others who are meekly 
and earnestly preaching the Gospel with malice toward none 
and with love toward all. 

As consecrated Christians, we must, in obedience to the 
Lord, call attention to the great truths he has recorded in the 
Bible and which he has commissioned us to tell others. (Isaiah 
61:1-3; Luke 4:18-21) It is the duty of every one to be 
obedient to the law. The fundamental law guarantees that 
every one shall worship God according to the dictates of his 
own conscience and speak the truth with freedom. There is 
no disposition on the part of any Christian to do violence to 
the laws of the land. 


A WARNING TO THE CHURCH 


What we are about to write is not written with pleasure, 
but from a sense of duty to the church. St. Paul prophetically
 wrote, "For I know this, that after my departing shall 
grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. 
Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse 
things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore watch." 
(Acts 20:29-31} Tfiie words of St. Paul are now having their 
fulfilment. 

The Watch Towek of November 1, MHO, published an 
article from the pen of Brother Eussell, whose words likewise 
seem prophetic and are now having a fulfilment. He quotes 
the Apostle's words above mentioned and shows how they will 
specially apply in the closing days of the church's earthly 
journey. Amongst other thiugs, he said: 

"We have already alluded to the ambitious and selfish spirit 
in the world leading on to anarchy; and we have just pointed 
out how the same selfish, ambitious spirit is leading on to 
anarchy in the church. We foresee a time of trouble for the 
world upon this score, and a time of trouble also for the 
church. The world cannot purge itself of this class; for 
the leaders and the led have the worldly spirit, which is sure 
to wax worse and worse. But not so in the church of Christ. 
Ours is the spirit of the Master, the spirit of loyalty to truth, 
the spirit of the golden rule, the spirit of brotherly love, the 
spirit of liberty and helpfulness, the spirit of fidelity to what 
we believe to be the truth." 

ANABCHY IN THE OHUECH 

The persons hereinafter mentioned participated in the referendum
 vote relating to the Society and its management; 
they likewise participated in the shareholders' annual meeting
, and at each place diligently endeavored to carry the 
election their way. The result has been heretofore reported in 
The Watch Tower, showing the overwhelming expressions of 
opinion from the Lord's people. At the Pittsburgh annual 
meeting, amongst the shareholders represented, about 83 per 
cent was in favor of the present management, as against 12 
per cent opposed. Having participated in these elections, the 
spirit of loyalty and obedience to the Lord's arrangements 
would require all such to abide by the result until another 
similar election. Any other spirit is the spirit of anarchy 
described by Brother Russell in the preceding paragraph. 

It is with pain that we mention the names of some individuals
, but we do this in the interest of the church at large. 
The Apostle Paul gives us the precedent for this; and we feel 
fully justified in mentioning the matter, that the friends may 
not be further deceived. "This thou knowest. that all they 
which are in Asia be turned away from me: of whom are 
Phygellus and Hermogenes." (2 Timothy 1:15) "And their 
word will eat as doth a canker; of whom is Hymenseus and 
Philetus." (2 Timothy 2:17) "Alexander the coppersmith 
did me much evil; the Lord reward him according to his 
works."— 2 Timothy 4:14. 

A wolf in sheep's clothing pictures the disposition of one 


who appears as a friend and yet is ready to do injury. Several 
of tiie Iriends report the method that is being pursued by I\ 
S. L. Johnson and R. G. Jolly. The practise is along the following
 line: They appear at a class of the brethren and, by 
their words and conduct, make it appear as though they are in 
complete harmony with the Society and its work ; but after 
they have ingratiated themselves into the confidence of a 
number, seeds of doubt are sown. They stay in a community 
for several days or longer. They advise the friends to hold 
cottage meetings to be addressed by themselves. They then 
go about and call on all the consecrated. If any one suggests 
a break with the Society, they discourage this for a time 
until they finish their campaign and thoroughly sow their seeds 
of discord; and then they have a resolution offered by some 
one, withdrawing support from the Society and its work. 
We publish below a letter from one of the brethren of the 
Philadelphia Ecclesia, which discloses the method of operation
 : 

"Dear Brethren: 

"We are constrained to drop you a note at this time in 

order that, should you think wise, the Class might be 

warned. 

"Brother Jolly, an able assistant of the Johnson propaganda
., will go to for three weeks, lxvjuise of his su> - 

cess here in gaining so many over on the side of the opposition
 that he might try the same methods there. They are similar
 to those stated in The Watch Tower recently. 

"Kindly accept this as a warning. Things are said and 
done to make it appear as though the brother is in complete 
harmony with the Bible House; then, after he has. gained the 
confidence of a number, seeds of doubt are subtly sown. This 
is accomplished at little gatherings during the week. Attempts 
of an open break are discouraged and prevented, if possible, 
until the entire class is thoroughly saturated with seeds of disloyalty
; then an open break is forced. This method has 
proven very successful here. 

"Experience has taught me the necessity of an uncompromisingly
 strong stand against all such subtlety immediately 
when attempted, What would I not do if I could but spare 
any ecclesia the sad experience here encountered! But the 
lessons to be learned were helpful, and perhaps our experience 
may assist the friends elsewhere. We suggest that one rotten 
apple in a barrel will make all the apples in the barrel rotten 
if not removed. 

""Realizing that all the attempts of the adversary will 
come to naught and desiring to do our little part and trust in 
the Lord, we leave this matter with you, as we do not know 

who are loyal and who are not at ." 

"MARK THEM WHICH CAUSE DIVISION" 

Wo"~take this occasion to call attention of the brethren 
everywhere to the fact that P. 8. L. Johnson and R. G. Jolly 
do not represent the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
in any manner whatsoever, and are wholly unauthorized to 


[6222] 


March 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(?<*- 84) 


represent it or the International Bible Students Association 
or the Peoples Pulpit Association. The evident purpose of 
the two named and those associated with them is to cause division
 amongst the brethren. "Now I beseech you, brethren, 
mark them which cause divisions and offences, contrary to the 
doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them. For they 
that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own 
belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts 
of the simple." (Romans 16:17, .18) "These six things doth 
the Lord hate; yea, seven are an abomination unto him: A 
proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent 
blood, an heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that 
be swift in running to mischief, a false witness that speaketh 
lies, and lie that so wet h discord among brethren." 

To avoid such does not mean to treat them unkindly, but 
it does mean to refuse to fellowship such in the spirit of the 
Lord. Leave their judgment entirely to him who judgeth all 


things righteously. Again Brother Russell's words in the 
article above mentioned are applicable: 

"If he has different views, do not persecute him — do not 
follow the style of the dark ages, but follow the proper 
course of letting him 'flock to himself/ or with as many as 
prefer to view matters as he views them. We have not given 
such strong advice heretofore; but we perceive that many of 
the dear sheep are being troubled, hindered of development, 
and imposed upon. Wo see that proportionately such elders 
and deacons are growing more bold, and hence the need is the 
greater that ail who have the right spirit, and who realize that 
under the Lord's guidance in our study of the 'Divine Plan 
of the Ages/ we have not been following 'cunningly devised 
fables/ should now take a positive stand for the good of 
themselves, far the good of the leaders who manifest a wrong 
spirit, and for the good of the public, who are inquiring for 
the way of the Lord as never before." 

