From Our Readers
Divorce  Right after our second anniversary, my husband had an affair with a close friend of mine. Two years later he left me. So when I saw the cover of the July 8, 1993, Awake! with the title “Divorce​—The Door to a Happier Life?,” I was less than enthused. At times it’s difficult for me to study material emphasizing family life. However, I found it encouraging to read that eventually “an innocent mate may emerge from the ordeal a stronger, more vital, whole person.” I wouldn’t say I’m at that point yet, but I’m making progress. I have been in a very deep depression. But the abundance of information you have provided in other issues on depression has helped my congregation elders support me through some very terrible times. Thank you for all the help you are providing through the magazines.
D. P., United States
Stepparents  When I read your article “Tips for Stepparents” (July 8, 1993), I just had to write. I am ten years old, and I live with my mother. My dad remarried, so now I have a stepmother. When I read how other kids felt about stepparents, I thought, ‘My feelings exactly!’ I am glad that one of your tips was to beware of jealousy. A lot of times, I view my stepmother as a competitor. My dad sometimes makes me feel like he loves my stepmother much more than he’s ever loved me. I hope my dad and stepmother will read this wonderful article and be more understanding toward me.
V. N., United States
Copper Mining  I read your magazines from time to time with interest. However, I wondered about the article “The Biggest Man-​Made Hole in the World.” (March 8, 1993) How could you put this copper mine in such a positive light? Does not the Bible say God will destroy those who ruin the earth?
H. Y., England
We are well aware of the environmental impact made by open-​pit mining. Nevertheless, our article merely reported on this copper mine as an item of interest, not as a promotion of the mining industry. In all fairness, though, it must be acknowledged that the electrical industry​—indeed, the public in general—​has become dependent upon copper. And the vast majority of copper used in the United States is unearthed in open-​pit mines. It would be unjust, then, to blame solely the copper industry for the environmental damage that results. This complex situation serves as another illustration of the need for God’s Kingdom to take over the management of earth’s affairs.​—ED.
Daydreaming  I am 11 years old, and I want to thank you for the “Young People Ask . . .” articles on daydreaming. (July 8 and July 22, 1993) I always dreamed about being someone else, and you’ve helped me appreciate that instead of daydreaming about being liked, I should work at being likable.
J. K., United States
Upon reading the articles, I broke down in tears. Most of my time was spent daydreaming​—usually about being famous or about boys or sex. This would happen even at Christian meetings. Daydreams were taking over my life. I would stay away from my family and friends and be off to myself up in my room. I was miserable and ashamed of myself. Now I have taken your advice to heart and put it to use. Sometimes these thoughts return, but now I fill my mind with other thoughts or work at one of my hobbies, and the thoughts go away. Thank you so much.
T. P., United States

