





LIVING AS CHRISTIANS
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry​—Discontinuing Unproductive Bible Studies




WHY IMPORTANT: People must call on the name of Jehovah in order to be saved. (Ro 10:13, 14) Yet, not everyone who agrees to study the Bible wants to live by Jehovah’s standards. We make the best use of our precious time in the ministry by helping those who truly want to make changes to please Jehovah. If a Bible student does not make meaningful progress after a reasonable period of time, we wisely redirect our efforts to those whom Jehovah is drawing to him and his organization. (Joh 6:44) Of course, if at a future time the person gives evidence of being “rightly disposed for everlasting life,” we gladly resume his Bible study.​—Ac 13:48.
HOW TO DO IT:
  Commend the student for wanting to gain accurate knowledge.​—1Ti 2:4

  Emphasize the importance of applying what he has learned.​—Lu 6:46-49

  Kindly discuss Jesus’ illustration of the sower, and ask him to consider what may be holding him back.​—Mt 13:18-23

  Tactfully explain why you are discontinuing the study

  Let him know that you will call periodically to encourage him and that the study can resume in the future if he makes progress


WATCH THE VIDEO, AND THEN ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS:
  What did you learn from the conversation that indicated that the student was not making spiritual progress?

  How did the publisher help the student appreciate that he needed to make changes?

  How did the publisher leave the door open for the study to resume in the future?





Before discontinuing a Bible study, seek Jehovah’s direction in prayer. While taking into account the student’s age or other limitations, look for indications of meaningful progress.
  Does the person keep his appointments to study?

  Does he prepare for the study?

  Does he attend congregation meetings?

  Is he making changes in harmony with Bible principles?

  Does he share with others what he is learning?

  Is he withdrawing from false religion?




