VOL. XIX. MARCH 15, 1898. No. 6. 



CONTENTS. 



"Because the Days are Evil" 83 

Helpful Rules for the Daily Life 

Feet Washing 88 

"The Night Cometh wherein No Man 

Can Work" 89 

The Wheat Harvest— Its Close 

Nigh at Hand 90 

Where to Look for the Wheat 

The Length of the Harvest Day, etc. 

John the Baptist and His Murderers 94 

"The Dogs Eat of the Crumbs which 

Fall from the Children's Table" 95 

page 82 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their cases and requesting the paper. 



R2278 : page 80 

REMEMBER THE MEMORIAL SUPPER, APRIL 5TH, 
AFTER 6 P.M. 

IT HAS been suggested by some that the day preceding 
(April 5th) be spent, to some extent, as partially a fast day and 
a day of much private prayer for the welfare of Zion. Let each 
of us do as is in his heart, in this matter. We of the WATCH 
TOWER will remember you all on that day, as we do every day, 
but more particularly. "Brethren pray for us."— 2 Thess. 3:1. 

Answering a query, would say:— 

The Hebrews will celebrate Passover Feast for a week, beginning 
(Nisan 15th) 6 P.M. April 6th. We celebrate the death 
of the Lamb in the "Memorial Supper" (Nisan 14th) the night 
before, after 6 P.M. Read the TOWER article again. 



R2278 : page 83 

"BECAUSE THE DAYS ARE EVIL. 



"See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, 
redeeming the time, because the days are evil."— Eph. 5:15,16. 

THE WORD "circumspect" is from circum, signifying 
around, and spectus, signifying to look, 
to watch. The true Christian pathway is so narrow, 
so beset with tests and pitfalls and wiles of the evil 
one that, if we walk carelessly even (not to say wickedly), 
we will be in great danger of mishap. It requires 
not only that we look all around at every step, 
but more than this, it requires that we be wise,— wiser 
than our fellow creatures of earth— wise with the wisdom 
that cometh from above, which is pure, peaceable, 
loving; yet first of all loyal to the Lord and his Word. 

At a centre to which flow by mail the records of 
the trials and difficulties through which many of the 
Lord's people are called to pass, we are in position to 
know that their trials are now more numerous and more 
severe than for a long time at least. Appeals for prayer 



on their behalf and for counsel respecting the way of 
the Lord come by nearly every mail from tried ones 
who are anxious to "walk circumspectly." These are 
gladly answered, to the best of our ability,— pointing 
out the Scriptural lines that must guide all who would 
walk with the Lord. 

We now wish to call attention to some general 
principles, applicable to every member of the body of 
Christ, at every time; and especially necessary to be 
remembered and practiced at the present time, because 
of the special activity of our Adversary;— "because the 
days are evil." For it would appear that, as in the 
"harvest" of the Jewish age, so in the present "harvest" 
of the Gospel age, opposition prevails not only 
in the synagogues, from the Scribes and Pharisees, but 
in the home circle— between parents and children, and 
husbands and wives— and among the Lord's people. 
And in proportion as the Adversary seeks to stir up 
strife, let each of the consecrated be the more on guard 
to give no avoidable offence either in word or deed. 
"Walk circumspectly, ...because the days are evil," 
—days of special trial and testing. 

HELPFUL RULES FOR OUR DAILY LIFE. 



The rules we have to suggest are as follows:— 

I. Let each resolve to mind his own business. 
The Scriptural injunctions along this line caution 

us not to be busy-bodies in other people's affairs. 

Everyone of experience in life has learned 

that this is a good rule; yet few walk by this rule, circumspectly. 

If we have not sufficient of our own business 

and of the Lord's service to fill our hands and 

moments and mouths, there is something wrong with 

us that needs careful prayer and study of the divine 

Word to set right. 

This does not mean that we should be indifferent 
to the welfare of others under our care, or for whom 
we are in any degree responsible; but, even in doing 
for these we should be careful to recognize their rights 
and the rights of others, and specially careful not to 
exceed our own rights. Let us never forget that justice 
must govern in our interferences with the affairs of 
others, tho we may not require full justice in respect 
to our own interests, but exercise mercy. 

II. We should exercise great patience with others 
and their faults— more than in dealing with ourselves 
and our own short-comings. 

When we remember that the whole world is mentally 
as well as physically and morally unsound through 
the fall, it should make us very considerate for their 
failings. Since the Lord is graciously willing to cover 
our blemishes with the merit of the precious blood, we 



R2278 : page 84 

cannot do less than be "very pitiful" and of tender 
compassion towards others;— even tho their failings be 
greater or different from our own. This general rule 
is specially applicable to your own children. Their defects 
to some extent came from you or through you; 
hence, in dealing with their faults, you should do just 
as in correcting your own faults,— earnestly, rigorously, 
for their correction in righteousness, but sympathetically, 
mercifully, lovingly. 

III. Do not be touchy and easily offended. Take 
a kindly, charitable view of the words and acts of others. 
A trifling slight or rebuff could well be passed 
unnoticed— covered with the mantle of generosity and 
love. A serious offense should be assumed to be unintentional, 
and inquiry should be kindly made in words 
that would not stir up anger, but in "speech seasoned 
with grace." In a majority of cases it will prove that 
no offense was meant. 

This rule in the Scriptures comes under the instructions 
not to indulge in "evil surmisings,"— imagining 
evil intentions and motives behind the words and 
acts of others. "Evil surmisings" is ranked by the 
Apostle as contrary to the words of our Lord Jesus, 
opposed to godliness, and of the same spirit as envy 
and strife— of a corrupt mind, works of the flesh and 
the devil.-l Tim. 6:3-5; Gal. 5:19-21. 

The other side of this subject is brought out by 
the Apostle's injunction respecting the elements of the 
spirit of love, of which God's people are begotten and 
which they are to cultivate daily,— the development 
of which is one of the chief proofs of their being "overcomers." 
He says, "Love suffereth long and is kind, 
...is not easily offended, thinketh no evil,...beareth 
all things, believeth all things [favorably], hopeth 
all things, endureth all things." 

It may be urged that such a disposition would be 
imposed upon frequently, by the evilly disposed. We 
reply that those who possess this spirit of love are not 
necessarily obtuse nor soft: their experiences in cultivating 
this degree of love have served to develop them 
and make them of "quick understanding in the fear of 
the Lord." They will be cautious where there is even 
the appearance of evil, even while avoiding the imputation 
of evil intentions until forced to concede them by 
indisputable evidence. Besides, it would be better far 
to take some trifling risks and suffer some slight losses, 
many times, than to accuse even one innocent person. 
And the Lord who has directed this course is abundantly 
able to compensate us for any losses experienced 
in following his counsel. He is both able and willing 
to make all such experiences work together for good to 
those who love him. He places obedience to his arrangements 
first (even before sacrifice) saying, "Ye are my 
disciples, if ye do whatsoever I command you." 



Whoever neglects the Lord's commands along this 
line of "evil surmisings" weaves a web for his own ensnarement, 
however "circumspectly" he may walk as 
respects other matters; for, a heart impregnated with 
doubt, and suspicion toward fellow creatures, is more 
than half prepared to doubt God: the spirit of sourness 
and bitterness implied is at war with the spirit of the 
Lord, the spirit of love. Either the one or the other 
will conquer. The wrong spirit must be gotten rid of, 
or it will defile the new creature and make of him a 
"castaway." On the contrary, if the new nature conquer, 
as an "overcomer," it will be along this line: if 
evil surmisings are overcome, half the battle against 
present difficulties and besetments is won. The surmisings 
are from the heart, and lead us either to good 
words and acts, or to evil words and acts. 

IV. If you have been slandered, you may explain, 
to set yourself right, either publicly or privately; 
but surely avoid doing more than this. If you 
slander in return you make two wrongs out of one. 
Let no man render evil for evil to any one;— no, not 
even if what you should tell be the truth, while what 
your neighbor told was falsehood. And in contradicting 
and explaining false charges, remember not to go 
beyond this to make counter-charges against your defamer; 
for thus you also would become a slanderer. 

This is the Scriptural rule. We are to do unto 
others as we would that they should do unto us, and 
not as they do unto us. The wrongs done toward us 
will never justify wrong doing on our part. God's true 
children are to have no sympathy with Satan's delusion 
—"Do evil that good may result." But while no 
Scripture forbids our explaining away the errors and 
false statements of slanderers, experience proves that, 
if we followed Satan and his deluded servants of unrighteousness 
around, to contradict every adverse criticism 
and evil report, we should be kept more than busy. 
And if Satan found us willing to do so, he would no 
doubt lead us such a chase as would prevent our having 
any time to tell forth the good tidings of great joy; 
thus he would gain a victory, and we should lose one. 

Rather let us commit our reputation to the Lord, 
as a part of the sacrifice we laid at his feet when we 
surrendered all in obedience to the "call" to run the 
race for the great prize of our high calling. If thus 
we suffer some loss of reputation, by reason of our 
resolution not to neglect the King's business to fight 
for our own tinsel, we may be sure that it will count 
with him as so much endured for Christ's sake; and so 
much the more will be our reward in heaven, when the 
battle is over and the victors are crowned. 

Meantime, however, it behooves each of the Lord's 
people to be as circumspect as possible at every step 
of the way. Remember that in proportion to faithfulness 

R2278 : page 85 



and zeal in letting the light shine we will have 
the malignant opposition of our great Adversary, who 
seeks to turn and twist and maliciously distort and discolor 
our every word and act;— because the accuser of 
the brethren can find no real charges; and because he 
is exceeding mad against the humble servants of the 
truth, as he was against the Chief Servant— our Lord. 
He, let us remember, was crucified as a law-breaker, 
at the instance of the prominent ones of the church, 
and betrayed to them by one of his own disciples. 

"Consider him who endured such contradiction of 
sinners against himself, lest ye be weary and faint in 
your minds" when attacked by the Adversary,— whoever 
may be his agents and whatever their missiles. 
He cannot harm but will only increase our reputation 
in the Lord's sight, if we endure faithfully; and he can 
do no outward harm that God cannot overrule for the 
good of his cause— tho that good may sometimes mean 
"sittings" of chaff and tares from the wheat. 

V. Evil speaking, backbiting and slandering are 
strictly forbidden to God's people, as wholly contrary 
to his spirit of love— even if the evil thing be true. As 
a preventive of anything of the nature of slander, the 
Scriptures very carefully mark out one only way of redress 
of grievances, in Matt. 18:15-17. 

Even advanced Christians seem to be utterly in 
ignorance of this divine ruling, and hence professed 
Christians are often the most pronounced scandal-mongers. 
Yet this is one of the few special, specific commandments 
given by our Lord; and considered in connection 
with the statement, Ye are my disciples if ye 
do whatever I command you, its constant violation 
proves that many are not far advanced in discipleship. 

Let us look carefully at this rule which, if followed, 
would prevent gossip, "evil-speaking," "backbiting." 

Its first provision, for a conference between the 
principals alone, implies candor on the part of the accuser 
who thinks that he has suffered; and whom here 
we will call A. It implies his thinking no evil of the 
accused, whom we will style B. They meet as 
"brethren," each thinking his own course the right 
one, to discuss the matter; to see whether they can 
come to the same view. If they agree, all is well; the 
matter is settled; peace prevails; the threatened break 
has been averted, and no one is the wiser. 

If they cannot agree, A may not start a scandal 
by relating his version;— not even to confidential friends 
may he disclose the matter, saying, "Don't mention it; 
and especially don't say I told you." No; the matter 
is still "between thee and him [A and B] alone." If 
A considers the matter important, so as to wish to 
prosecute the subject further, he has but one way open 
to him, namely, to ask two or three others to go with 
him to B and hear the case from both sides and give 
their judgment respecting its right and wrong sides. 



These should be chosen (1) as persons in whose Christian 
character and good sense and spirit of a sound 
mind A himself would have confidence, peradventure 
they should favor B's view of the matter. (2) They 
should be chosen as with a view to B's appreciation of 
their advice, if they should give their judgment of the 
matter in A's favor. 

It would, however, be wholly contrary to the spirit 
of justice as well as contrary to the spirit of the Master's 
instructions here, for A to "talk it over" with 
several friends from whom he desired to select these 
"two or three witnesses," to make sure that they favored 
his story (without hearing the other side) and 
would go to the conference prejudiced,— with their 
minds already determined against B. No; the matter 
is between A and B alone, until the two or three friends 
are brought in to hear both sides of the dispute in the 
presence of both parties. 

If the judgment of the "brethren" is against B, 
he should hear them, should accept their view of the 
matter as the just, reasonable one;— unless it involves 
some principle in which he cannot conscientiously acquiesce. 
If the "brethren" see the matter from B's 
standpoint, A should conclude that in all probability 
he had erred; and, unless conscience hindered, should 
accept the position and apologize to B and the brethren 
for the annoyance caused by his poor judgment. But 
none of the parties are at liberty to turn scandal-mongers 
and tell the matter, "confidentially," to others. 

If the decision went against A, and he still felt 
that he was injured and had failed to get justice through 
a poor choice of advisers, he might (without violence 
to the principles laid down by our Lord) call other advisers 
and proceed as before. If their decision were 
against him, or if he felt that he could not trust to the 
judgment of any, fearing that all would favor B, he 
should realize that part at least of his trouble is self-conceit, 
and would do well to fast and pray and study 
lines and principles of justice more carefully. But A 
has gained no right to tell anything to the Church nor 
to anyone, either publicly or privately. If he does so, 
it marks him at once as disobedient to the Lord and 
exercised by a bad spirit, a carnal spirit,— contrary to 
the spirit of the truth, the spirit of love. 

If the committee decide partly against B, and only 
partly in favor of A, the brethren (A and B) should 
endeavor to see the matter thus, and to arrange matters 
amicably. In this case there would be nothing respecting 
the matter to tell;— nothing that is anybody's 
business. 

If the committee decide wholly against B and 
wholly in favor of A, and if B will not heed 
them and make reparation for the wrong or cease 

R2278 : page 86 



from injuring A, the latter is still not at liberty to 
become a scandal-monger; nor are the brethren of 
the committee. If A considers the matter of sufficient 
importance to justify further action, there is just one 
course open to him: he with the committee may lay the 
matter before the Church. Then the Church shall 
hear the matter, both sides, and whichever (A or B) shall 
refuse to recognize the advice of the Church shall be 
thereafter considered and treated by all as an outsider 
—as not of the Church, not to be fellowshipped; as dead, 
until such time as he may repent and reform;— a not 
very likely thing after rejecting such faithful treatment. 

Thus did the Lord guard his true disciples from 
the insidious sin of slander which leads onward to 
other and grosser works of the flesh and the devil, and 
stops growth in the truth and its spirit of love. And 
let us note, too, that those who hear slanders and thus 
encourage slanderers in their wrong course, are partakers 
of their evil deeds; guilty partners in the violation 
of the Master's commands. God's true people should refuse 
to listen to slanders and should point the offender to 
the Lord's Word and the only method therein authorized. 
"Are we wiser than God?" Experience teaches 
us that we cannot trust to our own judgments and are 
on safe ground only when following the voice of the 
Shepherd explicitly. 

If any Brother or Sister begins to you an evil report 
of others, stop him at once, kindly but firmly. 
"Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness 
but rather reprove them." Refuse to have any 
share in this violation of our Master's commands, which 
does great mischief in the Church. Supposing the 
Brother or Sister to be only a "babe" in spiritual matters, 
call attention to the Lord's ruling on the subject, 
Matt. 18:15, and 1 Tim. 5:19. If the conversation 
is not directed to you but merely in your hearing, 
promptly show your disapproval by withdrawing. 

If, after having his attention called to the Lord's 
command on this subject, the slanderer still persists in 
"evil-speaking," "back-biting" and telling you his 
"evil surmisings," reprove him more sharply, saying 
as you go,— I cannot, must not hear you; for if I did, 
I would be as criminal in the matter as you are— violating 
the Lord's command. And even if I were to 
hear your story, I could not believe it; for the Christian 
who does not respect the Lord's Word and follow 
his plan of redress for grievances, shows so little of the 
Lord's spirit that his word can not be trusted. He 
who twists and dodges the Lord's words would not 
hesitate to twist and misrepresent the words and deeds 
of fellow-disciples. Then withdraw fellowship from 
such until his error has been confessed with promises 
of reform. If to any extent you listen to such conversation 
or express "sympathy" with it or the gossiper 
or slanderer, you are a partner in the sin and in all its 
consequences; and if a "root of bitterness" is thus developed, 



you are more than likely to be one of those 
"defiled" by it.-Heb. 12:15. 

A slanderer is a thief according to worldly standard: 
as Shakespeare wrote, "He who steals my purse 
steals trash; but he who steals my good name takes 
that which doth not make him rich, but leaves me poor 
indeed." According to the Christian standard, still 
higher, as voiced by the Great Teacher, slanderers are 
murderers. (See Matt. 5:22; 1 John 3:15, Revised 
Version.) Thus seen, the very suggestion to slander 
is to be shunned, as of the spirit of Satan.— Jno. 8:44. 

VI. God's people should beware of pride as they 
would avoid the most deadly plague. 

This rule, always good, and well backed by Scripture, 
seems doubly needful to those who are blessed 
with the light of present truth. This may seem strange: 
it may be reasoned that the receiving of so much 
grander views of God's character and plan would make 
his people feel the more insignificant and humble, the 
more dependent on divine goodness, and the more 
trustful of God and the less trustful of themselves. 
And this should be the effect, always and ever: but alas, 
with very many it is not so. 

Many get to feel that the knowledge of the plan 
of the ages proves them specially wise or great or good: 
they seem to forget that God hides the truth from the 
wise and great— that no flesh should glory in his sight. 
They love the truth selfishly, as dealers love their merchandise, 
for the sake of what they can get for it. If 
they cannot hope for wealth in exchange for the truth 
they can hope for small notoriety— to appear wiser 
than others, that they may dole it out in fragments 
and thus perpetuate their notoriety for wisdom, and 
gratify their pride or vanity. Such people do little to 
help circulate the present truth. If they cannot avoid 
it, they may mention MILLENNIAL DAWN or ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER or Tabernacle Shadows or Food for 
Thinking Christians or About Hell or About Spiritism; 
but when they do so it is usually with some disparaging 
remark; as for instance, that they "disagree in a 
good many things;" or that "they pin their faith to no 
man's coat sleeve but go to the Word of God direct;" 
or that "the author isn't much, merely reprinted what 
wiser people had written, and was endeavoring to make 
himself famous at their expense." 

Beware of all such people; sooner or later they will 
fly the track entirely, and injure more than they ever 
helped. God does not wish such people to serve his 
cause, and will surely permit their vanity to stumble 
them,— however much their natural ability— and it is 
generally people of real or fancied ability who are thus 
afflicted with the spirit of pride and vanity. God opposeth 

R2278 : page 87 

the proud, but showeth his favor to the humble. 



We call every reader of our publications to witness that 
the author has never boasted of his wisdom or originality, 
either publicly or privately. We have boasted 
in the truth, and shall continue to boast of it— that no 
human philosophies can hold a candle to its brilliant 
electric ray; but we have never boasted of being its 
originator. On the contrary, it is because we did not 
manufacture it, but because God has revealed it "in 
due time" as "meat in due season," and because it is 
so much more wonderful than we or any other human 
being could originate or concoct, that we have confidence 
that none other than God is its Author and its 
Revealer. 

If by the grace of God we have in any degree been 
used by him in serving present harvest truths to others, 
we rejoice in the service, and will continue to strive to 
be faithful to our stewardship: but as for vanity on this 
account, we see no room or reason for it. We are well 
aware that our Master could readily have found many 
others as fit and worthy of the service, and many more 
capable naturally: we can only suppose, therefore, that 
herein as previously— "God hath chosen the foolish 
things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath 
chosen the weak things of this world to confound the 
things that are mighty,. ..and the things that are 
despised. ..to bring to naught things that are; that 
no flesh should glory in his presence."— 1 Cor. 1:27-29. 

We therefore caution all who by the grace of God 
have been translated out of darkness into God's marvelous 
light, that they walk proportionately the more 
humbly before the Lord: because, if the light received 
should become darkness, how great would be the darkness, 
and how hopeless the condition. It would, as 
the Apostle declares, be better for such never to have 
known the way of life. If salt lose its flavor it is good 
for nothing more than sand. 

VII. Be pure: maintain a conscience void of offense 
toward God and men. Begin with the heart— the 
thoughts: harbor no thoughts that in any sense of the 
word would be evil. To make sure of this, have Christ 
Jesus as your pattern, well and much before your mind. 
When evil is obtruded upon you, either from without 
or from within, lift your heart to him in prayer for 

the grace promised to help in every time of need. 
Keep constantly near you the thought and prayer, "Let 
the words of my mouth and the meditations of my 
heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength 
and my Redeemer." 

VIII. While treasuring and seeking to follow the 
various specific commands of Scripture, let us seek 
more and more to understand and come into sympathy 
with the principles which underlie the divine law: this 
will enable us to judge of the right and the wrong of 
such of our words, thoughts and acts as may not be 
particularly specified in the Lord's Word. Indeed, as 
we get to understand and sympathize with the principles 



of divine law, to that extent we are getting at the 
spirit of the divine Word.-See Psa. 1 19:97-105. 

IX. Shun a contentious and fault-finding disposition 
as contrary to the spirit or disposition of Christ- 
contrary to love. 

A certain amount of combative courage is demanded 
in overcoming the world, the flesh and the devil 
and their various snares, and this fighting disposition 
may become a valuable aid to ourselves and the Master's 
cause if rightly and wisely directed;— against sin, first 
in ourselves and secondly in others; if used for the Lord 
and his people, and against Satan and all his powers 
of darkness and superstition. This in the Scriptures is 
called fighting the good fight: and we all should be 
gallant soldiers in this battle for right and truth, lovingly 
defending our Captain's honor and his people's 
liberties. 

But such a good use of combativeness is not pleasing 
to the Prince of this world, and he will seek to pervert 
what he cannot directly use. Consequently he 
attempts with some to make combativeness appear a 
chief virtue: he encourages them to fight everything 
and everybody;— the brethren more than the powers 
of darkness;— nominal churchmen more than the errors 
and ignorance which blind them and make them 
such. Indeed his desire is to get us to "fight against 
God." 

Let us be on guard on this point. Let us first of 
all judge ourselves lest we cast a stumbling block before 
others: let us fight down in our own hearts the 
wrong spirit which seeks to make mountains out of 
trifles and disposes us to be captious and contentious 
over littles and nonessentials. "Greater is he that 
ruleth his own spirit than he that taketh a city." Let 
us guard ourselves that our defense of the truth be not 
from motives of self glorification; but from love for 
the truth, love for the Lord and love for his people, 
the brethren. If love be the impelling spirit or motive, 
it will show itself accordingly, in loving, gentle, patient, 
humble efforts toward the fellow-servants; and 
let us be "gentle toward all." Let "the sword of the 
spirit, the Word of God," which is quick and powerful, 
do all the cutting. 

X. Beware of all thoughts, feelings and conditions 
directly or remotely connected with malice, envy, 
strife, hatred. Give these no place in your heart even 
for a moment; for they will surely do you great injury, 
aside from leading to the injury of others. Keep your 
heart, your will, your intentions and desires full of 
love toward God and all his creatures,— the most fervent 
toward God, and proportionately toward all who 

have his spirit and walk in his directed way. 

XL Do not trust your conscience. If it were a 
sufficient guide you would have no need of the Scriptures. 
The majority of people have as good as no conscience; 
for they are blind to the principles and laws 



of God given to guide conscience. And still worse off 
than these are those mentioned in 1 Tim. 4:2. Hence 
the imperative necessity for carefully heeding the 
Lord's Word, and walking circumspectly according to 
its light. 

XII. Do not be bold, except for the right, the 
truth. So far as yourself is concerned preserve a reverential 
fear— of sin, and of displeasing the Master, 
and of losing the great reward— "the prize of our high 
calling." Nearly all who "fall away," first lose all 
fear and become self-confident. They forget that it is 
only "If ye do these things ye shall never fall." (2 Pet. 1:5-10.) 
"Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of 
entering into his rest, any of us should seem to come 
short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) Partly because of the loss 
of this proper fear, "It is impossible to renew them 
again unto repentance." 



R2278 : page 88 

FEET WASHING. 



SOME feel that the feet-washing mentioned in 
John 13:4-17 is as important as the Memorial 
Supper; and hence we will here consider the subject: 
altho only one of the Evangelists remembered even to 
mention it. 

In Eastern countries, where sandals were worn, 
and the feet thus exposed to sand and dust, feet-washing 
was a regular custom, and an actual necessity. This 
service was considered very menial, and the humblest 
servants or slaves performed it for the family and guests. 

Our Lord had noticed among his disciples a spirit 
of selfishness; he had overheard them disputing which 
of them should be greatest in authority and dignity in 
the Kingdom he had promised to share with them; 
and, foreseeing that this spirit would injure them in 
proportion as it grew and strengthened, he had rebuked 
them for their lack of humility. So indeed it did, in 
the fourth to the sixth centuries, blossom and yield 
bitter fruit, in the organization of Papacy, and the 
train of evils and errors which still flow from that impure 
fountain. 

To illustrate the proper spirit which should characterize 
all who would be his disciples, he took a little 
child and set him in the midst, and said, Except ye become 
(artless and simple) as a little child, you are not fit 
for the Kingdom for which I am calling you. Ye know 
how the Gentiles lord it over one another, and recognize 
caste and station, but it must not be so with you. 
Ye have but one Master, and all ye are brethren; and 
he that would be chief, let him become chief servant. 



(Mark 10:35-45.) They who serve you most, you 
must mark as your chief ones. I am the chief servant 
myself; for the Son of man came not to be served by 
others, and honored thus, but he came to serve others, 
even to the extent of giving his life in their service. 
As therefore my greatest service toward you renders 
me your chief, so shall it be among you. Esteem 
and honor one another in proportion as you find in each 
other unselfish sacrificing love and service. Esteem 
such very highly for their works' sake.— 1 Thes. 5:13. 

But for all this, the spirit of pride and a desire to 
"lord it" over others, and be reverenced as chief, was 
there, even after three and a half years spent with the 
Master, and under his example; and as he was about to 
leave them. Jesus sought, even on the last evening 
with them, to impress this lesson indelibly upon their 
hearts. So, after the Passover Supper, he arose from 
the table and performed for his disciples the most menial 
service, in washing their feet. They probably had not 
even thought of performing such a service for each 
other or for him, and even had consideration enough to 
object to his thus serving them in so humble a manner. 

When Jesus had finished, he said to them, "Know 
ye what I have done to you? You call me Master and 
Lord, and ye say well; for so I am. If I then, your 
Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought 
to wash one another's feet. For I have given you an 
example, that you should do as I have done to you. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not 
greater than his lord; neither is he that is sent greater 
than he that sent him." If ye know these things, happy 
are ye if ye do them. If you understand and appreciate 
the lesson I have given you, and will practice it, you 
will be blessed thereby, helped in my service, and prepared 
for the Kingdom in which I have promised you a 
share.— John 13:4-17. 

That the lesson had its designed effect we can 
scarcely doubt, as we look at the course of several of 

R2279 : page 88 

the apostles, and see how, with much self-denial, they 
served the body of Christ, of which they were fellow-members, 
following the example of the Head, who was 
chief servant of all. 

The question arises, What did the Lord mean 
when he said, "I have given you an example, that ye 
should do as I have done?" Was the example in the 
principle, in the lesson of service one toward another? 
or was the example in the method of service, in the ceremony 
of feet-washing? To suppose the latter would 
be to hide the real lesson under a form. And if the 
example were in the form, then every item in the form 
should be observed: an upper room; a supper; sandals 
should be worn; the same kind of garments; the towel 
girdle; etc. But no: the "example" which we should 



follow lay in the humble serving of the disciples by 
the Master, regardless of form. His example of serving 
the fellow-members in even the most menial manner 
is what we should follow— and blessed will we be 
in proportion as we do follow it. In that proportion 
we shall be prepared for the everlasting Kingdom and 
service of God. 

Those now living in Eastern countries, where sandals 
are still worn may find an opportunity now to follow 
the example, the same form which the Master used, 
as well as other forms; and those differently circumstanced 
may follow the "example" in a thousand forms. 
Some of the fellow-disciples probably live in your city 
and in mine. How can we serve them? How can we 
show them our love and sympathy according to the 
Lord's "example?" Not in this climate by washing 
their feet— this would be an inconvenience, the very 
reverse of a pleasure and service to them, and therefore 
contrary to the "example." But we can serve the 
"body" otherwise, and truly follow the example. We 
can improve our various opportunities to serve them in 
matters temporal as well as spiritual. We can be on 
the lookout, and when we see sadness or discouragement, 
we can lend a helping hand to lift our brother's 
burdens, or our sister's sorrows, and we can let them 
see by deeds, as well as words, our anxiety to serve 
them— figuratively speaking, to wash their feet. 

Do not wait until they request your assistance; 
for in proportion as they are developed disciples, 
they will not ask your aid. Do not wait until they 
tell you of their burdens and trials, but watch to anticipate; 
for in proportion as they partake of our Master's 
spirit, they will not be complainers, but will live "always 
rejoicing"— rejoicing even in tribulations. 

Be not ashamed of such service of the "body," 

R2279 : page 89 

but seek and rejoice in it— "ye do serve the Lord, 
Christ." But still more important than temporal service 
is our service one of another as "new creatures." 

The washing of the body with the truth— the 
sanctifying and cleansing of it with the word— is in 
progress now. (Eph. 5:26,27.) What are you doing 
to cleanse and purify the faith and lives of your fellow 
members? Do you approach them humbly with the 
truth, sincerely anxious to serve them, to bless and 
comfort and refresh them therewith? If so, go on; 
grand is your service; the Master served thus; this is 
his example; follow on. The more you can thus serve, 
and at the greater cost of time, and effort, and convenience, 
and self-interest, the greater will you be in 
the eyes of the Master, and the more honored and beloved 
of the body when they shall come to see and 
know you, as the Lord sees and knows your love and 
service. 



Follow closely, then, the noble "example" of Jesus: 
wash and be washed one of another, cleanse and purge 
away the defilements with which each comes daily in 
contact in the world, that ye may be clean, "through 
the word spoken unto you." Purge out the old leaven 
of hypocrisy, and envy, and self-exaltation, even as ye 
have already been justified from all things and reckoned 
pure and holy by the merit of the precious blood which 
the chief servant and Lord of all gave for all.— 
2 Tim. 2:20,21. 



page 89 
"THE NIGHT COMETH WHEREIN NO MAN CAN WORK. 



THE article from Brother Woodworth, which follows, 

will be read by all with great interest. If 

it be merely speculation, it is surely ingenious. We received 

it eight months ago, but after careful consideration 

wrote our dear brother W. that we enjoyed the 

reading of it but could not endorse it as truth— that it 

is more fanciful, inferential and speculative than anything 

we have ever published. Brother W. was by no 

means offended at this, but urged that if published even 

as a conjecture or with a suggestion that it may be only 

a cunningly devised fable, it might do some good by 

awakening some to the fact that whether this calculation 

be right or wrong, evidently "the time is short," 

anyway, for labor in this great harvest work. We 

give a portion of his letter:— 

February 16, 1898. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In reply to your loving 
letter of the 14th, I beg to assure you that I sympathize 
with your statement that you have considerable 
hesitation in respect to this matter, for I think I 
realize quite clearly just how important it is that you 
should be cautious in what you place before the Lord's 
hungry "sheep." If, therefore, after you have carefully 
considered the points, you still feel averse to 
publishing the article, how would it do to mention that 
you were considering some further points in the chronology, 
which, if correct, would show that the night 
will begin to settle down early next year— that you 
had not yet fully satisfied yourself as to their correctness 
and that since the time is now so near at hand you 
think best not to make any definite statements for the 
present, but to wait and see whether the date will be 
corroborated by developments? It would seem to me 
that you would thus be provided with a good opportunity 
for an exhortation to special effort during the 
year, and at the same time no harm can come in case 
we should find my arguments unsupported by the facts. 



However, this is merely a suggestion. 

I treat the Time of Harvest as one complete day, 
from sunrise to sunrise. It seemed to me clear that 
having established the proportion of 

light : darkness 14.6 : 9.4 
in its application to a representative harvest day of 24 
literal hours, the same proportion should hold good in 
the division into day and night of the great forty-year 
harvest day in which we are now living. Reasoning 
in this way I found the date February 1st, 1899. 

In my understanding the period from Oct. 1st, 
1874, to Feb. 1st, 1899, would therefore represent the 
12 Jewish hours of daylight, while the period from Feb. 
1st, 1899, to Oct. 1st, 1914, would represent the four 
"watches" of night, the night including a period of 
twilight at each end. 

Do as you may think best, and be assured I will 
continue to be, as ever, your brother and servant in 
the hope of the Gospel, CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 



We conclude to place the matter before the TOWER 
readers with the foregoing cautions against accepting 
this matter as of the same weight and authority as the 
more definitely stated prophecies treated in the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN volumes. Should the outward work 
of "sealing" with the truth be stopped at the date indicated 
it will surprise us greatly— our expectation 
being that it will continue for probably eight years 
yet, until the Religious Federation shall have been 
consummated and have gained sufficient political prestige 
to deprive us of our rights of publication, etc. 
Nevertheless, we wish to use this year and every year 
as tho it were the last for this precious service of the 
Lord, his Word and his "sheep." And this is the 
spirit of all possessed of the holy spirit of God's dear Son. 

Brother Woodworth's article follows. 



page 90 

THE WHEAT HARVEST. 



ITS CLOSE NIGH AT HAND. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In a back number 
of the WATCH TOWER (1893) you quote from 
a subscriber who says:— "It is evident that a portion of 
the forty years of the Gospel harvest will be a 'night,' 
without opportunity for labor, and this harvest time 



is now nearly half consumed. Since there probably 
will be ten years of 'night' but little more than a decade 
remains for active service." 

Then follows an editorial comment in these words: 
"May not this imply that the forty-year day will be 
practically divided in the middle, and hence that from 
1895 onward the darkness may be expected to gather 
more and more?" 

These suggestions seem to me to be the first steps 
toward the unfolding of a great truth. It will occur 
at once to any person who gives the subject careful 
thought that as, during the harvest season, the days 
are somewhat longer than the nights, the same should 
be true of the Gospel harvest, and this is the experience 
of those who are now laboring as co-reapers with 
the Master. The time of harvest is more than half 
gone, but the daylight still continues; there is still 
here and there an "Israelite indeed" who, when he 
hears the "joyful sound" is glad to come "out of darkness 
into His marvelous light." 

But as, in a literal harvest day, the length of the 
daylight does not greatly exceed that of the night, so, 
in this harvest time, we should expect the present 
favorable opportunity for effective service to soon draw 
to a close; and indications are not wanting to the 
watchers in Zion that ere long the last "over-ripe" 
(parched, thirsty) head of wheat will have been gathered, 
and the harvest of this age will have been fully 
reaped.— See Matt. 13:30 and Rev. 14:16, Revised 
Version, margin. 

In Matthew 13:24-30,36-43, our great Teacher 
and Chief Reaper, in speaking of this time of harvest, 
has called it a wheat harvest, and it would seem that 
if we could by some means ascertain what is the representative 
wheat-harvesting day of the world, and 
what its length is, we might learn something of value. 
At first thought this may seem a difficult thing to do, 
but with the Lord's help the problem may be solved 
more easily than one would suppose. The first step in 
its solution is to find 

WHERE TO LOOK FOR THE WHEAT. 



Thanks to the labors of those who "run to and 
fro" in this day of increased knowledge, this is a very 
simple matter, and below are given, from the American 
Agriculturist hand book for 1897, the latest and most 
reliable statistics available of the wheat crop of the 
world. 

[Brother W. here furnishes statistics for each state 
in the United States and for the several wheat-producing 
countries of the remainder of the world. These 
statistics show that Minnesota and North Dakota produce 
the largest crops of the United States, and that 



Russia, France, Hungary, Germany and Italy are the 
chief wheat countries of Europe in the order named, 
British India being chief in Asia.] 

We give the summary as follows:— 

Continent 1895. 

Bushels. 

North America 538,563,000 

South America 85,000,000 

Europe 1,443,233,000 

Asia 404,578,000 

Africa 48,842,000 

Australasia 32,461,000 

Grand Total 2,562,677,000 

If you will kindly take an atlas and look up the 
location of these countries, you will be surprised, first, 
to find that in every instance the larger portion of the 
country named lies within the Temperate Zone (north 
or south), while in the great majority of cases the entire 
country lies wholly within that zone. But you 
will be still more surprised if you investigate the matter 
further, to find that in the few countries which do 
touch or project into other zones, the wheat producing 
provinces lie entirely within the Temperate Zone. 
This means that 

THE ENTIRE CROP IS GROWN IN THE TEMPERATE ZONE. 

Of the wheat production of India, the Encyclopedia 
Brittanica says:— "Broadly speaking, it may be 
said that wheat does not thrive anywhere south of the 
Deccan" (which lies on the border between the Torrid 
and Temperate Zones). The entire civilized region 
of Egypt lies in the Temperate Zone, and the sections 
of Western Australia and Queensland which extend 
north of the tropic of Capricorn are barren and uninhabited." 
It is interesting to note, however, from 
the Encyclopedia Brittanica that wheat has been 
"grown in Norway as far north as latitude 65 degrees," only 
1-1/2 degrees from the arctic circle. We thus have conclusive 
evidence that practically all of the wheat of the world 
is grown in the Temperate Zone. 

[Brother W. next proves satisfactorily (we omit 
the evidences which are lengthy) that the 45th parallel 
is the center of the wheat producing belt: and this 
line he finds runs through the principal wheat state 
of these United States— passing through its capital city, 
Minneapolis, the greatest wheat and wheat flour market 
in the world;— with twenty-six flouring mills producing 
over 10,000,000 barrels per annum. 

Seeking next for the date of harvest, he gives 
abundant statistics to prove that the first day of August 
would represent the average middle of wheat harvest 
the world over, and continues—] 



THE LENGTH OF THE DAY. 



Having thus ascertained beyond all reasonable 
question that the center of the world's wheat belt is 
the 45th parallel of latitude, and that its representative 
harvest day is August 1st, it becomes a comparatively 
simple matter to ascertain the length of the 
average wheat harvest day. It is only necessary to 
find the time of sunrise and sunset on the 45th parallel 
of latitude on August 1st. 

page 91 

[Further elaborate calculations are given here, showing 
that--] From 4.48 A.M. to 7.24 P.M. is 14 hours 
and 36 minutes, which, if these calculations are correct, 
is therefore the length of the harvest day of the world. 

FEBRUARY 1ST, 1899, MARKS THE CLOSE OF THE DAY. 



We are now ready to apply what we have learned. 
If the length of the harvest period from October 1st, 
1874, to October 1st, 1914, be considered as a day, part 
of which is light and part darkness, we can easily find 
what portion of the forty-year period will correspond 
with the daylight. To begin with, we will reduce the 
forty years of "harvest" to months. 40 times 12 
equals 480 months. Now, taking the length of the 
average harvest day, we have 14 hours and 36 minutes 
=14.6 hours=14.6/24 or 146/240 or 292/480 of the day. The 14 hours 
and 36 minutes from sunrise to sunset, therefore, corresponds 
to 292 months from the time when the Sun 
of Righteousness arose, October 1st, 1874. (MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II., p. 188.) 292 months equals 24 
years and 4 months. 24 years and 4 months from 
October 1st, 1874, brings us to February 1st, 1899, as 
marking the close of this harvest day (sunset), and 
would seem to indicate that by that time the harvest 
work [of gathering from the world] will be finished 
[— tho much threshing and winnowing may still be in 
order]; i.e., that the last of the "overcomers" will 
have been sealed with the knowledge of present truth, 
and the shadows of the night, wherein no man can 
work, will then begin to settle down. 

But, even after the sunlight is withdrawn, it seems 
probable that there will still be a period corresponding 
to twilight, in which those who are really anxious to 
labor in the Master's cause may find the opportunity. 
It is plain that there must come a time when the last 
member of the prospective bride of Christ will come to 
a knowledge of the truth. It is clear also, that after 
that time has come, he or she must, to some extent at 



least, "spend and be spent" in the Master's service. 
This being the case, it follows as a matter of course, 
that the "door" of opportunity will not be immediately 
and forever closed when the last saint has been sealed, 
but that the shadows will gradually deepen. It seems 
clear to me, therefore, that while it will still be possible 
to work for the Master after February 1st, 1899, 
it will not be possible to do any further [outward] 
harvest work, for the last overcoming saint will have 
been "sealed in his forehead" with a knowledge of 
the truth before that time. It behooves us all to do 
with our might what our hands find to do, while it is 
called to-day. 

CONFIRMED BY THE TIME OF PUBLICATION OF THE 
"PLAN OF THE AGES." 

From a careful study of Revelation, I became convinced 
long ago that the 10th chapter refers, in general, 
to the rise and development of present truth, but specifically 
to MILLENNIAL DAWN; please see also pages 
88, 89 of Volume III. 

As nearly as I can ascertain, the publication of 
the first volume of this wonderful set of Bible helps 
was looked for eagerly by all the friends of the truth, 
and the book itself was and still is regarded by its 
author as his first clear and systematic presentation of 
the divine plan of the ages. In support of this I quote 
from pages 1 14, 1 15 of Harvest Sittings, as follows:— 

"It was about this time that. ..I took occasion 
to promise MILLENNIAL DAWN, which should present 
the Plan of the Ages in the clearer, more orderly manner 
made possible by the new light shed upon every 
feature of it by the lessons from the Tabernacle;" and 
again: "Some who have The Three Worlds or the old 
edition of Day Dawn, would perhaps like to know my 
present opinion of them— whether I still think them 
profitable books to loan to truth seekers. To this I 
reply, Certainly not; because the very immature views 
of God's truth therein presented fall far short of what 
we now see to be God's wonderful plan.. ..All now 
so clear was then blurred, mixed and indistinct. Neither 
had we seen the steps or planes, shown upon the Chart 
of the Ages, MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., which have 
assisted so many to distinguish between justification 
and sanctification, and to determine their present standing 
and relationship to God.... Even Food for Thinking 
Christians I no longer commend, because it is less 
systematic than later publications." Again, in speaking 
of these earlier works it says: "Things which are 
now clear as noonday were then cloudy and mixed." 

Thus, by your own words, it is apparent that the 
light of truth did not shine upon all the features of the 
Divine Plan until we were well on in the harvest day— 
until noonday— until the "Sun" had reached the zenith 
and poured its light-giving rays into the secret recesses 



of the deep things of God. And what was noonday to 
you was noonday to all, as soon as The Plan of The 
Ages had been published. 

To find, therefore, the time of publication of the 
Plan of the Ages will, it seems to me, be to find midday 
of this harvest season, and this can be easily done. 
On the fourth cover-page of every paper bound copy of 
The Plan of the Ages occur these words: "Special 
Issue of Zion's Watch Tower, representing numbers 
3, 4 and 5 of Volume VIII.," which numbers correspond 
to November 1st, 1886, December 1st, 1886 and 
January 1st, 1887. As the middle date of these three 
is December 1st, 1886, that is evidently the midday 
hour of this harvest day. 

In the "Helps" in the back of my Bible I find the 
following remarks under the heading "The Day and 
its Divisions:" "The hour varied in length with that 
of the daylight to be subdivided. To compute any 
given hour of a Jewish day in modern terms is thus a 
matter of some complication, as only one hour of the 
Jewish day,— that of noon— would always correspond 
with one hour of our day." Reckoning back, therefore, 
from this important hour, midday, to sunrise, (assuming 
the publication of MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., to 
have been midday in this 40 year harvest day) we find 
that the difference between October 1st, 1874, and 
December 1st, 1886, or, in other words, the first half 
of the harvest day (from sunrise to noon), is 12 years 
and 2 months. Accordingly, the last half of the day, 
or from midday to sunset, will be of the same length. 
12 years and 2 months from December 1st, 1886, 
brings us to February 1st, 1899, and exactly confirms 
what we had previously learned. If this were all the 
evidence to show that February 1 st, 1 899 marks the 
date of sealing of the last overcomer, it would be sufficient, 
but there is still more. 

page 92 

CONFIRMED BY THE HALF HOUR OF SILENCE. 



After mentioning, in Chap. 6, the various epochs 
which, under the symbols of seals, mark the events 
connected with the rise and fall of Papacy and with 
those of "the time of the end," Revelation 7:2,3, 
says: "And I saw another angel [messenger] ascending 
from the East [the messenger of the covenant— 
the Sun of Righteousness], having the seal of the living 
God [the seventh and last]" and he cried with a 
loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to 
hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the earth, 
neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the 
servants of our God in their foreheads." The balance 
of the chapter, verses 4-17, seems to me to be a parenthesis, 



thrown in to conceal, until God's due time, 

the meaning of the first verse of chapter 8. If I understand 

the subject correctly, this verse closes the 

subject of the seals, the balance of chapter 8 dealing 

with an entirely different subject. 

Correctly translated, the verse reads, "And when 
he had opened the seventh seal there was silence in 
heaven during half an hour." The word "silence" 
has a double significance. It not only conveys the impression 
of a time of deep study and thoughtfulness, 
but of a calm before a storm, and as here used seems to 
me to plainly mean both. Please note carefully that 
this time of silence takes place 

(1) While the saints are being sealed. 

(2) While the winds of the time of trouble are 
withheld, and see how perfectly it coincides with both 
thoughts. 

Again, Christ and his Church, since April 1st, 
1878 (the date when "He took to himself his great 
power and began his reign") really constitute the 
heaven, and as the prophecy, "He uttered his voice 
[i.e., broke the "silence"], the earth melted," is not 
yet fulfilled, I hold it to be unmistakable evidence that 
the time of silence and the work of sealing are one and 
the same thing; and that both began April 1st, 1878. 
This is the date when it was first possible to apply the 
Lord's command, "Come out of her, my people;" for 
it was not till then that Babylon was cast off; this is 
the date marked in the time parallels as the time when 
our Lord took to himself his great power and began his 
reign; it marks the rejection and commencement of 
the fall to everlasting destruction of what has constituted 
the heavens all down during the Gospel age; it 
indicates the beginning of the return of favor to fleshly 
Israel; it is the end of the 360-year periods or 
"times" of Revelations; it is the date when the 
first resurrection (of the Church, the body of Christ) 
began, and the time from which it is said, "Blessed 
are the dead who die in the Lord from now henceforth." 
It is, therefore, a focal point toward which the rays of 
prophecy converge. 

Moreover, since then the work of "sealing" the 
saints has progressed in an orderly, systematic and 
wonderfully thorough manner. During all this time 
the winds of the time of trouble have been held and 
the "silence in heaven" which commenced, as we have 
shown, on April 1st, 1878, still continues. The seventh 
seal, by way of contrast with the other seals, is called 
the "Seal of the living God." It lies wholly within 
God's day,— the seventh thousand-year day, the Millennium, 
—and the events which occur under it are 
specially under God's direction. The scale, therefore, 
by which the half hour of silence should be measured 
is not the "year for a day" scale by which God measures 
human events, but is the scale by which God 
measures his own work. In speaking of the events of 



this day of judgment, Peter says, "one day is with the 

Lord as a thousand years and a thousand years is as 

one day." (2 Peter 3:8.) Using this divinely provided 

scale it becomes a very easy matter to find the 

length of the half hour. One half hour is one forty-eighth 

of a literal day. One forty-eighth of a thousand 

years is 20 years and 10 months. 20 years and 10 

months from April 1st, 1878, brings us again to February 

1st, 1899, as marking the date when the last 

overcomer will be sealed, and the storm of the great 

time of trouble will begin to break. Perhaps it will 

be worth mentioning that by this scale one hour would 

be 41 years and 8 months, this corresponds with the 

period from the beginning of the seventh thousand 

years or Day of the Lord, to October 1st, 1914, and reminds 

one of Rev. 18:10,17,19, where it is thrice 

repeated that "in one hour" the judgment and desolation 

of Babylon takes place. 

CONFIRMED BY THE LENGTH OF THE NIGHT. 



In several places in MILLENNIAL DAWN reference 
is made to the fact that the French Revolution is a 
type of the great time of trouble or "night," into 
which we anticipate the world will soon be plunged; 
and it seems probable that if we can find the length of 
that period of unrest, we may be able to learn something 
of further advantage. After mentioning the 
gathering of the National Assembly, and their claim 
on June 17th, 1789, that they were the legitimate representatives 
of the French people, Anderson's General 
History, page 572 says:— 

"Thus was inaugurated that tremendous social 
and political convulsion known as the French Revolution, 
which in its progress not only overturned the government 
of France, but threw the whole of the civilized 
world into violent commotion, uprooting institutions 
that had withstood the assaults of ages. The king and 
his ministers, dismayed at the determination shown by 
the lower order and desiring to check their proceedings, 
attempted to exclude them from their hall and thus 
suspend their sittings. ...An insurrection of the populace 
of Paris ensued, and the Bastile, a noted prison, 
was stormed and captured by the mob, July 14th, 1789. 
The excited populace then proceeded to Versailles and 
demanded that the king and royal family should return 
to Paris, and Louis felt himself obliged to comply." 
(July 17th, 1789.) 

Concerning king Louis' memorable journey from 
Versailles to Paris, Abbott's "Life of Marie Antoinette," 
says:— 

"As on the morning of the 17th of July, the king 
entered his carriage, with a slender retinue and with 
no military protection, to expose himself to the dangers 



of his tumultuous capital, this whole body formed in 
procession, on foot, and followed him. A countless 
throng of artisans and peasants flocked through all the 
streets of Versailles, and poured in from the surrounding 
country, armed with scythes and bludgeons, and 

page 93 

joined the strange cavalcade. Every moment the multitude 
increased, and the road, both before and behind 
the king, was so clogged with the accumulating mass 
that seven hours passed before the king arrived at the 
gates of the city. During all this time he was exposed 
to every conceivable insult. As Louis was conducted 
to the Hotel de Ville a hundred thousand armed men 
lined the way, and he passed along under the arch of 
their sabres crossed over his head. The cup of degradation, 
he was compelled to drain to its dregs." 

As the first great result of the French Revolution 
was to humble royalty, to destroy reverence for 
"names" of men, (Rev. 11:13), we are safe in fixing 
upon the date of the humbling of the French monarch, 
July 17th, 1789, as the time when something more 
than claims had been made, or mob violence attempted, 
and the people had begun to know their power and to 
use it. We therefore look upon this date as the real 
beginning of the "tremendous social and political convulsion" 
of that period. 

Now looking ahead to the great time of trouble 
coming, we know that it will only come to its final end 
when Isaiah 2:2-4 is fulfilled— "And many people shall 
go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the mountain 
of the Lord, to the house of Jacob, and he will teach 
us of his ways and we will walk in his paths." With 
this in mind we look amid the troublous events which 
stirred France from end to end a century ago, for a 
personage who was not only a mighty factor in those 
events, but who, so far as he was able, so shaped them 
as to cause them all, eventually, to work together for 
his own aggrandizement. Needless to say we find him 
in the "Man of Destiny"— Napoleon Bonaparte, he 
who so narrowly missed becoming a universal monarch 
that he is described at length in that wonderful 
eleventh chapter of Daniel, in which they all find a place.— 
See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., chapter 2. 

As all students of history know, Napoleon, during 
the latter part of the French time of trouble, caused 
the fickle populace to really play into his hands. He 
became successively the First Consul, then Consul for 
life, and finally Emperor. But even when he had 
been crowned Emperor of the French he had not yet 
attained the height of his power, and we must look for 
an event in his life which will correspond with the 
homage which, about October 1st, 1914, we expect will 
be paid to the rightful Lord of Earth. Such event did 
occur, and by those who feared and hated him was considered 



of such importance that it caused a coalition 
to be formed against him by the combined governments 
of Europe. From Arnault and Panckoucke's Life of 
Napoleon, Part I., page 206, 1 quote a description of 
this event:— 

"Napoleon no longer indulged the least hesitation 
in putting upon his head the iron crown of the kings 
of the Lombards. In reality, as Napoleon had established 
royalty in France, he could not think of suffering 
a republic to subsist in the north of Italy, and as, 
during his Consulship, he had prepared the French 
for an imperial regimen, he had also brought the Italian 
republic into such a state that it was impossible to preserve 
its independence. From its first existence this 
republic had been led by him, as it were, in leading 
strings, but from the moment he was declared Emperor 
of France a change in the Italian constitution was to 
be expected. In order to be more sure of the assent 
of his new subjects, he used the same means as he had 
adopted in 1802. He summoned the Italian consulta 
to meet him at Paris for the professed purpose of adding 
those modifications and changes that times and 
circumstances had rendered necessary. On the 17th 
of March, 1805, therefore, M. de Melzi, Vice President 
of the Italian republic, arrived at Paris at the head of 
a deputation from the Cisalpine Republic, to express 
their cordial acquiescence in a monarchial and hereditary 
government, and also their wishes that Napoleon, 
being (already) proclaimed king of Italy, would not suffer 
a year to elapse before he came to be crowned," etc. 

This, I believe, was the proudest day of Napoleon's 
life, when the representatives of that country which 
for two thousand years had— under one form of government 
or another— ruled the world, came to lay their 
homage at his feet and beseech him to be their lord. 

Anderson's General History, page 579, under the 
heading "King of Italy," says:— 

"Napoleon received the crown of France from the 
hands of the Pope; and subsequently, at Milan, caused 
himself to be crowned King of Italy, with the famous 
"iron crown" of the Lombards (1805). These assumptions 
of power led to another coalition against 
him, on the part of England, Austria, Russia, Sweden 
and Prussia." 

From this date, March 17th, 1805 (when his imperial 
power was first recognized by the Italian government), 
back to the beginning of the French Revolution, 
July 17th, 1789, was 15 years and 8 months, and if I 
am acting upon right premises this should be the length 
of time from October 1st, 1914, back to the beginning 
of the great time of trouble. 15 years and 8 months 
back from October 1st, 1914, brings us again to Feb. 
1st, 1899, and confirms all we have previously learned! 

Having found the length of the "night" to be 15 
years and 8 months, it may be of interest to note if we 
divide this into four equal watches,— as was the Jewish 



custom,— where the end of the cock-crowing or third 
watch, and the beginning of the morning or fourth 
watch will occur. 15 years and 8 months equals 188 
months; three quarters of 188 months would be 141 
months, or 1 1 years and 9 months. 1 1 years and 9 
months from February 1st, 1899, brings us to November 
1st, 1910. This synchronizes very closely with 
the teachings of the pyramid (Vol. III., p. 363). The 
difference of one month from October 1 st to November 
1st, suggests that possibly the "month" referred to by 
Brother Dickinson in the November 1st, '96, TOWER 
may have a literal as well as a symbolic fulfilment, and 
that some great catastrophe, the worst event of the 
year of October 1st, 1910 to October 1st, 1911, may 
occur about that time, and that as Christ has promised 
his followers that if worthy they would be permitted 
to escape the severest troubles of this coming day of 
wrath, he will take the last one to himself before that 
catastrophe has come. It seems reasonable, also, to 
suppose that it will take but a very short time after the 
last members of the body of Christ (the light of the 
world) have been taken from the earth, until the darkest 
hour of that dark night will have involved Great 
Babylon in inextricable confusion and dismay. 

In love and fellowship, Your brother in Christ, 
July 12, '97. CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 



R2279 : page 94 

JOHN THE BAPTIST AND HIS MURDERERS. 

-MAR. 20.-MATT. 14:1-12.- 

"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out 
of it are the issues of life."— Prov. 4:23. 

THIS lesson relates more particularly to Herod 
and Herodias, than to John the baptizer. It will 
be remembered that John had faithfully reproved Israel's 
sins, calling the nation to repentance— in preparation 
to receive their Messiah and the long promised 
Kingdom of God. His work, while faithfully done so 
far as he was concerned, and while not devoid of fruits, 
was nevertheless a failure as respected the bringing of 
Israel into a proper condition of heart, that as Israelites 
indeed they might be prepared to receive Jesus as 
the Messiah. Had John succeeded, the mission of 
Jesus to Israel would have been successful; and then, 
instead of the nation's being rejected from divine favor 
and overthrown in a great time of trouble, it would 
have received additional divine blessings, taking the 
place now occupied by the Christian Church: but, as it 
was, the words of the prophet were fulfilled, "Tho Israel 
be as the sands of the sea, yet a remnant only shall 



be saved." The unready stumbled, were "broken off." 

In this respect we have seen that John, like Elijah, 
was a type or illustration of the entire Gospel Church 
in the flesh,— in its earthly career.* John himself, 
however, tho a loyal servant to the Lord and a martyr 
for the truth, was not a member of the Gospel Church. 
He belongs on the lower plane, with the overcomers of 
the Jewish age. Our Lord clearly declares this; "The 
law and the prophets were until John; since that time 
the Kingdom of Heaven is preached." (Luke 16:16.) 
Again he said, "There hath not risen a greater than 
John the Baptist; notwithstanding, he that is least in 
the Kingdom of Heaven [Church] is greater than he." 
(Matt. 11:11.) None could share in the "high calling," 
nor in any manner be recognized by the Father 
as members of the house of sons, who died prior to our 
Lord's death and resurrection,— prior to the giving of 
the holy spirit of adoption, whereby all the house of 
sons are "sealed unto the day of redemption."— John 1:12; 
Eph. 4:30. 

John's position in the future, therefore, will not 
be that of a member of the Bride, the Heavenly Kingdom 
class; but with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all 
the prophets, amongst whom he was one of the chief, 
he will be privileged to participate as a member of the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom, and be one of the 
"princes in all the earth." And as a servant of the 
Kingdom he will be greatly honored and blessed and 
used, in that position to which by the grace of God he 
was called. And we might here remark that the ancient 
worthies who will thus be the servants of the 
Kingdom class, are not thus differently honored from 
the Church because less faithful than the overcomers 
of the Gospel age: on the contrary, had they not been 
faithful they would not be honored at all. Only overcomers 
will have any part in the Kingdom work; and 
any part in that work will be honorable and desirable. 
God desired two classes and hence in his plan called 
two classes, both honorable and to honorable service; 
—the one on the earthly plane, the other on the spiritual. 
There was no obligation to "call" either class: 
it is an honor to be called and to be used of the Lord 
in any part of his service; and all thus used will be 
perfect, each on his own plane, and be perfectly satisfied 
with his estate: just as fish are better satisfied to be in 
the water, while birds are better satisfied to be in the air. 

John's candor in reproving Herod for living in 
adultery with his brother Phillip's wife, brought 
against him not only Herod's ill-will, but especially the 
ill-will of the woman. It would seem indeed that it 
was the woman, Herodias, that was the instigator of 
Herod's entire course toward John. We read, "Therefore 
Herodias had a quarrel against him and would 
have killed him; but she could not, for Herod feared 
John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, 
and saved him; and when he heard him, he did many 



things, and heard him gladly."— Mark 6:19-25. 

Herodias was therefore on the lookout for some 
opportunity to overcome Herod's sympathy and fear, 
and to accomplish the death of John, who had now 
been imprisoned, at her instance, for over a year. Her 
opportunity came when, at a birthday banquet, Herod, 
surrounded by his "lords and high captains," and 
charmed by the dancing of Saloam (the daughter of 
Herodias), promised her whatever she might ask even 
to the half of his kingdom. The wickedness and intense 
malignity of the woman's heart against John, 
simply because of his reproof of her wrong course, is 
fully shown by the fact that at her instance the 
daughter chose the death of John in preference even to 
a half of Herod's kingdom. 

Incidentally, too, this narrative shows how great 
an influence a wrong-minded woman can exercise. 
Herod was under her influence to such an extent that 
he had put away his lawful wife to make room for this 
wicked woman: her daughter was under her influence 
so that she was willing to relinquish half a kingdom to 
fulfil her mother's wicked will. One lesson here set 
before us is that, while women naturally are more sentimental 
than men, and under favorable circumstances 
dominated by good sentiments, yet, if they become 
evil-minded and vicious, they are correspondingly disposed 
to go to even greater extremes of wickedness 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., page 251. 

R2280 : page 94 

than their brothers. It is of absolute importance to 
men that they should not only be emptied of the evil 
spirit of selfishness and sin, but that they should be 
filled with the spirit of Christ, the holy spirit: all this 
is still more important as respects woman, with her 
more sentimental nature for either good or evil. 

R2280 : page 95 

What a suggestive lesson is here for mothers in 
respect to their power over their daughters either for 
good or for evil. And here we trespass upon our subject 
sufficiently to remark that woman's proper sphere 
of influence is the home— as saith the Scriptures. A 
true, pure, noble, sensible mother has an almost untellable 
influence for good or for evil with her husband 
and sons as well as with her daughters. What a great 
mistake has been made by some well-intentioned but 
not Scripturally guided mothers in leaving the home 
privileges, opportunities and duties put into their hands 
by Providence, to go out into the world to attempt its 
reformation. How frequently the homes of female 



suffragists and female reformers are neglected, the evil 
effects thereof falling upon husbands and children. 
Let every mother feel that in her own family and family 
connections, and in the opportunities opened to her 
in the Church, the Lord's family, she has abundant 
opportunity for the exercise of every talent and grace, 
and that in a manner fully in accordance with the divine 
Word and therefore in harmony with the wisdom 
which cometh from above. 

Herod was grieved, "sorry," for the unexpected 
turn matters took in connection with his unwise offer. 
We are not to infer from this any heart repentance, 
but merely that the matter was incongruous to his 
sentiments and wishes. But proud of his word as a 
king, proud also of the power, and desirous of appearing 
omnipotent as possible before his nobles, none of 
whom probably were of a kind to have any sympathy 
with John, because also of his oaths, Herod concluded 
to grant the request, and as a result John was beheaded, 
and the cruel, vindictive and wicked Herodias received 
the ghastly present of his head, while John's 
followers buried the remainder of his body and bore 
the news to Jesus, his friend. 

John's courage and fearlessness in reproving the 
King should not, we believe, be taken as an indication 
of proprieties, by the Lord's people. To our understanding 
John exceeded his mission when he undertook 
a personal correction of the king. He was right in 
speaking publicly and boldly against sin in its any and 
every form; and had Herod inquired of him respecting 
the subject, it would have been duty for John to have 
made the statement here recorded. And it is barely 
possible that Herod did inquire and that John was not 
a busybody in the king's business, but merely told the 
truth in answer to an inquiry. This however does not 
appear from the general narrative. We suggest, however, 
that the Lord's people would generally best proclaim 
the truth in a general way without making applications 
of it to persons in particular, rulers or others, 
unless so requested by them. It is, we believe, sufficient, 
if principles of righteousness are firmly held 
and publicly stated. 

However, it is altogether possible, indeed probable 
we think, that John's course which brought him 
into conflict with Herod was in some degree typical of 
the course of the Gospel Church in this present time; 
and of the course of events that may be expected. If 
it be a type, Herod would represent civil government, 
and the unlawful wife would represent the nominal 
church, which throughout the symbolic Scriptures is 
represented as a woman, Jezebel, etc. Should it prove 
to be a type by its fulfilment in antitype, the fulfilment 
will probably be on something like the following lines: 
(1) A partial reunion of Church and State. (This 
seems to be now in process of development.) (2) In 
such case it would become the duty of the true Church, 



the forerunners and announcers of the Messianic Kingdom, 
to reprove the civil powers as well as the nominal 
church systems, and to declare their union unlawful- 
contrary to the Word of God. (3) The effect of this 
would pretty surely be to awaken the animosity of 
both civil and religious powers; but it would draw out 
specially the animosity and venom of the latter. (4) 
The church nominal, in her false position would be 
anxious to stifle the reproofs and to destroy the reprovers, 
and the effect would be that the civil power would 
be induced to pass such legislation as would restrain 
the liberty of the faithful ones and hinder them from 
public utterances;— as John was hindered by imprisonment. 
(5) Jezebel's personal influence being insufficient 
may subsequently be augmented by the influence 
of her daughter (united Protestantism) who will be so 
fully in sympathy with her as to become her tool in the 
destruction of the most loyal servants of God. 

The Golden Text of this lesson is well worthy of 
being deeply engraven upon the hearts of all who seek 
to make their calling and election sure: "Keep thy 
heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of 
life." If the heart, the thoughts, be kept strictly under 
control in full harmony with the Lord and his 
Word, all the opposition of the world and the flesh and 
the devil will not be able to overcome us. Being filled 
with the Master's spirit and guided by him, we shall 
thus come off victors, conquerors and more than conquerors 
through him that loved us. 



page 95 

-QUARTERLY REVIEW.-MAR. 27. 



R2280 : page 95 

"THE DOGS EAT OF THE CRUMBS WHICH FALL FROM THE CHILDREN'S TABLE. 

-APRIL 3. -MATT. 15:21-31.- 

"Then came she and worshipped him, 
saying, Lord, help me."— Matt. 15:25. 

SIDON and Tyre lay between Galilee and the 
Mediterranean sea, and the border line of 
these two countries, where they touched the land of 
Israel, are in this lesson called the "coasts." Our 
Lord did not go into the countries of Tyre and Sidon, 
for those were Gentile countries, and he had already 
instructed his disciples not to go into the way of the 
Gentiles. His journey, mentioned in this lesson, was 
still in Israel, in Galilee, but over toward the border 



of Tyre and Sidon. The woman who is the central 
figure came from the Gentile side of the border: she 
no doubt had heard of Israel's hope in a coming Messiah, 
who would be of the house of David, and whose 
Kingdom it was predicted should be a universal Kingdom. 
And she had undoubtedly heard also of Jesus 
and his wonderful works, and of his claim that he was 
Israel's Messiah. Hearing of his close approach to her 
neighborhood, she came to him on behalf of her daughter 

R2280 : page 96 

who was possessed of a demon, obsessed.* In harmony 
with her knowledge she cried to Jesus for help, 
"Have mercy upon me, O Lord, thou Son of David: 
my daughter is grievously vexed of a devil." 

Our Lord's course in making no answer for a time 
was perhaps intended to test the woman's faith as well 
as to manifest it to others, then and since. Perhaps 
also his delay was in order to consider well the path of 
duty, the work which the Father had given him to do. 
What a lesson is here for us: if our Master went into 
the wilderness and into the mountain to pray and to 
meditate, and if here he paused to consider the Father's 
will, how much more need have we to do so;— we, 
whose judgments have so often proved to be unsound, 
and who know that to begin with we are sadly fallen 
and imperfect. Our dear Master's caution should be a 
reproof and a lesson to us; for how apt the majority 
are to speak and act without one moment's thought 
respecting the will of our Father in heaven. 

Our Lord was perhaps weighing the subject, fully 
recognizing the fact that his powers were to be specially 
used with Israel and Israel only, as he himself had 
testified. He seems to have been considering whether 
or not he might reasonably and properly reward the 
faith of the supplicant. While he delayed to answer, 
his disciples seemingly took up the woman's cause, 
whether from sympathy or from vexation because she 
was interrupting their opportunity for study and communion 
with the Lord, we cannot judge; but their suggestion 
evidently was that the Lord grant her request 
and "send her away" in peace. As tho still weighing 
the question and as tho desirous that the disciples 
should discern the logic of his course and the propriety 
of his decision, he answered the disciples, "I am not 
sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel."— 
Verse 24. 

Quite probably the poor woman heard our Lord's 
disclaimer of any mission to the Gentiles; but so great 
was her love for her daughter, and so great her faith 
in the Lord's power, that she persisted, and falling before 
the Master, she worshipped him, saying, "Lord, 
help me." Her daughter's cause was her cause. Our 
Lord's response, that it would not be proper to take 
the food away from the children of God to give it to 



dogs, she understood fully. She recognized Israel as 
the children of the Kingdom that God had promised 
to their father Abraham and his seed; and she well 
knew that all Gentiles were reckoned as "dogs." But 
our Lord's language seemed nevertheless to give her 
some hope, for it would appear that he used a word 

R2281 : page 96 

for dogs which signifies not ferocious dogs but house-dogs 
—dogs which were friends and companions of the 
children. And so the poor woman, taking advantage 
of this thought, pressed her prayer for help, saying 
that the friendly dogs do get some of the children's 
bread, sometimes, cast to them from the table: and she 
desired that some crumb of favor might be granted to 
her. Our Lord was greatly touched by her faith 
which, while persistent, was not intrusive nor assertive; 
and as a result her prayer was granted. Her 
daughter was healed. 

Here, too, we have a valuable lesson respecting 
what course is pleasing to our Lord when we approach 
him; for our Lord approved the woman's course. Let 
us note that she was not brazen and assertive. She 
did not attempt to be wiser or more just than God, and 
to criticize his partiality toward the elect seed of Abraham. 
So far from demanding that her wishes be 
granted instanter she did not even express a wish. She 
merely told the Lord the nature of her trouble, and 
said, "Lord have mercy on me." "Lord help me." 
She left it entirely to the Lord's wisdom how the help 
and mercy should be bestowed. 

Alas! how many Christians of years of experience 
have less idea of how to approach the Lord acceptably 
than had this poor heathen woman. But it is not too 
late to learn better. Let us remember this example 
of what was pleasing and acceptable eighteen centuries 
ago; for we deal with the same Lord who changes not. 
Sometimes our Lord may be pleased to grant physical 
relief and at other times he may do as he did to Paul 
—give us the more grace to bear the physical ills, saying 
"My grace is sufficient for thee, my strength is 
made perfect in weakness." 

Turning his course inward again toward the Sea 
of Galilee, our Lord rested in the mountain and healed 
the multitudes, lame, blind, etc., all "afflicted of the 
devil." For we are to remember that all afflictions 
are either directly or indirectly of Satan: by his temptations 
he first induced our first parents to sin, and 
thus brought upon them the penalty of sin, death,— 
with all its train of attendant evil, pain, sickness, sorrow; 
difficulty, mental, physical and moral. And subsequently, 
all the way down, by additional temptations 
to sin, through the pride of life, the lust of the eye, 
etc., Satan has continued to ensnare and to injure the 
fallen race. And thus all sickness and blemish, of every 



kind, may be either directly or indirectly charged to 
him. Our Lord in healing the people was doing so 
much in offset to the work of Satan; but all that was 
done in the few years of his earthly ministry, was only 
a type, a figure, a foreshadowing of the great coming 
work of blessing the world with restitution— which 
will include not only physical, but mental and moral 
recuperation and release from Satan's power. "For 
this purpose Christ was manifested that he might destroy 
death and him that hath the power of death, 
that is, the devil. "-Heb. 2:14; Acts 3:19-21. 

It is claimed by some that miracles are impossibilities 
and the reason that they give is that they are 
contrary to the laws of nature. But this is shallow reasoning 
Every person of observation knows that mankind 
has the skill and ability to overcome the laws of 
nature to some extent, and that he frequently does so 
to his own comfort and advantage. For instance, gravity 
is one of the known laws of nature, yet, every time we 
walk upstairs and are lifted upward in an elevator, we 
are overcoming and going contrary to the laws of 
nature. According to this same law of nature water 
gravitates downward, yet by overcoming this law of 
nature with pumps, etc., mankind has one of his greatest 
conveniences in the waterworks systems of the civilized 
world. If then the laws of nature can be controlled 
to some extent by man for his own convenience, 
how much more able is God to control the operation 
of his own laws, so that all things shall work together 
for good to them that love him;— and for the carrying 
out of any and all of the divine purposes, in this age 
and in the ages to come. 



*See— What Say the Scriptures about Spiritism? 



page 97 