Fortify Yourselves for the Activity Ahead
TODAY there is much activity among Jehovah’s dedicated people, even as the annual report for the service year of 1964 in this issue shows. In many lands this activity is carried on without severe opposition.
But it will not always be that way. We know from Bible prophecies that persecution will increase and that the endurance of every dedicated Christian will be tested to the limit. What would you do if you were separated from your congregation and had to continue alone? or, while preaching underground you heard that a prominent brother had turned traitor, and available evidence indicated that it was so? How long would you go out of your way to make opportunities to exalt Jehovah’s name under such conditions? How much and how long you would serve would depend upon how well you had fortified yourself for the activity ahead. As Peter counseled: “Brace up your minds for activity, keep your senses completely.” —1 Pet. 1:13.a
How can we fortify ourselves for the activity ahead? First of all, by looking to Jehovah God and leaning upon him at all times. Also, by looking to Jesus Christ and trying to follow him rather than any imperfect fellow human. Looking to human creatures and following them does not give us God’s holy spirit; besides, there is always the danger of their falling away and our falling away with them.—Ps. 91:1-16; 1 Pet. 2:21; 1 Cor. 1:10-13.
Further, to fortify ourselves for future activity we must take advantage of all the spiritual provisions and all the opportunities for service that are available to us now. We must cultivate a keen appreciation for these so that, when adversity makes these more difficult to come by, we will not become easily discouraged but will put forth ever greater and more courageous efforts to enjoy these. In particular will zealous fearless activity now fortify us for the activity ahead. By braving ridicule to offer Bible magazines to people on the street, by continuing from house to house in all kinds of weather, by persistently making return visits, we will strengthen ourselves so as to be able to endure under adversity.
And not to be overlooked is prayer. It is one of the most important aids we have, and we should make frequent use of it. Certainly in the trying times ahead we will be resorting frequently to prayer. To pray effectively then we must learn to pray effectively now. Prayer helps us to overcome uncertainty and fear. It helps to strengthen our view of God’s Word and to apply it in our lives.—Phil. 4:6, 7.
In all such ways we can fortify ourselves for the more strenuous activity ahead as well as enjoying many blessings now.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, May 1, 1964.

