You Need the Bible
“It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” Those inspired words of the Holy Bible, found at Jeremiah 10:23, stress the fact that man needs the Bible. He needs it because man was not made to direct his steps without divine guidance. Just as it would be foolish for a purchaser of a complex electronic computer to try to operate it without instructions from its maker, so it would be foolishly walking in darkness for man to try to deal with life’s activities without counsel from man’s Maker.
You need the Bible, then, because you are confronted with problems that require reliable guidance. You are certain to be faced with moral issues that call for right decisions. Wrong decisions spell tragedy and heartache. The Bible can direct you in the right way by educating your conscience and moral sense.
So many decisions need to be made, too, regarding personal activities. The Bible contains principles to guide you in the selection of recreation, in determining whether you should join this club or that organization, and in deciding what kind of people to associate with and what kind to avoid. What are you to think about the new fads, philosophies and theories of the day? The Bible provides sound guidance for you in these matters, setting forth righteous principles, making clear in this vast sphere of personal activities what is right and what is wrong.
You need the Bible also in directing family affairs, concerning which there is so much nonsense masquerading in the garb of wisdom. From it the husband can learn his Scriptural role, the wife hers, for a successful marriage. What about the conflicting theories for rearing children in a delinquent world? You need the Bible, for its counsel about family affairs is clear-cut—and it is right.
Guidance in the realm of business affairs is also vital. Whether employer, employee or in business for yourself, you need reliable principles to guide you if you are to avoid sorrow and attain success.
With the Bible, you have a Light, and by using it, you do not walk in darkness. The psalmist wrote: “Your word is a lamp to my foot, and a light to my roadway.” (Ps. 119:105) You need this Lamp. Without it, you will be traveling in darkness and may plunge into the abyss of tragedy.
So why walk in darkness? Use God’s Light to illuminate your steps on the roadway of life. Then you will have God’s enriching blessing and avoid the pain and sorrow that befall those walking in darkness.—Prov. 10:22.

