Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed reading the last several issues of The Watchtower? If so, see if you can recall the following points:
□ Is sickness the result of a specific sin on our part?
No, not necessarily. Sickness is one of the evidences that we have all inherited sin and imperfection from Adam. (Romans 5:12) Deliberate sin, however, can lead to sinning against God’s holy spirit, something far worse than physical sickness. (Matthew 12:31, 32)​—8/15, page 31.
□ Why should Christians be time conscious?
God has always had an appointed time for expressing his will and judgment. By consulting the Bible we can be aware of the arrival of events affecting humans, such as Christ’s invisible presence.​—10/1, pages 4-7.
□ What outstanding evidence today shows that God’s rulership is a reality?
Evidencing the reality of God’s rulership is the existence of millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide already subjecting themselves to God’s Kingdom. They no longer view things racially or nationalistically but work together as a united body of brothers and sisters. (John 13:34, 35)​—10/15, pages 6, 7.
□ What is the “holy place” that is invaded by the “disgusting thing” that causes desolation?
The “holy place” is the “heavenly Jerusalem” represented by faithful anointed Christians on earth. But religious leaders, by placing the United Nations as a substitute for God’s Kingdom, have in effect made this man-made makeshift stand in the “holy place.” This is a “disgusting thing” in God’s sight. Also, Christendom claims to have a “holy place” representing her religious field of operation. Today, the United Nations stands as a threat to this “holy place” of Christendom due to the action taken by many atheistic nations. God’s prophetic word shows that desolation will result from such confrontation. (Revelation 17:16)​—11/15, pages 5, 6.
□ What is the “sacred secret” discussed by Paul in his letter to the Ephesians?
It is God’s purpose to restore universal peace and unity by means of his “administration.” (Ephesians 1:9, 10)​—12/1, page 9.

