God’s Word Is Alive
Jesus Christ​—Little Baby or Reigning King?
DURING the Christmas season many persons think of Jesus simply as a little baby in a manger. Scenes are displayed of “wise men” bringing gifts to a newborn babe. People say that it was at this season of the year that Jesus was born. Is this what the Bible says?
Why not open your Bible and see what it actually does say. Read carefully Luke 2:1-20 and Matthew 2:1-16. Now, does the Bible not say that shepherds were in the fields taking care of their flocks when Jesus was born? Since December in Palestine was the rainy, cold season, it is not likely that shepherds would be out-of-doors with their flocks at that time of year.
Notice, too, that this was the time of the registration when the people were required to travel to their home city to register. It certainly is not likely that the Roman rulers would require a people that were already inclined to revolt against them to make that trip to register in the dead of winter. Other evidence, too, proves that Jesus was not born at Christmastime. (See page 10.)
Did you also note that when the so-called wise men brought him gifts, Jesus no longer was a babe in a manger? The Bible says that “when they went into the house they saw the young child with Mary its mother.” (Matthew 2:11) Who really were these “wise men” that were guided, not by the instructions of an angel, but by a star? They were Magi, or astrologers. And although astrology is popular among many people, God condemns it.​—Isaiah 47:12-15.
As the Bible record shows, those astrologers were not at first directed by the star to Jesus in Bethlehem but to murderous King Herod in Jerusalem. Now, if God had used the star to guide the astrologers, would he have directed them first to Jerusalem so that they would come in contact with that dangerous king? Obviously not!
When the star finally led the astrologers to Jesus, God stepped in and warned those men in a dream not to go back to Herod. God thereby saved the life of Jesus. How do we know? Because when Herod learned that the astrologers had fled without reporting to him, he sought to kill Jesus. But by then God had provided for Jesus’ escape. So that star was actually a scheme of Satan the Devil to have Jesus killed!
It is also a scheme of the Devil today to try to make people think of Jesus only as a helpless baby. But he is not! Before Jesus was born, the angel Gabriel told his mother regarding him: “He will rule as king . . . and there will be no end of his kingdom.” (Luke 1:33) Jesus Christ is now ruling as a mighty king in heaven, and if we are to receive life under his Kingdom rule it is vital that we recognize this fact.​—Isaiah 9:6, 7.
[Picture on page 8]
What is there about this scene that is not accurate?
[Pictures on page 9]
The “wise men” followed a star​—where did it come from?
In what way do you view Jesus?

