Announcements
CONGREGATING TOGETHER FOR WORTHWHILE WORKS—Eccl. 12:9.
Witnesses of the Most High God, Jehovah, are closely united together as a family and as an organization, unique and distinct from the ungodly and indifferent world in which they dwell. Being “congregated” by Christ, they are drawn together by love for God and his King, Christ Jesus. They have one aim and purpose, to serve the true God, Jehovah, and to engage in worthwhile works. These worthwhile works honor God and advance the interests of his glorious kingdom. They include the proclamation of the good news of the Kingdom. Throughout June Jehovah’s witnesses will take worthwhile knowledge to the people in the form of two bound Bible-study aid books and two booklets on a contribution of $1. All persons who desire to engage in worthwhile works are invited to contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses.
FOR CONTINUAL BIBLE READING
By its very name, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society gives evidence of its interest in the closely related fields of Bible distribution and Bible education. Jehovah’s witnesses, who have used this nonprofit corporation since 1884, are busy in every community, ever alert to help truth seekers in their quest for Bible knowledge. It is only in God’s Word that the truth may be found. Never cease studying it, for with such study comes great peace of mind now and, along with it, positive assurance of a new world ahead, a world of everlasting peace and righteousness.
In its years of service the Society has printed and distributed many different translations of the Bible. One of such is the excellent American Standard Version containing all sixty-six books of the Bible. It is printed on thin Bible paper and bound in light-brown leatherette. Among its features are a 95-page concordance, maps and footnotes, as well as helpful markings for pronunciation. It can be yours for only $1. Send now!
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
The Society’s office, factory and Bethel home in Brooklyn, New York, will be closed from August 16 to 31 inclusive. Orders and correspondence sent in during that period will not be handled until sometime after the reopening of the offices. Please anticipate your needs and place your orders in ample time for attention before the vacation period.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
July 6: What Does It Take to Make You Happy? ¶1-19. Page 337.
July 13: What Does It Take to Make You Happy? ¶20-24, and What It Takes to Be Happy Forever. Page 343.

