Congregating Together for Worthwhile Works
“EVERYTHING is vanity!” Thus wise King Solomon accurately appraised all human striving after material gain. And no wonder, since there is so much frustration connected with such striving. Even if one does gain his goals, which is seldom the case, he then may be in no position to enjoy his gains or he may have to leave them to one who is not deserving. Uncertainties such as these make man’s striving a “calamitous work.”—Eccl. 1:2; 4:3.a
Since Solomon proved by his experience that materialism does not pay, why experiment ourselves only to arrive at the same frustrating conclusion? Why not be wise and learn from a study of God’s Word and from the experiences of others?
King Solomon gave others the benefit of his experience in his book misnamed Ecclesiastes—misnamed, for it would better have been termed “The Congregator,” since that is what the original Hebrew word means. Solomon was a congregator of his people. He had them come together, as at the time of the dedication of the temple. Additionally, by means of his book, Ecclesiastes, he endeavored to congregate them away from the vain and fruitless works of men and to the worthy service of the God to whom they, as a nation, were dedicated. As the congregator, Solomon well pictured the Greater Congregator, Jesus Christ.
Concerning his own activity as congregator of his people Solomon says: “And besides the fact that the congregator had become wise, he also taught the people knowledge continually, and he pondered and made a thorough search, that he might arrange many proverbs in order.” By a study of this book of Ecclesiastes we are helped closer to God and to a finer appreciation of his service.—Eccl. 12:9.
When Solomon said that “everything is vanity!” he was thereby referring to everything he took in survey, the things that he saw other men doing and with which he experimented to see if they really brought satisfaction. He therefore did not include his building of the temple nor his congregating his people for the worship of Jehovah God. And so today, while all materialistic pursuit is vanity, all activity related to the pure religion of Jehovah God is not vain, is not a calamitous occupation but constitutes worthwhile works. And this is especially true of the work of preaching this good news of the Kingdom in all the earth for a witness.—Matt. 24:14.
To carry on such worthwhile works it is necessary for us to congregate together. By means of our very dedication to do God’s will and to follow in Jesus’ footsteps, and also by prayer, we become congregated in spirit, as it were, with all other dedicated Christians. But we must also literally congregate together to the extent we have opportunity by attending the weekly congregational meetings provided for us in the New World society, as well as the larger assemblies. By thus congregating together we become stronger in faith, grow in love and learn to be more able ministers as well as more effective by reason of united activity. And in a special sense we congregate together for worthwhile works when we meet at specified times for joining others in preaching from house to house, in the homes and on the streets.
By congregating together for worthwhile works in all such ways we are able lovingly to help one another and to build up our sense of togetherness, of belongingness, and of mutual dependence and need.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, November 15, 1957.

