Vol. XXXVUT 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MAY 15, 1917 


No. 3 f> 


THE COMMISSION OF A CHRISTIAN 

"The Spirit of the Xiord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek. 

he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the 

prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance 

of our God; to comfort all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto 

them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit 

of heaviness, that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of 

the Lord, that he might be glorified." — Isa. 61:1-3. 

Every man who is elected to an office of honor and trust in thority. All recognize the necessity thereof. The Government 


a Government receives a commission. His commission is a 
formal, written warrant, or authority, granting certain powers 
or privileges and authorizing or commanding the performance 
of certain duties. The various officers, legislative, executive 
and judicial, of the United States and of the different States, 
before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, receive
 such a commission, or warrant of authority. If a lawyer 
be elected to a judicial office, his commission, or warrant of authority
, directs that he shall perform the duties of that office. 
Should he ignore these duties or fail to perform them, and 
devote his time to something else, he would be regarded as 
an unfaithful officer. In many jurisdictions the people, by vote, 
would recall him and deprive him of his commission, or auvery
 jealously guards such officers in the performance of their 
respective duties, and by law provides that they shall be relieved
 from military duty in order that they may uninterruptedly
 perform the duties of the office to which they are 
elected and commissioned. 

A Christian is one who has received from Jehovah a very 
high commission. He has surrendered his will to the will of 
God ; he has entered into a covenant, or contract, with Jehovah 
by sacrifice. He has agreed to "renounce all earthly hopes and 
prospects to follow in the footsteps of Jesus, his Redeemer ( 1 
Peter 2:21), and faithfully to perform his duties and obligations
 as a Christian — obligations which have been placed upon 
him by hi* commission, or warrant of authority, and the perr
*082] 


May 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(147-148) 


form&nce of which is essential to Ma sharing the glorious resurrection
 of his Lord and Savior, Christ Jesus. A Christian, appreciating
 the high, position to which he has been called, is like 
St. Paul, earnestly desirous of performing the duties of hh 
office, "if by any means, he might attain unto the resurrection
 of the dead." Like St. Paul, he says, "But one thing I 
do, forgetting the things behind, and stretching towards the 
things before, I press along the line towards the prize of the 
high calling of God by Christ Jesus," (Philippians 3:13, 14, 
Diaglott) The Christian who faithfully performs the duties 
which his Christian commission enjoins upon him is promised 
participation in the chief resurrection and to be forever with 
Christ the Lord, to reign with him for the carrying out of 
God's purposes toward mankind, and to have life everlasting 
on the immortal plane. — Revelation 2:10; 20:6. 

Jesus was the first Christian — the first of the Christ company
. "He is the Head of the body, the church, who is the 
beginning, the first born from the dead — that in all things he 
might have the preeminence." (Colossians 1:18) "And (God) 
hath put all things under his feet, and ga\e him to be the 
Head over all things to the church." (Ephesians 1:22) 
"Christ is the Head of the church." — Ephesians 5:23. 

When Jesus was baptized in Jordan, he was there begotten
 of and anointed with the holy Spirit as the great High 
Priest and King who is to bless all the nations and families 
of the earth. According to the Jewish custom, which was 
typical of things to be performed in the Gospel age, those who 
were called to the office of priest or king were anointed with 
oil. The Scriptures show that such anointing typified the 
anointing of Jesus and the members of his body, of whom 
Aaron the priest was a type. (Psalm 133:1, 2) These are 
to be both priests and kings — priests upon the throne. — Hebrews
 5:6, 10; Genesis 14:18; Revelation 3:21. 

The text set forth at the beginning of this article states 
the terms of the commission, or warrant of authority, which 
Jehovah has granted and given to Jesus and all his faithful
 followers. The duty and obligation, then, is laid upon each 
one to perform that commission faithfully. Jesus expressly so 
applied this to himself. (Luke 4:18, 19) From Pentecost until 
now all who have come into Christ by being baptized into his 
death (Romans 6:3) have received this anointing of the holy 
Spirit (1 John 2:20, 27) Jehovah has provided in his Word 
clear testimony whereby one may be enabled to determine for 
himself whether or not he has received this anointing. (Romans
 8:14, 16, 17) Therefore it is the duty of all having 
received this divine warrant, or authority, or commission, to 
perform the obligations which they have assumed. — Luke 
9:62; 14:28-35. 

THE CHKISTIA2TS DUTY 

The Scriptures show that God has a great plan which he 
is working out in an orderly manner. It has pleased him to 
deal through human agencies. He dealt with the Jews for 
eighteen centuries, using that people to make types and pictures
 of the sacrifices and development of his kingdom class. 
Having called, begotten and anointed the followers of the Great 
Master, and that without regard to sect or denomination, Jehovah
 has marked out for such certain duties, a certain course, 
as follows: 

(1) "To preach the glad tidings to the meek." To preach 
means to proclaim, to teach and to instruct. To preach the 
#lad tidings, therefore, means to proclaim the Gospel of the 
kingdom of God, which glad tidings must come to all the peoples
 of the earth in God's due time. 

None can preach understanding^ and in harmony with Jehovah
's way except those who have received this anointing, 
which constitutes their divine ordination, or warrant of authority
 to preach. It devolves upon all such, then, as opportunity
 may offer, to tell mankind concerning the glorious 
kingdom of righteousness that is to be established for the blessing
 of the human race; to teach and instruct all who have the 
cars to hear. We are not instructed or authorized to attempt 
to teach the haughty, the high-minded, those who do not wish 
to be taught, but those only who are teachable — "the meek." 
Such preaching and teaching may be done by oral proclamation 
or by handing out to others the printed Gospel in the form of 
a paper, tract or book, giving them instruction upon the Bible. 
Since the day of Pentecost lentil now, the Lord nt all times 
has had some faithful ones in the world who have proclaimed 
his message and done this very work. Thus it is observed that 
the commission of the Christian is one of active service by doing
 good unto others. The Apostle Paul expressed the obligation
 thus devolving upon the Christian when he said: "For 
though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for 
necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not 
the Gospel" — in harmony with mv commission. — 1 Corinthians 
0:16. 

[60 


(2) "To proclaim the acceptable year of the .Lord." Thia 
"acceptable year" is the period of time in which our heavenly 
Father is willing to accept the sacrifices of those who become 
members of the body of Christ. It covers the entire period of 
the Gospel age from Pentecost until the last member of the 
kingdom class has been called, begotten and developed, and will 
cease at the time when Christ takes, unto himself his completed
 bride. Thereafter there will be no more opportunity to 
declare the message concerning the high calling. Hence it is 
the present duty and privilege of the Christian to call to the attention
 of others who desire to hear that this is the age during
 which Jehovah is selecting those who are called to be 
sharers in Christ's sacrifice and who will be changed in the first 
resurrection from human to spirit beings to be with their Lord. 
The message to the world will come later. 

(3) "And the day of vengeance of our God." The Scriptures
 clearly show that the day of vengeance of God is a period 
of time at the end of the gospel age, when great trouble, sorrow
 and distress shall come upon the nations of the earth; 
that it comes particularly as a result of the disregard of those 
who claim to be Christians of the teachings and admonitions 
of God's Word of truth. The Word of truth, the Word of God, 
shows that had God's message been faithfully delivered to the 
people, and heard by them, the day of vengeance upon the nations
 would have been unnecessary. But Jehovah foretold that 
this great day would be necessary and would come. It is the 
time mentioned by Jesus to St. John, saying, "The nations were 
angry and thy wrath is come." (Revelation 11:18) The Lord 
Jesus pointed out to his disciples that he would come again to 
receive his church unto himself, and that during his second 
presence God's vengeance would come upon the" nations, and 
there would be "upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity
; the sea and the waves roaring; men's hearts failing 
them for fear and for looking after those things which are 
coming upon the earth." — Luke 21:25, 26. 

That time is Scriptural ly spoken of as (r the day of God's 
vengeance" because it would mark the period of time in which 
Jehovah would remove his restraining power and permit the 
angry passions of men to lash the nations to fury and to utterly 
destroy the present order of things. Jehovah's "prophet, speaking
 as though he stood in the very day of the trouble, and as 
the mouthpieee of the Lord, said : 

"I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even 
them that rejoice in my highness. The noise of a multitude in 
the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise 
of the kingdoms of nations gathered together; the Lord of 
Hosts mustereth the host of the battle; they come from a far 
country, from the end of heaven, even the Lord, and the 
weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land." 

"Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people; 
let the earth hear, and all that is therein; the world and all 
things that come forth of it, for the indignation of the Lord 
is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies." — 
Isaiah 13:3-5; 34:1, 2. 

Again, referring to the same time, our Lord Jesus said: 

"For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against 
kingdom; and there will be earthquakes (literal and symbolic 
— revolutions) in various places; there will be famines. These 
will be the beginning of the birth pangs." — Mark 13 :8. 

It is the great privilege of every Christian now living on 
the earth to see these prophetic statements in the course of fulfillment
, and they may therefore recognize that the day of 
God's vengeance is now at hand. Since his commission places 
upon him the obligation of declaring this day of vengeance, any 
Christian who sees that these great Bible prophecies are now 
in process of fulfillment and who fails or refuses to tell forth 
the meaning thereof, proves himself disloyal to the Lord and 
unfaithful to the warrant or authority which has been committed
 to him. So we see that it is the clear duty of the Christian
 to hold himself aloof from the turmoil and trouble now 
upon all mankind, and with calmness and poise of mind to tell 
those who have the hearing ear; the meaning of this distress 
upon the earth, and, having the Spirit of the Lord and the 
Message of the Lord, to direct them to the only remedy for the 
present conditions; namely, Messiah's kingdom and the blessings
 it will bring to those who are willing to accept it upon the 
terms offered. 

(4) "To bind up the broken-hearted." Mark these words 
contained in the Christian's commission! The Lord does not 
say, Go out and make trouble, break many hearts and cause 
many tears of bitterness to flow; but he does say, Your duty 
is to bind up those hearts that are broken by sin, sorrow and 
distress, and to aid such by pouring in the balm of Gilead 
from the Lord's great storehouse — the sweet message of his 
provision for salvation, which is the only thing that will bring 
the peace of mind that passeth all understanding. What a 

83] 


(148-149) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


wonderful privilege, then, the Christian has at this time! The 
earth is full of broken hearts, many of whom, doubtless, have 
ears to hear the message that will soothe and comfort them. 
The duty and privilege of the Christian is to give forth this 
message." 

(f>) "To comfort all that mourn." Is it the duty devolving
 upon the Christian to comfort all those that mourn? Even 
*o! But how is it possible for the Christian to comfort all 
that mourn at thia time, seeing that many will not listen now 
to the message of comfort? We answer: Before this part of the 
commission can be fully accomplished the entire body of Christ 
must be fully developed and united together with him. All 
who have received this anointing of the holy spirit are commissioned
 to do unto their brethren a sweet and blessed service, 
which is: 

(0) "To appoint (that is, to give the exceeding great and 
precious promises contained in the Word) unto them that 
mourn in Zion (the true saints who are yet in some branch 
of the nominal- church, distressed by worldliness, and who 
know not the remedy,) to give unto them beauty for ashes 
( to point them to the beautiful promises concerning the resurrection
 of the dead), the oil of joy for mourning (taking 
away their sadness and turning them to the joy of the Lord), 
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness" (removing 
their heaviness of heart hy showing them the falaity of the 
creeds as contrasted with" the glorious arrangements of the 
Lord for the blessing of all mankind). 

All Christians must first be comforted. God's channel for 
bringing comfort to his people is his word. But none can 
understand this save those who have his Spirit; and so the 
Prophet has declared that during the Gospel age God would 
pour out his Spirit upon his servant? and handmaids (upon 
godly men and women) ; and that after those days (during the 
Millennium) he would pour out his Spirit upon all flesh. During
 the Gospel age the Christian alone is able to understand 
a*nd appreciate the Bible as God's Word of Truth. "Whatsoever
 things were written aforetime were written for our learning
, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures 
might have hope." — Rom. 15:4. 

SOME PBECIOTJS PROMISES FOB ZION'S OOMFOET 

The Christian has many perplexing questions to decide and 
is many times unable to decide the same without aid. To 
such the Lord has said : 

"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean, not 
to thine own understanding. Jn all thy ways acknowledge 
him, and he shall direct thy paths." — Proverbs 3:5 V 6. 
As the stress upon the world grows, the trials of the Christian
 increase; but when he understands the purpose of these 
trials he rejoices. To such the Apostle says: 

"That the trial of your faith, being much more precious
 than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with 
fire, might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the 
appearing of Jesus Christ." — 1 Peter 1:7. 
The Christian finds that to perform his duties, striving to 
fulfil the terms of his commission, or warrant of authority, 
consumes his strength and energy and bring persecution upon 
himself (for he is misunderstood) ; and for the comfort of such 
the Lord declares : 

"Ptecious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his 
saints." "Fear not them that are able to kill the body."— 
Psalm 11(5:15; Matthew 10:28. 
The Christian has many experiences that are difficult for 
him to understand, but the Lord sends us the word of cheer 
through his "chosen vessel": 

"And we know that all things work together for good 
to them that love God, to them who are the called according
 to his purpose." — Romans 8:28. 
The Christian, beholding so many dangers upon every side, 
might quail before his hosts of enemies, fearing violence or 
other injury; but for his comfort our God has said: 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear him and delivereth them. — Psalm 34:7. 
The Christian realizes that his enemies are legion; that 
he is not warring merely against flesh and blood, but against 
evil spirits, the agencies of the adversary, entrenched in high 
places. He realizes his inability to meet his enemies alone. 
For his assurance and strength, and for his comfort of mind 
and heart, the Lord has said to him : 

"The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the 
whole earth, to show his strength in behalf of them whose 
hearts are perfect toward him." — 2 Chronicles 16:!). 
Again the child of God hears the Lord saying to him: "My 
grace is sufficient for thee." — «2 Corinthians 12:9. 

The Christian suffers many afflictions. He realizes the 
truthfulness of the statement that "All who live godly in Christ 


Jesus shall suffer persecution. "' But he hears the reasurring 
words of comfort: 

"For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory." — 2 Corinthians 4:17. 
Men of the world seek the glory which is as, a fading flower; 
but the Christian has the promise of a glory and honor which 
far exceeds anything the world can give, and which no one of 
earth may know — a glory which is eternal. 

The Christian recognizes in these strenuous times that upon 
every side are strife and dissention, trouble and war. He 
keenly realizes that under such conditions a faithful and loyal 
performance of his commission, or authority, of necessity must 
bring persecution upon him; but for his consolation and reassurance
 the Master says to him: 

"Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness
* sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed 
are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you and 
■shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my 
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great i3 your reward
 in heaven." — Matthew 5:10-12. 

The Iy>rd has been selecting those who are willing to undergo 
hardships, misunderstandings and persecutions for his sake. 
He foreknew the great difficulties that' the followers of the 
Master would have, and for the encouragement and comfort 
of such he keeps before the mind of the Christian the promised 
blessings and rewards that shall be granted to the faithful, 
saying : 

"For Zion's (God's chosen people) sake will I not hold 
my peace, and I will not rest until the righteousness 
thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof 
as a lamp that burneth; and the nations shall see thy 
righteousness, and all the kings thy glory ; and thou shaft 
be called by a new name which the Lord shall name! Thou 
shalt be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a 
royal diadem in the hand of thv God." — Isaiah 62:1-3. 
WHY GOD IS TRAINING THE CHRISTIAN CLASS 
It must be apparent to all who carefully look into the 
matter that Jehovah has devoted the long period of the Gospel 
age to selecting and developing Christians, followers of Jesus, 
permitting them to have hard experiences that they may be the 
better prepared for some special purpose and work to follow. 
He is himself the great God of comfort, and has made provision 
for those who come to him, that their hearts may be made glad. 
The Apostle Paul expresses God's purpose when he says : 

"Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesu^ 
Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort, 
who comforteth us in all our tribulations, that we may be 
able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort
 wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God; for as 
the Bufferings of Christ abound in us so our consolation 
also aboundeth by Christ." — 2 Corinthians 1:3-5. 
(7) "That they might be called trees of righteousness, 
the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified." This 
part of our text will be more particularly fulfilled during the 
thousand years' reign of Christ. The trees here referred to are 
God's chosen ones, the royal priesthood, Jesus the head and 
the church his body. They are referred to as "trees of righteousness
, Jehovah's planting," because he has planted them, 
and all the body members of Christ have been made righteous 
through the merit of the Lord Jesus. In Revelation we read : 
"Then the angel showed me a river of the water of life, as clear 
as a crystal, issuing from the throne of God and the Lamb, in 
the middle of the street of the city. On each side of the river 
was the tree of life, which bare twelve maimer of fruits, producing
 one crop each month ; the leaves of the trees served 
as a cure for the nations." — 'Revelation 22:1, 2. 20th Centur\ 
Translation. 

Thus the Lord describes The Christ complete— Jesus Christ 
in the midst of the new kingdom, and the members of his body. 
described as trees of life, the leaves of Which — their professions 
and teachings during the times of restitution — will be for the 
healing and blessing of the sin-sick and sorrowing nations of 
the world. 

During that glorious reign of Messiah, Cod's promise made 
to Abraham, saying, "In thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed," shall be in operation and fully realized by 
the peoples of earth. This 3eed is primarily The Christ, Head 
and body. Secondarily, there will .be an earthly seed of Abraham
 — the faithful of natural Israel restored. For many centuries
 the poor Jews have been persecuted and driven from one 
nation to another, but then they will come to a knowledge and 
understanding of the truth. Then will be fulfilled the words of 
[St. Paul, "So all Israel shall be saved; as it is written, There 
shall come out of Zion the Iteliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness
 from Jacob" (the Jewish people). (Romans 11:25, 


[6084] 


May 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(149-150) 


26) Then the poor dews who have suffered indescribable horrors
 in the great wai that is now devastating the world will 
say, "Lo, thu is our <Jod; we have waited for him and he will 
save ns. This \< tin* Lord ; we have waited for him; we will be 
glad and rejoice in his salvation." — Isaiah 25:9. 

The Apostle Pan J says: "For we know that the whole creation
 groaneth and travail eth in pain together until now, waiting
 for the manifestation of the sons of "God." (Romans 8:22. 
19) The people of earth are in great sorrow and distress! The 
trouble in the world must of necessity increase until all the 
nations are exhausted, until the heady and proud are brought 
low. Then, but not until then, will they be in an attitude of 
mind and Iteart to receive comfort. God's means of comforting
 them will be through the ministration of his Spirit by 
teaching them his great plan of salvation. This will be done 
during the Millennial reign of Christ, Then all that mourn 
shall be comforted, and the comforters will be Jesus and his 
bride, the church. 

The peoples have long been kept in ignorance of God's 
purposes, but during the reign of Messiah they shall know the 
truth, as the Lord has promised: "He will destroy in this kingdam
 the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil 
that is spread over all nations; he will swallow up death in 
victorv; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from all fa<jes; 
for the Lord hath spoken it." (Isaiah 25 :7, 8) "Then the 


knowledge of the glory of the Lord shall fill the whole earth 
as the waters cover the sea." — Habakkuk 2:34. 

It will be the blessed privilege of those Christians who 
faithfully perform their covenant, who faithfully carry out the 
terms of their commission in this present time, to be instruments
 of Jehovah to restore the peoples of earth — this time 
upon a basis of justice and righteousness — and to bring blessing
 to the sad and comfort to all that mourn. A Christian thus 
seeing his privileges and opportunities appreciates the necessity
 of keeping himself aloof from the entangling conditions of 
the earth and of preparing himself for the glorious work which 
shall follow. Such preparatory work of the Christian is his 
specialty at this time. 

Let us then, dear brethren, be active and energetic in the 
performance of the duties the Lord now gives us, that we may 
share in the glorious privileges he has set before those who love 
him supremely and prove their love by their loyalty, even unto 
death. Let each of us daily be more and more worthy of the 
name * ( Barn abas," given to one of the Lord's faithful ones, 
which means, "Comforter of the brethren"! Let us have the 
holy Spirit abounding in us more and more! Let us be the 
Lord's faithful representatives, channels of the holy, Spirit, to 
spread his message of truth; and, finally, when our course 
here is finished, we shall be received by him into glory to carry 
out his future purpose of blessing all mankind! 


THE THOUGHT OF CHRIST 


"Over and over it comes to me — 
The thought of Christ on the stormy sea, 
In times of trouble and loss and pain, 
When my heart's a ship on a wind-swept main. 

'•Over and over it comes to me — 
Each human life has its Galilee; 


And Christ is ever the Lord of old, 

When his 'Peace, be still!' to the wavea wa? told. 

"Over and over it comes to me — 
The message of comfort from Galilee ; 
The voice of Christ through my storms I hear, 
'Lo, it is I! there is naught to fear.'" 


CONGRESS ENACTS CONSCRIPTION LAW 

PROVISION MADE FOB EXEMPTION IN CERTAIN CASES 
"Render therefore unto Caesar the things which arc Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." — Matt. 22:21. 


Readers of The Watch Tower throughout the country have 
been inquiring about 'Military conscription in the United 
States. We have promised to publish a statement as soon as 
conscription should become a reality by law. This is our first 
opportunity to do so. 

All true Christians are law-abiding citizens, because the 
Scriptures command them so to be. (Romans 13:1-9) But 
God's laws are higher than the laws of human institutions. 
"For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways 
higher than your ways, and my thoughts (laws) higher than 
your thoughts (laws)." (Isaiah 55:9) Where the laws enacted
 by man are contrary to the laws of God, then it is for 
each one to govern himself by his own conscience as to whether 
or not he will be controlled by the law of man or by the law 
of Jehovah. Jesus, the great Master-Teacher, made clear the 
duty of a Christian under such circumstances, when he said: 
''Render therefore unto Caesar (civij governments) the things 
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." 

The law of the land commands that man shall pay taxes 
upon his property for the support of the Government; that 
no man shall do injury to the person, property or reputation 
of his neighbor ; it declares that every man is endowed with the 
inalienable rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, 
and that none shall interfere therewith. These laws of man 
should be obeyed, particularly by Christians, but the Christian 
is governed by even a higher and nobler law. 

God's law provides, "Thau shalt not kill; thou shalt not 
steal; thou shalt not bear false witness;" etc. (Romans 13:9) 
Jesus said, "All they that take the sword shall perish with 
the sword." (Matthew 26:52) "No murderer hath eternal 
life abiding in him." (1 John 3:15) "Follow peace with all 
men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord." 
(Hebrews 12:14) God's law not only commands to refrain 
from doing evil, but his law governing the Christian says: "As 
we have opportunity let us do good unto all men, especially 
unto them who are of the household of faith." — Galatians 6:10. 
War is for the very purpose of taking human life. It is 
legalized amongst nations on the ground that it is necessary. 
It is not needful for us to discuss whether or not the world is 
justified in this position. Our duty is to look at it entirely 
from the Christian viewpoint as related to Christians. 
Voluntary enlistment means a voluntary agreement to take 
human life under certain conditions, those conditions being 
whenever the commanding officer shall direct the use of weapons 


against the opposing army. Involuntary enlistment, or Conscription
, means that one is required to take human life if the 
condition arises. The world of mankind in general can, with 
a clear conscience, Toluntarily engage in war. Many who claim 
to be Christians can also engage in war without doing violence 
to their consciences, while other Christians would grossly violate
 their consciences should they enter an army for the purpose
 of engaging in carnal warfare. 

St. Paul, the witness of the Lord, plainly states to the 
Christian: "For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but 
mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds." — 2 
Corinthians 10:4. 

The fundamental law of the land recognizes that every man 
may exercise liberty of conscience. In substance, it provides 
that every man may choose his own religious belief and may 
worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience. 
To worship God means to render full; obedience to his holy will. 
To obey his will means to be governed by his law. Good 
men differ as to the meaning of God's law, and herein is where 
the law of the land justly recognizes that each man shall be 
at liberty to exercise his conscientious religious convictions. 

Then we say, Let every man who can with a clear conscience
 go to war, do so. With equal force we say that every 
man whose religious convictions and beliefs are against war, or 
participation therein, should he at liberty to exercise his conscience
 and therefore to request that he* be relieved from the 
obligation to bear arms. The Congress of the United States is 
governed by the fundamental law of the land., and acting as 
the agent and servant of the people, has recognized the right 
of man to exercise his conscientious religious convictions 
against engaging in war. So what we are here saying is not 
speaking against the Government ; but, on the contrary, we are 
calling attention to the right and liberty the Government 
recognizes and guarantees. 

Thank God for the privilege of living in the United States! 
While we all recognize that it is not a perfect government, yet 
it is the best of all earthly governments. Every one who 
lives under the flag of the United States should be loyal to 
that Uovernrnent as against all earthly governments. No 
citizen of this country could be a Christian and do violence to 
the Government of the United States. To be loyal to the law 
of God he must render unto the United States Government 
everything that is not in contravention of the divine law. — 
Romans 13:1-9. 


[6085] 


(150-151) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BtOOXtYN, N. Y. 


DISPLAYING THE AMERICAN FLAG 

Suppose the city or state officials should issue an order requiring
, or even requesting, that all persons display the American
 flag. What should we do? We answer, We think it would 
be right to display the flag in obedience to such order or request
. The American flag was adopted as an emblem of liberty. 
It is the national emblem. While some have insisted that it 
now represents war, this is hardly in keeping with the facts. 
It may represent war to those who desire war, but to those 
who love liberty and peace, the flag represents liberty and 
peace. However that may be, the displaying of the American 
flag can do injury to no one. If commanded or requested to 
display the flag, it should be done, out of respect to the Government
 under which it is the privilege of Christians to live. 
If an American was the guest of the British, Government and 
was requested to display the British flag and refused to do so, 
it would be showing disrespect to the British Government, his 
host. If a Christian, who is an alien amongst all earthly 
governments, should, while journeying amongst them, be requested
 to display a flag of the country whose benefits he is 
enjoying, and refuse to do so, such refusal would be failing to 
show the proper respect to such government. Recognizing that 
the Government of the United States has been the special 
refuge of Christian people from intolerable persecution ; that it 
was founded as an asylum of religious liberty and freedom of 
speech, every one in America should take pleasure in displaying
 the American flag — especially when requested so to do. It 
does not mean that by putting a flag on your house you would 
want to go to war. 

Since the Bethel Home was established, in one end of the 
Drawing Room there has been kept a small bust of Abraham 
Lincoln with two American flags displayed about the bust. 
This is deemed entirely proper, having in mind what Mr. 
Lincoln did for the Government and for the people of the 
United States, and in this we see nothing inconsistent with a 
Christian's duty. 

The Sixty-fifth Congress, now in session at Washington, has 
passed a law providing for selective draft into military service 
of the United States of all men between certain ages. Section 
II of said Act provides: 

"Such draft shall be based upon liability to military service 
of all male citizens, or male persons not alien enemies who 
have declared their intention to become citizens, between the 
ages of 21 and 30 years, and shall take place and be maintained 
under such regulations as the President may prescribe not inconsistent
 with, the terms of this Act. Quotas for the several 
States, Territories, and the District of Columbia, or subdivisions
 thereof, shall be' determined in proportion to the population
 thereof available for military service, as shown by the 
registration provided for herein." 

This provision of the. Act means that the President of the 
United States may by selective draft call to arms all male 
citizens of the United v States, and all male persons not alien 
enemies who have declared their intention (by taking out what 
is known as "First Papers") to become citizens of the United 
States, between designated ages ; and that he has power to compel
 'all such to respond to such call. 

REGISTRATION FIRST 

For the purpose of enabling the Government to know who 
may be called into such service, the Act provides for a registration
 as follows: 

"Sec. 4. All persons liable to military service under the 
provisions of this Act shall be subject to registration in accordance
 with regulations to be prescribed by the President, and 
upon proclamation by the President or other public notice given 
by him or by his direction stating the time and place of such 
registration, it shall be the duty of every such person liable to 
military service under the provisions hereof to present himself 
for and submit to registration undeT the provisions of this Act ; 
and every such person liable to military service shall be deemed 
to have notice of the requirements of this Act upon the publication
 of said proclamation or other notice as aforesaid given by 
the President or by his direction; and any person who shall 
fail or neglect to present himself for registration or to submit 
thereto as herein provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor 
and shall, upon conviction in the proper district court of the 
United States, be punished by imprisonment for not less than 
three months or more than one year, and shall thereupon be 
duly registered." 

This Section of the Act means that the President of the 
United States, by public proclamation, will designate the time 
and place of registration, and that the publication of such 
proclamation or notice given by the President will be all the 
notice that any one will need or be given concerning such 
registration; and that all male persons embraced within the 


Act are required under the law to register and submit to examination
; that on the day provided by such proclamation it 
shall be the duty of all male persons liable to military service 
under the provisions of said Act to present themselves for registration
 before the proper officers and to give answers to such 
questions as may be propounded to them. Since this Bection is 
not in any way in conflict with the law of God, as believed and 
understood by Bible Students of the International Bible 
Students Association, then all such should cheerfully obey 
this provision of the Act and duly appear and register in accordance
 with its terms. 

EXEMPTION FROM MILITARY SERVICE 

Recognizing the right of each person to exercise an honest 
religious conviction with respect to participation in war, Congress
, in the Act herein under examination, has made provision 
for certain persons to be exempted or excused from selective 
draft for military service. Section 3 of said Act providing for 
such exemption, is as follows: 

"Sec. 3. The Vice President of the United States, the officers
, legislative, executive, and judicial of the United States 
and of the several States and Territories, and all persons in the 
military and naval service of th.e United States, shall be exempt
 from the selective draft herein prescribed; and nothing 
in this Act contained shall be construed to require or compel 
any person to serve in any of the forces herein provided for if 
foundto be a member of any well-organized religious sect or 
organization, at present organized and existing, whose creed 
forbids its members to participate in war in any form and 
whose religious convictions are against war or participation 
therein in accordance with the creed of said religious organization
 ; and the President is hereby authorized to exclude or discharge
 from said selective draft and from the draft under the 
second paragraph of section one hereof, or to draft for partial 
military service only, persons of the following classes: Customhouse
 clerks; persons employed by the United States in the 
transmission of the mails ; artificers and workmen employed in 
the armories, arsenals, and navy yards of the United States, 
and such other persons employed in the service of the United 
States as the President may designate; pilots; mariners 
actually employed in the sea service of any citizen or merchant 
within the United States; persons engaged in industries including
 agriculture, found to be necessary to the maintenance 
of^ the military establishment or the effective operation of the 
military forces or the maintenance of national interest during 
the emergency; those in a status with respect to persons dependent
 upon them for support, which renders their exclusion 
or discharge advisable; and those found to be physically and 
morally deficient. No exemption or exclusion shall continue 
when a cause therefor no longer exists." 

It follows, therefore, that any person who makes application
 for exemption because of his religious creed, or belief, 
forbidding his participation in war in any form, or whose religious
 convictions are against war or participation therein, is 
not vioIating.any law of the land, but, on the contrary, is availing
 himself of the provisions of such law. In calling the attention
 of our brethren thereto, we are merely advising what 
rights and privilege this law grants to them. 

The Watch Toweb Bible and Tract Society was incor 
porated and organized according to law in the year 1884 as a 
religious organization, and still is organized and exists as such 
religious organization. The International Bible Students 
Association is the same organization incorporated and organized
 in the year 1913 under that name according to the provisions
 of the laws of Great Britain, but said organization 
had existed as an unincorporated religious organization many 
years prior thereto, and still exists as such religious organization
. The classes or congregations of Christian people throughout
 the United States organized and existing under the name 
of Associated Bible Students of the International Bible 
Students Association are so organized and directed under the 
supervision of the Watch Toweb Bible and Tract Society 
and its like organization, the International Bible Students 
Association. The members of all such Bible Classes come 
clearly within the provisions of said section of the above Act 
of Congress relating to the exemption from military service. 
The Act provides that "Nothing in this Act contained shall 
be construed to require or compel any person to serve in any 
of the forces herein provided for who is a member of any wellorganized
 religious sect or organization at present organized 
and existing, whose creed forbids its members to participate in 
war in any form and whose religious convictions are against 
war or participation therein in accordance with the creed of 
said religious organization. 

The word "creed," of course, means belief. All Christians 
of the above mentioned religious organizations believe the Bible 


[6086] 


Ma* 15, 1917 


T HE WA T C H T O W li R 


(151-15^ 


as taught by Jesus and the apostles, and therefore such teachings
 of the Bible constitute their creed or belief, which Bible 
teaching, creed or statement or belief) is amplified, elaborated 
upon and explained and made more easy to be understood 
by the teachings and writings on Bible truths as set forth in 
the Scripture Studies and the Watch Tower. The Scriptures
 speak of the followers of Jesus as "strangers and pilgrims
" whose citizenship is in heaven, since all such have made 
a covenant to follow in the Master's footsteps. A stranger 
is an alien, and as such would not be subject to the military 
laws of a nation where he is sojourning. Commenting thereupon
, Studies in the Scripture say, with reference to the 
duty of a Christian in time of war: 

"Aliens must be obedient to the laws; so must we. Aliens 
must pay taxes according to the laws; so must we. Aliens may 
look for protection under the laws; so may we. But aliens 
would not feel compelled to fight against their own King, the 
allegiance which they recognize primarily ; and we would prefer 
to be in the same position, as far as possible, for are not we 
'translated out of the kingdoms of this world into the Kingdom
 of God's dear Son'? 

"Are not we subjects of the Great King? And are not all 
the kingdoms of this world more or lees identified with 'the 
prince of this world* and his law of selfishness? Are not we, 
therefore, strangers and pilgrims here, and to some extent 
aliens and foreigners? It is eminently proper that we should 
love and appreciate every good law and all the servants of 
earthly laws, and rejoice that quite the majority of the new 
creation (Christians) live under the highest forms of civil 
government to be found in the world today, and appreciate this 
as a divine favor and blessing. Hence we neither traduce our 
native country, its rulers nor its laws ; but this does not mean 
that we must fight for these with carnal weapons, nor that we 
must increase our responsibilities by voting for them." See 
also Vol. 1, Pages 166, 167. 

Further commenting on this, subject, The Watch Tower, 
September 1, 1915, says: 

"To become a member of the army and to put on the military
 uniform implies the duties and obligations of a soldier as 
recognized and accepted. A protest made to an officer would 
be insignificant — the public in general would not know of it. 
Would not the Christian be really out of his place under such 
conditions ? 

" 'But,' some one replies, if one were to refuse the uniform 
and the military service he would be shot.' 

"We reply that if the presentation were properly made there 
might be some kind of exoneration ; but if not, would it be any 
worse to be shot because of loyalty to the Prince of Peace and 
refusal to disobey his order than to be shot while under the 
banner of these earthly kings and apparently giving them support
 and, in appearance at least, compromising the teachings 
of our heavenly King? Of the two deaths we would prefer 
the former — prefer to die because of faithfulness to our 
heavenly King. Certainly the one dying for his loyalty to the 
principles of the Lord's teachings would accomplish far more by 
his death than would the one dying in the trenches. We cannot 
tell how great the influence would be for peace, for righteousness
, for God, if a few hundred of the Lord's faithful were 
to follow the course of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, and 
refuse to bow down to the god of war. Like those noble men 
they might say, 'Our God is able to deliver us, if he choose* 
bo to do; but if he does not choose to deliver us, that will not 
alter our course. We will serve him and follow his direction, 
come what may.' 

"May not the soldiers of Christ well say to themselves. 
( If the ancient worthies knew God only partially, yet were so 
faithful to him, and if earthly soldiers are so faithful to earthly 
kings, what manner of persons ought we to be who have come 
into the family of God by the Spirit of begetting, who have 
entered the school of Christ, who are being guided and led 
by the Captain of our Salvation, and who have his exceeding 
great and precious promises in respect to our eternal future! 
How should we stand for him and fox his teachings? Could 
we lay down our lives in a better way than by faithfulness to 
the King of kings and Lord of lords, our Redeemer and Head f* 

It follows, therefore, that every one who is a member of the 
above mentioned organization, who believes the Bible as taught 
by the Lord Jesus and the Apostles, and as explained and 
taught in the publications of said Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society and International Bible Students Association
, is one whose religious convictions are against war or 
the participation therein in any form in accordance with the 
creed or belief of such religious organization, and whose belief 
or creed forbids him to participate in war in any form. It 
would therefore be the privilege of any of the Bible Students 


before mentioned holding such views to avail themselves of the 
exemption provision of said Military Act and at the proper 
time to claim such exemption. 

EXEMPTION MAT BE GRANTED ON OTHER GROUNDS 
The Act of Congress in question further provides that the 
President is authorized to exclude from such selective draft 
tor military service any person engaged in any of the following 
occupations, viz: Custom House clerks, mail carriers, or those 
otherwise engaged in the transportation of mails, workmen employed
 in the Navy yards or the United States, pilots on boats, 
mariners actually employed in sea service, and persons engaged
 in agriculture or farming found to be necessary to the 
military establishment, or to the effective operation oi military 
forces, or to the maintenance of national interest durin^ tlu« 
emergency. 3 

Some of our brethren are engaged in these various vocationand
 in addition to their religious convictions and their 
privileges under the Act resulting therefrom, such may be relieved
 from military duty in the discretion of the President 
Hence it is important for each one at the time of registration 
to clearly state his occupation, or the work in which he is engaged
. 

Furthermore, some of the brethren have wives, aged parents
, or others dependent upon them for maintenance and 
support, which may entitle them to be released from Military 
duty at the discretion of the President, as will be observed 
by the latter part of Section 3 of the aforementioned Act At 
the time of registration all such facts should be called to the 
attention of the officers taking the census or registration. 
HOW TO APPLY FOR EXEMPTION 

It is understood that within a short titoe the President 
will issue a proclamation with reference to registration 
and selective draft j following this, the War Department of 
the Government will take steps immediately to register 
all male citizens and aliens provided for by the bill and 
due notice of the time and place of such registration will be 
given When appearing for registration each one will be required
 to answer certain questions. The registration will be 
had in every voting precinct in the United States the same day. 
At the time of registration it will be proper for any one who 
expects to claim exemption, in answering the question as ro 
whether or not he does claim exemption, to answer in the 
affirmative. Within a certain time thereafter, as may be prescribed
 by the Government, a formal application for exemption 
must be filed. It is understood that the Government will 
furnish the necessary blanks for such application and affidavit 
tor exemption. As these *lave not yet been issued and the rules 
have not yet been published, it is impossible for us to state 
definitely about these matters, but in all probability all necessary
 information and blanks will be obtainable at each registration
 point. We will be glad to publish them in Tub Watch 
Ioweb as soon as the Government makes known the form of 
application. 

In the April 15th issue of The Watch Toweb, this year, 
page 124, we called attention to certain State laws with reference
 to the registration of male citizens, and also set forth 
a form of affidavit that might be used under the laws of some 
of the States, which were then contemplating an early registration
. We advise that every one now disregard the form or 
blank therein eet forth, for the reason that all registration in 
all the states will now be made under the Act of Congress, 
and the United States ' Government will furnish the proper 
blanks and forms. 

We advise the dear brethren everywhere to be calm and 
undisturbed about this matter; that all avoid discussions or 
controversies, and be content with merely stating their views 
and leaving the matter there. We can accomplish no good bv 
engaging in controversial arguments, as all such rather tend 
to provoke to wrath. Let us keep in mind that all who are 
fully consecrated to the Lord are under his care and protection
, an<* that he has promised to make all things work together
 for good to those who love him supremely. Let us appreciate
 our privilege of quietly and in the spirit of the Master 
pointing out to all those who desire to be told, that this great 
trouble upon the world is but the forerunner of Messiah's kingdom
, which shall bring blessings to all who love and obey the 
principles of righteousness. Let us each strive to be an example 
of the flock of God, manifesting by our deportment, our demeanor
 and our words that we have walked with the Great 
Master and learned of him, and that we are patiently and confidently
 waiting for the full inauguration of his kingdom, 

"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; lean not to thine 
own understanding; in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he 
shall direct thy paths." — Proverbs 3:5, 6. 


[6087] 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND ITS WORK 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled * ( The Holy Spirit Promised/' published in issue of May ], 1908, which please see.] 


ANOTHER DAY WITH THEE 


"Another day before me! 
Dear Master, let it be, 
In working or in waiting, 
Another day with thee; 

''Another day of leaning 

On thy beloved breast, 
Of ever-deepening trustfulness. 
Of quiet, happy rest; 

"Another day of mercies, 
Of faithfulness and grace, 


Another day of gladness 
In the shining of thy face. 

''Another day of progress, 
Another day of praise, 
Another day of proving 
Thy love 'in all thy waj-i. 

"Another day is dawning— 
Dear Master, may it be, 
On earth, or else in heaven, 
Another day for thee!" 


JESUS BETRAYED AND DENIED 

| The last five paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article* entitled "The Great High Priest Arraigned, " published 

in issue of May 15, 1899. The remainder was a reprint of article entitled "The Lord Betrayed, M 

published in issue of May 15, 1899. Please see the articles named.] 


MEMORIAL SUPPER REPORTS 


On Thursday, April 5th, after 6 P. M., Eeclesias of the I. 
B. S. A. the world over gathered together to observe the anniversary
 of our dear Lord's death. Although it occurred on 
a week night, and rain fell in torrents in New York, and no 
doubt in other eastern cities as well, the attendance was little 
affected; so faithful are the Lord's sheep in observing the instruction
 imparted to them by the Master — "This do in remembrance
 of Me." And while doing this the solemnity of 
the occasion is always deepened by file remembrance of the 
"participation'* which the communicants enjoy both in the 
"Body" and in the "Blood" of the Anointed One — Christ Jesus 
the Head and the Church His Body. Three brethren officiated 
at the service of the New York congregation. 

The corroboration of world-events with the prophecies bearing
 upon the last days of the present order of things, and 
the ever increasing signs that the Kingdom draweth very near, 
were likewise feasted upon in the hearts of the participants. 
And the words of the Master, at the' time of the institution of 
the Memorial Supper, and the fact that the realization of 
them is very near, were forgotten: "I will not drink henceforth
 of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it 
new with you in My Father's Kingdom. — Matthew 26:29. 

Faith seems now to have almost given way to sight, and 
our hearts are rejoiced as we view the glories of our Home 
beyond the veil. Our hearts also rejoice as we look out over 
the field and see so many of like precious faith continuing in 
their purpose to be faithful unto death. 

The number participating in the Memorial Supper here in 
New York City, as shown below, does not include some suburban
 Classes which formerly met with us, but which have 
now grown so large that it is considered wise for them to have 
their own celebration. We are appending to this list all 
Classes which have thus far reported an attendance of from 
twenty up 


New York, N. Y 917 

London, Eng 770 

Chicago, 111 758 

Glasgow, Scot 538 

Los Angeles, Cal 475 

Boston, Mass 475 

Detroit, Mich. : 454 

Pittsburgh, Pa 428 

Philadelphia, Pa 425 

Chicago. 111., Polish 365 

Vancouver, B. C 326 

Toronto, Ont 319 

Cleveland, Ohio 810 

Portland, Ore 243 

Seattle, Wash 232 

St. Louis, Mo 226 

Milwaukee, Wis 216 

Manchester, Eng 195 

Dayton, Ohio 193 

Kansas City, Mo 192 

Liverpool, Eng 183 

Washington, D. 177 

Providence, R. 1 175 

San Antonio, Tex 171 

Indianapolis, Ind 161 

Victoria, B. C 161 

Minneapolis, Minn 157 

Cincinnati, Ohio (white) , . . 157 

(152-157) 


Columbus, Ohio 157 

Buffalo, N. Y 144 

Denver, Colo 143 

Toledo, Ohio 142 

Diamond Bluff, Wis 141 

Oakland. Cal 138 

Tacoma, Wash 133 

Bloomington, III 123 

Baltimore, Md 120 

Spokane, Wash 118 

Springfield, Mass 115 

Louisville, Ky 108 

San Francisco. Cal 105 

Bellinghara, Wash 100 

Oldham, Eng 94 

St. Paul, Minn 91 

Bridgetown, Barbados .... 90 

Lancaster, Pa 90 

Akron, Ohio 89 

Allentown, Pa 87 

St. Joseph, Mo 87 

Worcester, Mass. . . ♦ 87 

Detroit, Mich., Polish 82 

Oklahoma City, Okla 81 

Duquesne, Pa 79 

Everett, Wash 79 

Sheffield, Eng 77 

Pasadena, Cal 76 


Hartford, Conn 

Newark. N. J 

Balboa, C. Z 

Trinidad, B. W. I. 

Leeds, Eng 

Convers, Switz 

Grand Rapids, Mich. . 

Reading, Pa 

Schenectady, N. Y. 

Altoona, Pa 

Hamilton, Ont 

Erie, Pa 

Rockford, 111 

Wichita, Kan 

Scranton, Pa 

Youngstown, Ohio 

Jackson, Mich 

New Brighton, Pa. . . 
Jacksonville, Pla. . . 

Norfolk, Va 

Omaha, Neb 

Rochester, N. Y 

San Diego, Cal 

Montreal, Que 

Richmond, Va 

Birmingham, Ala. . . . 

Cromwell, Conn 

Dallas, Tex 

Bangor, Eng 

Tampa. Pla 

West Haven, Conn. . . 

Calgary, Alia 

Sharon, Pa 

York, Pa 

Wilmington, Del 

Cumberland, Md 

Passaic. N, J 

Flint, Mich 

London, Ont 

Santa Ana, Cal 

Atlanta, Ga 

Salt Lake City, Utah. 
Terre Haute, Ind. . . . 
Cedar Rapids, Iowa. . 
Kingston, Jamaica . . 

Leicester, Eng 

Riverside, Cal 

Strathcona, Alta 

Des Moines, Iowa. . . . 

Harris burp, Pa 

Saginaw, Mich 

Wheeling, W. Va. 

Belvidere, 111 

Dundee, Scot 

East Kirby, Eng 

Duluth, Minn 

Niagara Palls, N. Y. . 
Waterbury, Conn. . . , 

Johnstown, Pa 

Springfield, 111 

Topeka, Kan * 

Watertown, N. Y. 
Burlington, Wash. . . 

Fresno, Cal 

Johnstown, N. Y. 
Kalamazoo, Mich. . . . 
The Dalles, Wash. . . 

Lawrence, Mass 

Lincoln, Neb 

Mattoon, HI 

Tiffin, Ohio 

Boise, Ida 

Brazil, Ind 


70 Camden, N J 35 

70 Colon. Rep. of Pan 35 

69 Pall River, Mass 35 

68 Jamestown, N. Y 35 

66 Kingston, Jamaica 35 

65 Brockton, Mass 34 

65 Brownsville, Pa. (Hung.).. 34 

65 Crooksville, Ohio 34 

6.j Nashville, Tenn 34 

64 New Orleans, La 34 

63 Paisley, Scot, • 34 

63 Quincy, Mass 34 

63 Brandon, Man 33 

63 Bridgeport, Conn 33 

62 East St. Louis, 111 33 

62 Ipswich, Jamaica 32 

61 Chattanooga, Tenn. (white) 32 

61 Auburn, Ind 32 

60 Glens Palls, N. Y 32 

60 Santa Cruz, Cal 32 

60 Tulsa, Okla 32 

60 Warren, Ohio 32 

60 Knoxville, Tenn 32 

59 Champaign, 111 81 

59 Chattanooga, Tenn. (Col.).. 81 

57 Chicopee, Mass 31 

57 Evansville, Ind 31 

55 Galveston, Tex 31 

54 Long Beach, Cal 31 

54 Sacramento, Cal 31 

54 Steelton, Ont 31 

58 Abilene, Kan 30 

52 Bay City, Mich 30 

52 Colo. Springs, Colo 30 

51 East Liverpool, Ohio 30 

51 Lynchburg, Va 30 

51 Stillwater, Okla 30 

50 Syracuse, N. Y 30 

50 Beaumont. Tex 29 

50 Canton, Ohio 29 

48 Fort Smith, Ark 29 

48 Limon, C. R 29 

48 Zion City, 111 29 

47 Utica, N. Y 29 

47 Albany, N. Y 28 

47 Calmar, Alta 28 

45 Chatham, Ont 28 

45 >Glace Bay, N. S 28 

44 Hayne, N. C 28 

44 Hobart, Okla 28 

44 Kingston, N. Y 28 

48 Muncie, Ind 28 

42 Coffeyville, Kan 27 

42 Edmonton, Alta 27 

42 Iola, Kan 27 

41 Lowell, Mast 27 

41 Pueblo, Colo 27 

41 Rhonesboro, Tex 27 

40 Bhawnee, Okla 27 

40 Wilkes-Barre, Pa 27 

40 Bloomfield, N. J 26 

40 Butler, Pa 26 

39 Danbury, Ohio 26 

39 Cincinnati, Ohio (Col.) 26 

39 Halifax, N. S 26 

39 New Albany, Ind 26 

39 New Brunswick, N. J 26 

38 Tonawanda, N. Y 26 

38 Elkhart, Ind 25 

38 Gait, Ont 25 

88 JopHn, Mo 25 

85 Mansfield, Eng 25 

85 MeadviUe, Pa 25 


[6088] 


May 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(157-158) 


Newark, Ohio 25 

Oil City, Pa 25 

Piqua, Ohio 25 

PitUfield, Mass 25 

Portland, Me 25 

Rock Island, VA 25 

St. John, N. B 25 

Warren, Pa 25 

Cecil, Ga 25 

Childress, Tex 25 

Davenport, Iowa 25 

McMinnviHe, Oru 25 

Pottstown, Pa 25 

Weatherford, Tt>3 24 

Cortland, N. Y 28 

Elfin, 111 23 

Elwood, Ind 23 

Pawtucket, K J ... .23 

Preston, Ont 23 


Kejfina, Sask 28 

San Jose, Cal 23 

Webb City, Mo 23 

HoMster, Ohio (Hung.) 22 

Kewanee, 111 22 

Lynden, Wash 22 

Marion, Ohio 22 

Millville, Ohio 22 

Mitchell, S. Dak 22 

New Castle, Pa. * 22 

Osseo, Wis 22 

Philipsburg, K. J 22 

Port Huron, Mich 22 

St. Catherines, Ont 22 

Stockton, Cal 22 

Tamaqua, Pa 22 

Parien, Oonn 21 

Dubuque, Iowa 21 

Beverly, Mass 21 


Boulder, Colo 21 

Midland Park, N. J 21 

New Kensington, Pa 21 

New Liskeard, Ont 21 

Niagara Falls, Ont 21 

Norristown, Pa 21 

Parismina, Costa Rica .... 21 

Pentictou, B. C 21 

St. George, Grenada 21 

Seguin, Tex 21 

Sheboygan Falls, Wis 21 

Alva; Okla 20 

Appleton, Wis. * 20 

Augusta, Ga 20 

Cleveland, Ohio (Hung.)... 20 

Corpus ChriBti, Tex 20 

Ea&ihampton, Mass 20 

Fort Wayne, Ind 20 

Scandinavian Classes reported from 


Fort Worth, Tex 20 

Grand Junction, Colo 20 

Greenfield. Mass 20 

Hillside, Mandeville. Ja 20 

Little Rock, Ark 20 

Morgantawn, W, Va 20 

Nowata, Okla 20 

Petersburg, Va 20 

Peterborough, Eng 20 

Pittsburg, Kan 20 

Racine, Wis 20 

South Bend, Ind 20 

South Norwalk, Conn 20 

Stirling, Ont 20 

Stockport, N. Y 20 

Troy, N. Y 20 

Wellington, Ohio 20 

Swedish Branch 1,388 


SOME LETTERS 

ANOTHER BRAVE BROTHER ACROSS THE SEA 

(nineteen years of age — written in the guard boom) 
My Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings! You will be glad to know that your little 
brother in England is now privileged to share with the others 
the experiences peculiar to us over here. Truly, although the 
present surroundings are not congenial to the new creature or 
to the flesh, one realizes how cood the Lord is. Experiences 
which we would naturally shrink from are taken as among the 
"all things/' because of the trustful confidence we have in our 
great God. He has guided and blessed me richly thus far, and 
my desire is to just continue daily to abide in him, to faithfully
 seek to uphold the principles we have grown to love and 
appreciate. Under these circumstances one is able to reflect 
the light by the life lived, and to be an example of the believers
. My prayer is that my heart shall always respond 
joyfully to his loving leadings, and be submissive in all the 
way he shall lead. 

Taking such experiences as he sees fit to permit with joy 
and gratitude, one is able to count all as light afflictions, as 
surely they are. When we think of all the blessings he has 
showered upon us since we were brought into the light, why, 
our hearts bubble over with joy and the }*oy of the LoVd becomes
 our strength ! Our great hope, too, is so bright that it 
surely stimulates us to cheerful, patient endurance. 

In this peculiar position one is able to bear the reproaches 
of our Master in various ways, and it gives us great joy to be 
so permitted. Today 1 have been thinking of our dear Redeemer
's example — he endured all things unmurmuringly, without
 retaliation. It is my heart*s desire to prove worthy of his 
leadership, following the more faithfully in his footsteps daily. 
Truly the heavenly hopes and joys are the only enduring, 
eternal things! 

This morning, as 1 was marched before the Colonel, the 
words on page 238 of our Poem Book flashed into my mind : 
"He rose, and from that hour went forth 

To trial and to death, in peace — 
A calmness born of perfect confidence in God." 
That last line has many times in the past been helpful to me; 
and under the present circumstances it is more than helpful, it 
is inspiring. 

I feel it a great privilege to be permitted to bear this witness
. The Colonel told me this morning that I shall be ordered 
to don the King's uniform, and if 1 refuse, I shall be courtmartialed
. That iB the usual experience, of course. Most 
sentences are commuted now to four months hard labor, and 
after about ten weeks one is released and put somewhere on 
Work of National Importance, so-called, under the Government
's Home Office scheme. 

Truly, the Lord is very good and we rejoice in his loving 
leadings; and our desire is to be more faithful day by day, to 
do always those things pleasing in his sight! Rev. 2:10, all 
of the verse, is very forceful to ua while in the hands of the 
Military. It is indeed a happy privilege to bear his reproaches 
with meekness and pitying love for our would-be enemies. I 
am assured of an interest in your prayers, and I commend all 
the dear ones in America to our Father's tender care and 
keeping. 

Later. — I thought I would like to send just a few more 
lines before I go to prison, to let you know of our continued 
trust in our dear heavenly Father's love and providential 
care. Surely one has abundant cause for gratitude — we truly 
find what we seek! We are daily counting our blessings and 
find fresh causes to thank our loving Father. 

By Tuesday next it will be three weeks since I came into 
the hands of the Military, I have had a nice and happy time, 
because after a few days I was in the company of four other 
Conscientious Objectors to Military Service on religious 


OF INTEREST 

grounds. The difference in our religious views makes little 
ii inference — we have all been quite happy. There have been 
many opportunities for presenting the truth to my fellow 
"0. O.V and to the soldiers who are supposed to be guarding 
us prisoners. 

t One realizes the need for patient- endurance, yet we can rejoice
 that in all the various experiences which we have been 
privileged to pass through his grace has been sufficient. This 
morning the last performance was gone through — that of being
 marched before the troops and nearing the sentence read 
out: "The accused is found guilty and sentenced to suffer imprisonment
 for 112 days with hard labor," 

So I go away to prison tomorrow, dear ones. What a grand 
privilege 1 It is very sweet to suffer a little for his dear sake 
who has suffered so much for us. We rejoice in his tender 
care who loves us with such a strong love. (2 Chron. 10:9; 
Num. 6:24-20, Hymn 307.) With fondest Christian love, I am, 
Your little brother "in bonds" for his sake, 

Stanley W. Willis. — England. 

A VOICE FBOM FAR-OFF AUSTRALIA 
Beloved Brethren: — 

Greetings in the name of our blessed Alias ter! May his 
peace be multiplied unto you. Although somewhat late in forwarding
 a message to you, we nevertheless have had you continually
 in our thoughts, and rejoice in our privilege of remembering
 you daily at the throne of grace. 

Some few years ago, an ecclesia was formed in this city, 
and our Brother Russell consented to be our Pastor. We thank 
our heavenly Father for his provision in our Brother Russell, 
through whose ministrations we have been built up and enabled
 to grow in knowledge and grace. We also thank him 
for having answered the prayers of so many of his saints, in 
that our brother was kept faithful until death. 

While assembled in Convention (one day Convention), we 
desire to convey to you our Christian love, and to assure you 
that you have taken Brother Russell's place in our prayers 
and as our guides. Further, this ecclesia unanimously resolves
 to accord you our unreserved and loyal support in forwarding
 the work of the kingdom, so soon to he established. 

Our message to you, dear Brethren, is expressed in Isaiah 
41:10 and Joshua 1:8, 9, "Fear thou not, for I am with thee; 
be not dismayed, for I am thy God. I will strengthen thee; 
yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee, with the right 
hand of my righteousness." "This book of the law shall not 
depart out of thy mouth ; but thou shalt meditate therein day 
and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that 
is written therein; for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous
, and then thou shalt have good success." Have not I 
commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not 
afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with 
thee withersoever thou goest." God is our strength. How 
strong we are in him! 

With Christian love, we remain, 

Your brethren by his grace and in his service, 

Brisbane Ecclesia. — Australia. 
fleecing the sheep 
Dear Brethren: — 

I want to congratulate the Editorial Committee for their 
forethought, wisdom and general ability. I have the March I 
Tower, and was glad to note article on fly leaf, "Warning to 
the Friends," also letter on page 78, top of 1st column, and 
the reply thereto, As the secretary of the class for eight or 
ten years, I have been up against all the propositions contained 
in those articles; and from the fact that I was a traveling 
salesman for twenty-eight years and know the ways of the 
world and human nature, I have naturally become what the 
boys term a "wise guy." I have not been duped to anv irr^t 


rfiosaj 


(15»-159) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BROOKLYN. N. Y. 


extent, but my experiences, if I could tell you about them, 
would be quite laughable. 

1, however, know of many innocent and unsophisticated 
brethren that have been imposed on and duped ahainetully. 
And it had been in moat caj&es the new menUb, Irtish in their 
first love for the truth", that have been the victims. 

You have acted wisely in not publishing the names and addresses
 of the class secretaries. Yet mine has gotten out 
pretty generally, and 1 am a constant recipient of letters and 
callers of doubtful intentions. It is a real, genuine privilege 
and pleasure for wife and myself to extend hospitality and 
generosity to the authorized pilgrims, colporteurs, agents and 
helpers sent out by the Bible House; but when it comes to 
lazy, never -do-well, spiritually sick hangers-on, 1 never let them 
lie down on me. 1 feel that it would be encouraging them in 
a wrong. Having had much personal experience all along the 
line that both of those articles suggest, 1 think they are very 
timely indeed, and 1 am sure the friends will profit thereby. 
With much personal esteem, I am, 

Your fellow servant in the Lord, W. B. Sutton.— Va. 
MAY OUB HEARTS BEAT AS ONE 
My Beloved Brethren ; — 

We know your hearts have been touched with sadness. What 
a shock Brother Russell's death must have been to you of the 
Bethel home! The day the news reached us it seemed as though 
we were in a stuffy room, unable to get a full breath. It was 
so hard to realize it was so. But, as we remembered the 
fruition of our hopes was a participation in the first resurrection
 with our dear Redeemer, and that Brother Russell had 
gone to his reward, "to meet the Lord in the air," and that he 
was one of those "blessed in the Lord that die from henceforth
," we could not help but rejoice with our dear Brother. 
We have been personally acquainted with him for fifteen years, 
and have been greatly blessed by his life— and wonderfully 
blessed by his death — knowing that his trials are over and 
that he has gone beyond the nery darts of enemies and people 
who did not understand him; and, additionally, blessed in the 
glorious tact that he now lives forever — changed in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye — having closed his eyes to temporal
 things and opened them to eternal things — to see Jesus 
as he is, and be like him ! We know that all is well, and that 
he had finished his work this side the veil. 

We pray our Father's richest blessings on the dear Israel 
at Bethel, that wisdom from on high may be abundantly bestowed
 on you to carry on the great work uninterruptedly, and 
that there may be a remarkable manifestation of the sweet 
spirit of Jesus in all that is done, that every word, thought 
and deed may redound to the glory of God and his dear fc>on, 
out High Priest and Advocate, and that we all may meet each 
other soon in the realms of glory, honor and immortality. 

We are pledging ourself anew to God, his truth, and his 
called ones, that our hearts may beat as one during the stirring
 scenes which will mark the close of "Elijah's" career. 
Continuing in daily prayer for you, my brethren, I remain, 
Your brother by his rich favor, C. E. Stewart, — 111. 
EARTH NOW POORER— HEAVEN RICHER 
Deab Bbetuken : — 

We desire to express to you our love in the Lord, and our 
loyalty to you as the channel he is now using to bring to us 
the clear and refreshing waters of truth. 

We find it difficult to express in words our feelings on 
learning that our Pastor was found faithful and taken home. 
We hardly realized how much we loved him. Was ever a 
man truly loved so well since our dear Lord was on earth 
as a mant We think not, and yet he was worthy of it all, 
for it was his self-sacrifice and zeal for the truth which in 
our Father's hands and with his blessing brought us all here 
into the glorious light of present truth. 

Our hearts go out in thankfulness and praise to our loving 
heavenly Father for sparing him so long to us, as well as for 
the example he was to us of loving devotion and sweet, patient 
endurance under all circumstances. Though earth is poorer, 
heaven is richer, and we would not wish it otherwise than as 
it has pleased our Father to arrange it; but we look forward 
to meeting him again, now very soon, when we too have made 
our calling and election sure. 

We pray our Father's blessing on all the work in your 
corner of the vineyard, and that he may |uide and direct 
you in all your labors and service and multiply his love and 
peace unto you. 

Yours in the fellowship of the mystery. 

Manchester Ecclesia. — England. 
ONLY A XITTLE WHILE 
I>TAB BBETttBEN: — 

We bow in loving and humble submission to the divine 
will, confident that the seventh and last special "angel" to 


the church is now like our blessed Lord and Head, and can 
see him as he is. 

We resolve to redouble our diligence to make our calling 
and election sure; to renew our consecration vows, and to 
pledge our cooperation in all possible ways to the Society, who 
though berett of its best iriend on eartti are bravely seeking 
to complete their share in the kingdom work yet to be done 
this side the veil. 

We also desire, at this time, to extend to you our deep 
appreciation of the faithful, loving ministrations of both our 
dear, departed Pastor and of all at the Brooklyn Tabernacle 
and Bethel home, who were closely associated with him in 
the harvest activities. 

Lkwiston and Aububn Ecclesia. — Maine. 
WITNESSING AT FUNERALS 
Deab Bheturen: — 

Your letter of the 13th came to hand this P. M., and was 
much appreciated. Many thanks for the careful way in which 
you replied to our several inquiries. 

Foi some weeks we have felt that the matter of conducting
 funerals should be mentioned to you, and by you to the 
friends in some general way. Three very sad cases have recently
 come to our attention, instances in which we would 
have thought the dear friends would have known better how 
to proceed. In each of these cases some of the friends had 
the matter of funeral services placed in their hands, but they 
were unable to secure a capable brother to conduct the service
. In two of these cases a nearby brother could have been 
easily secured, but the friends did not know of this until 
too late. They seem to have done the best they knew, but they 
did not know the best to do. 

It would have been very simple and inexpensive to have 
wired you asking for someone to render this service, and a 
capable speaker could have been provided at small expense. 
The friends would have been glad to pay all the expenses, 
and a wonderful witness for the truth could have been given. 
We consider these great opportunities for witnessing. So 
does the Society, as evidenced by the fact that mention is 
made of such free service on the volunteer matter. 

Could not some* brief, pointed, yet comprehensive instructions
 be given to all through the Toweb! You will know what 
would be the best thing to do. W 7 ith fervent Christian Love 
to all, I am, 

Your brother by his grace, W. H. Spbing. — Ohio, 

[The Society has for a long time cooperated in the matter 
of furnishing capable brethren to speak at funeral services 
whenever requested so to do, whether near or far, and shall 
be glad to continue to render such assistance wherever possible
. Requests of this character should be wired to the Society
 without delay, giving place, day and time of funeral. 
We will in turn wire information.] 

MEN AFTER GOD'S OWN HEART 

1>eab Brethren: — 

The Suffolk, Va., Ecclesia celebrated the Memorial of our 
dear Saviour's death on the evening of April 5, in my house, 
in which, in an adjoining room, lay the dead body of my wife. 
There were ten present, one of our sisters being absent on account
 of sickness. It was a blessed experience to each and all 
as we again commemorated the death of our dear Lord and 
Master and once more renewed our consecrations to be dead 
with him. 

As we partook of the emblems which symbolize his death 
we thought of and prayed for all of like precious faith the 
world over. In our daily prayers, we fail not to remember 
the household of faith, and in an especial manner do we invoke
 wisdom and guidance for the dear brethren upon whom 
the Lord has now placed the duty and responsibility of directing
 the harvest work, that they may be men after God's 
own heart, as we believe them to be, so that the work may 
be conducted in a manner that will command hia approval, and 
bring the best results, to the glory of his great and holy 
Name. 

In much Christian love for all, Wac. W. Mubbay. 

EARNEST WORDS OF APPRECIATION 
DteAB BbetHREn: — 

Just a line or two to tell you how much we all appreciated 
the series of public meetings we have had here in Columbus. 
It was an inspiration to us to see and hear the hearty responses
 to the messages from the dear Brooklyn brethren 
who spoke. 

We all wish to thank the Society for arranging such a 
precious season of blessing for us and such a wonderful witness
 to the truth once more in Columbus. May God continue 
His rich blessing on you all and make you at one and complete
 in him who is the Savior of the body. 


[6090] 


May 15, 1*17 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(143-163) 


We made judicious use of the newspapers in advertising 
these meetings and feel that we had excellent results. We 
used mostly "Readers" scattered through the papers. The 
total cost of the four meetings will reach about $380, which 


was all pledged before we started the series for the public. 

We feel richly blessed and more determined than ever to 
go on to the end. With fervent Christian love to you all, 

Your brother by his grace, C. B. Shull. — Ohio. 


FOUL SCANDAL'S DANGER 


"Brakes on! Go slowl you do not know, 
You are not sure that it is so, 
A vagrant whisper overheard, 
A sneer, a shrug, a dastard word 
Are not sound evidence — you may 
Unjustly hurt a man today. 
The thoughtless things that people say. 
The vandal lumors gossip spreads, 
The 'I have heards' and ^Someone saids.' 


And like remarks, destroy and blight 
Without a chance to prove the right. 
Noblesse Oblige! Who knows when you 
May stand in need of fair play, too? 
A thousand men and women die 
At heart each day because a lie — 
Some ill-considered, vicious fling — 
Has robbed their lives of everything." 


ANGELOPHONE COMPANY REORGANIZED 


In a recent issue of the The Watch Toweb we announced 
that the Angelophone Company was going out of tiudinoss, We 
are glad now to inform our readers that this work will continue
, some brethren having taken over the Company and reorganized
 it. 

There was a legal question raised as to whether or not the 
Society had authority under its charter to sell talking machines
, together with the records. It is our desire to be strictly 
law-abiding. There could be no question about the right of 
the Society to manufacture and sell talking and singing 
records, because this is another method of preaching the Gospel. 

The records made by Brother Russell proved unsatisfactory, 
but there has been such a demand for them that the Society 
has arranged to have these records made again, which is now 


being done by the same person who made the Photo-Drama 
Records so great a success. The new records are clear and 
distinct, and easy to be understood, and will be much appreciated
 by every one, especially by those who enjoyed Brother 
Russell's discourses. Those records will be handled by the 
Angelophone Company, which still has on hand a few sets of 
records in the voice of Brother Russell. 

Because of the increased cost of rerecording and remaking, 
and the increased cost of material, the Angelophone Company is 
compelled to Bell these records at 25c each or $5 per set of 
twenty-five. Even at this they are cheaper than any other 
records on the market. 

Orders should be sent to us or to the Angelophone Company
, 184 Fulton St., Brooklyn, N. Y. 


"WHY DO THE NATIONS WAR?" 


The announcement that there would be a new issue of Volunteer
 literature has awakened many to the importance of 
ordering the first Volunteer matter— Vol. 9, No. 1— "The World 
on Fire" — and distributing it. We believe that the time H 
more propitious now than ever for the Lord's people to work, 
and "The World on Fire" is excellent to begin with. People 
are thinking now as never before. We believe, too, that the 
Lord expects us to keep on witnessing as long as it is "called 
day." It will be time to stop when the night has so far come 
upon us that no one can work. 

The leading article of the new volunteer matter will be: 
"Whv Do the Nations War?" Many orders have been received 
for it When ordering it please mention Vol. 9, No. 5. We 
had thought to make it eight pages, but after considering every 


detail, it was concluded, the Lord willing, to issue another 
volunteer number before the summer ends. 

The printers are at work now upon the new issue, and orders 
will be filled as rapidly as the printing proceeds. There should 
be no delay in putting it out when it reaches you. A combined 
effort and systematic distribution would be best! 

Whenever there are classes, orders should be sent by the 
Secretary, nnd orders should be carefullv e^timatrd on a ba*is 
of one copy for each English-speaking family. Where there are 
no classes individuals may order, based upon the same estimate. 
The literature ib furnished free; but we do not pay the transportation
 charges. 

"Finally, brethren, be strong in the Lord and in the power 
of His might!" 

