VOL. XXIII. MAY 1, 1902. No. 9. 



CONTENTS. 

Yearly Reckonings— Spiritual 

Accounts 131 

Examples of Proper Counting, 

Valuation, Etc 132 

How the Lord is Accounting 

Respecting Us 133 

Contrasting Experiences of the Saints 134 

"It is His Angel!" 137 

"Thy Will Be Done!"~Poem 138 

The Early Christian Missionaries 138 

Letters of Interest 142 

Special Items 130 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



NEW BIBLES GOING OUT. 



We are glad to announce that the binders are making good 
progress with the new wide-margin etc. Bibles. The first thousand 
has gone out and others will follow at the rate of about 
1000 per week. Wherever possible these go by express; and 



friends living in small places where express matter is not delivered, 
should call on express agent. 

PATENT BINDERS FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 



The price has been advanced on us, so that on orders recently 
filled we have been losing money. We must restore the price 
to 50 cents each, delivered. However, they are still very 
cheap, as one binder holds two years' issues of Z.W.T. 

1902-PILGRIM VISITS-1902. 



If you desire a Pilgrim visit, free, be sure to respond 
to the questions of page 2 of our January 15th issue. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



Your recent valued orders for tracts have about exhausted 
our supply but plenty more are being printed, and 
orders will be filled soon; if not, order again. 



R3000 :page 131 

YEARLY RECKONINGS-SPIRITUAL ACCOUNTS. 

"Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done, 
and thy thoughts which are to usward: they can not be reckoned 
up in order unto thee; if I would declare and speak of them, 
they are more than can be numbered."— Psalm 40:5. 

BUSINESS MEN are at great expense to secure 
accuracy in their accounts. Millions 
of dollars are spent every year in details of 
bookkeeping, an important part of which is to enable 
proprietors to know definitely upon which items 
of their business there is a profit, and upon which 
there is a loss,— to the intent that the profitable 
branches may be increased, and the unprofitable ones 
corrected. This is admittedly a wise procedure. 
If the case be such with those who are seeking 
temporal wealth and its honors, how much more careful 
accounting should be attempted in connection with 
spiritual matters ! The Lord's people are not merely 
seeking for wealth, which will last for a few years, 
and then must be parted with— at the tomb, if not 
sooner;— they are seeking for the riches which perish 
not, and which thieves do not break into and steal. 
More than this, with the heavenly riches they are assuredly 



seeking also heavenly honors and glories- 
even join t-heirship with the King of kings and Lord 
of lords, in the Millennial Kingdom, and in the glorious 
opportunities which it will bring in connection 
with the promised blessing of all the families of the 
earth. 

The general settlement day with the world is at 
the close of the old year, and the beginning of a new 
one, but with the Church an equally appropriate occasion, 
or, indeed, a still more appropriate one, comes 
with the annual remembrancer of our Lord's death 
as our Passover Lamb— and of our participation with 
him in his sacrifice; and in the Easter celebration of 
his resurrection, and of our figurative rising with him 
to walk in newness of life— in prospect of the actual 
resurrection in which, if faithful, we shall be changed 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, to be like 
our glorious Redeemer, to see him as he is, and to 
share his glory. 

Let us see how our spiritual accounts stand for 
the year past— since last we broke together the emblems 
of our Redeemer's sacrifice and of our own 
participation with him. Let us note whether or not 
the year's experiences have brought us nearer to the 
Lord, or have in any measure separated us from the 
warmth of his love and fellowship, and from fellowship 
with fellow members of his body. Every year 
should find us nearer to the Lord, not only in the purposes 
of our hearts, but in the conduct of our lives,— 
nearer to the perfect standard. We should be making 
progress, growing in all the graces of the spirit, 
and growing also in our knowledge and appreciation 
of the Lord and of his wonderful plan. 

We trust that each reader, as he takes a conscientious 
view of the situation, whichever way he 
feels that the balance stands (favorable or unfavorable, 
as compared with a year ago), can nevertheless 
thank God that by his grace we are what we are, and 
where we are;— still his, with hearts striving for 
things of the spirit, and not for things of the flesh. If 
any have slipped to some extent backward, let such 
thank the Lord that matters are not worse than they 
are, that they have not wholly let go of his hand, and 
relinquished their share in the exceeding great and 
precious promises of his Word. Let them thank God 
that this day of reckoning and reviewing of accounts 
finds them desirous of being on the Lord's side, and 
making a better record during the year before us. 
Let us look together at our text, and see if we cannot 
joint heartily with the Prophet in the sentiment 
expressed. He divides the subject into two parts. 
(1) Thankfulness to God for his wonderful work of 
grace already done or accomplished; and (2) for his 
thoughts, his plans, his purposes, toward us, which 
are not yet accomplished, and which we have grasped 
by his promises, with our arms of faith. 



Looking back at the things that God already has 
done for us, we see that the Prophet has defined some 
of these, saying, "He brought me up also out of an 
horrible pit, and out of the miry clay, and set my feet 

R3000 : page 132 

upon a rock, and established my goings." (Verse 2.) 
If we can apply this heartily to ourselves, what a 
cause it is for thankfulness. As we look about us, 
and see the whole world lying in the Wicked One, 
without God and having no real hope,— merely vague 
impressions— and when we look back and see how the 
Lord has delivered us from the horrible pit of condemnation 
and sin, how he has had mercy upon us 
and delivered us, and established our feet of faith upon 
the rock foundation, Christ and his redemptive work, 
well may we give thanks, and tell his mercies all 
abroad. Looking back we may see that happy day 
that fixed our choice upon our Savior and our God, 
as being the time from which our goings have been 
established,— our course no longer vacillating. It was 
there that we obtained a fixed purpose, a ballast which 
has hindered us from being upset when tossed, hither 
and thither, by the varying winds of philosophy and 
human speculation. Praise God for this which he already 
has done for us! No wonder, as the Prophet 

R3001 :page 132 

proceeds to say, we realize that "He has put a new 

song into our mouth,— even praise unto our God." 

The new song is not one of doubt or of fear, nor concerning 

anguish of sinners; but a song of God's Justice 

and Mercy and Love,— reasonable and harmonious 

in its every cadence. Thank God! It has 

brought a new life to us; a new pleasure in life, as 

well as new aspirations and new hopes for others as 

well as for ourselves. We can never thank the Lord 

enough for the blessings which we have already received 

at his hands,— for the things which he has already 

done for us. 

And yet the things that we already enjoy of the 
Lord's favor we are assured are but a foretaste of the 
blessings yet in reservation for them that love him 
—blessings which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
neither hath entered into the heart of man to see or 
appreciate, but which God hath lovingly declared, 
and which we grasp by faith, seeing through a glass 
only obscurely, as yet, the glory, honor and immortality 
promised to the faithful. What we now have 
are not realities so much as promises and hopes. 
Present experiences being but the beginning of our 
comfort, we agree with the Prophet, that the number 
of God's favors cannot be reckoned, computed. 
We are exceedingly his debtors; we can never discharge 



the obligation. But then we are his children; 
he is pleased to give us these things, and his request 
in return is that we shall act toward him in such a 
manner as will betoken our gratitude, and that we 
are indeed his offspring, begotten of his spirit. 

Let us proceed in our calculation of present assets, 
and in our balancing of the year; and let us not 
be content simply with generalities in the balance. 
Let us retrospectively scrutinize the privileges and 
mercies enjoyed during the year, and the use we made 
of them and the blessings we derived. Let us carefully 
note which features of our daily course have been 
most helpful to us, and which have to any extent 
retarded our spiritual progress, hindered our fellowship 
with the Lord, prevented our running with patience 
or with best results the race set before us in 
the Gospel. These items will necessarily vary with 
each individual— for no two are alike in temperament 
or environment. Each in his counting should 
weigh the advantages derived from fellowship and 
communion with the Lord in prayer; and should determine 
whether or not this feature of his spiritual 
interests could be advantageously expanded during 
the beginning year. 

Each should consider, also not merely how much 
time he had spent in talking to the Lord, but also how 
much time he had spent in listening to the Lord's 
voice— in searching the Scriptures; in seeking to 
know the divine mind, the divine plan, as it pertains 
to himself individually and to the Church and to the 
world. Included in this matter of listening to the 
Lord's voice, he should reckon the helps to Bible 
study provided by the Lord through the brethren, 
the members of the family, the members of the one 
body of Christ;— remembering the statement of the 
Apostle, that God himself had set the various members 
in the body as it hath pleased him; and that he 
set these members for the very purpose of blessing 
one another, edifying the Church, building it up in 
the most holy faith. True, we are to consider that 
the Apostle were set first, foremost, and hence, that 
their teachings are paramount; and that all other 
teachings are to be submitted to the test of harmony 
with the testimonies of the apostles and the prophets. 

If any, on reckoning up, shall find that they have 
not made such good progress as they had hoped, or 
perhaps apparently less progress in the narrow way, 
than some others about them, let them consider to 
what extent this failure to progress was due to a failure 
to use the divinely appointed means for growth in 
grace and knowledge and love;— namely, the Word 
and the brotherhood. If the progress has not been 
so great as could be hoped, let another point be examined: 
see whether or not you have been as active 
as was possible in serving the truth. Consider that 
you have consecrated your entire life to the Lord, 



and that by his direction it is to be laid down, sacrificed, 

yielded up in the interest of his brethren, the 

Church. Consider, count, reckon, whether or not you 

have been faithful in this matter of laying down your 

life during the past year— faithful in serving the 

Church, the body of Christ, to the best of your 

ability. Remember that it is a part of the Lord's provision, 

that he who watereth shall himself be watered, 

that he who serves the truth to others may appropriate 

to himself the more abundantly at the Lord's table 

of grace and truth. 

EXAMPLES OF PROPER COUNTING, VALUATION, ETC. 



In our counting let us take some hints and suggestions 
from the inspired apostles; let us note how 
they counted matters and things— which matters they 
set down to the profit account, and which to the loss 
account. Hearken to the Apostle Paul's words: 
"Neither count I my [earthly] life dear [precious, 
valuable] unto me." (Acts 20:24.) Again, "I count all 
things [earthly] but loss for the excellency of the 
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord." (Phil. 3:8.) 
Paul's estimation was not merely that the future glories 
were worthy of some loss in the present time, but 
that even the knowledge of Christ (including the 
knowledge of God's grace toward us through him, 
and the knowledge and consequent opportunities of 
running the race for the great prize)— was alone worth 

R3001 :page 133 

the price; he estimated that the loss of all things, in 
order to obtain this knowledge (and its opportunities), 
would be a great bargain. Let us thank God if we have 
this good asset— a knowledge of Christ,— a knowledge 
of his character, and a deep appreciation of it, a 
knowledge of the plan which centers in him— no matter 
what it has cost us of earthly good; if we have this 
knowledge, if to us he is precious, we are rich today, 
thank God! The same Apostle proceeds to say 
that already he had suffered the loss of all things and 
did "count them but dung," that he might "win Christ, 
and be found in him"— a member of his body. 

A further suggestion as to how to count is found 
in the Apostle James' words, "Count it all joy, when 
ye fall into divers temptations, knowing that the trial 
of your faith worketh patience," etc. (James 1:2.) 
No doubt, as each looks back for a year, we see that 
there were numerous snares and temptations in our 
pathway. Over some, no doubt, we gained victories, 
readily; others perhaps we conquered with a severer 
struggle; and still others perhaps were only partial 
victories,— they were partially reverses, partially victories 



for our enemy. 

What did these temptations bring us? What has 
been their value? One value, as the Apostle suggests, 
is the lesson of forbearance. They proved to 
us that we are still in the schooling time, in the testing 
time;— to demonstrate our loyalty to the Lord, 
and our worthiness, through his merit, to a share in 
his Kingdom. All wish frequently, no doubt, that 
the testings were all over, and that we were accepted 
to a place amongst the overcomers; but patience and 
faith and trust are to do a refining work in our hearts, 
making us mellow, willing and obedient to the Lord. 
Let the good work go on. Let us rejoice if our trials 
have brought us lessons of any kind that are profitable 
to us,— that have tended to make us stronger in 
character, more firm for truth and righteousness, 
more aware of our own weaknesses, and more on 
guard against the same. Even those conflicts which 
have resulted in only partial victories have possibly 
been to our advantage. Surely so, in proportion as 
we contended earnestly against our weaknesses or 
against the besetments of the Adversary. Even on 
points in which there may have been absolute failure, 
the result may be a strengthening of character, a crystallization 
of determination for greater zeal in that 
direction again; and a humility of heart before the 
Lord in prayer, which has caused us to remember the 
throne of grace afresh, and that thither we may flee 
in every moment of temptation and find the succor 
which we need. 

The Apostle Paul summed up his account, and 
balanced it, as follows: "I reckon that the sufferings 
of this present time are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us"— the 
faithful. (Rom. 8:18.) In our reckoning, in our account 
for the year, let us similarly reckon the things 
which we have suffered, whether they be few or many, 
small or great— whatever we suffered for Christ's 
sake, for righteousness' sake, for the truth's sake,— 
let us rejoice therein, and endeavor for the coming 
year, to be so much more faithful in all these respects, 
that it may be our high privilege of suffering something 
further for the name of Christ, for his cause, 
and for his brethren. 

As we reckon the profit and loss sides of the account 
for the year, let us be thankful that amongst 
the shortcomings which all may have to deplore none 
of us find one item of evil which the Apostle mentions; 
viz., none of us "count the blood of the covenant, 
wherewith we were sanctified, an unholy [ordinary] 
thing." Thank God, we still appreciate the 
precious blood of Christ; we still appreciate the fact 
that we are accepted, not in any merit or worthiness 
of our own, but in him who loved us and who bought 
us with his own precious blood. Oh, how much we 
have to be thankful for in this one feature of our experience, 



even if, as we look back, we find that there 

have been vacillations or slips or slidings in the pathway! 

How much we may thank the Lord, that by 

his grace we still are what we are, and still have the 

opportunity of persevering and running with renewed 

zeal and patience the race set before us,— looking 

unto Jesus for our example. 

HOW THE LORD IS ACCOUNTING RESPECTING US. 



Finally, in our account of matters, let us take 
courage from the Lord's statement respecting how 
he counts things, and let us count accordingly. The 
Apostle said himself, "I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, 
who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, 
putting me into the ministry." (I Tim. 1:12.) Ah, 

R3002 : page 133 

yes, what a blessed satisfaction it is to us to know that 

while the Lord knows of our every word and every 

deed he is pleased to count us something different, 

even from our words and our deeds— something better! 

Our words do not always represent the full 

sentiments of our hearts; our conduct does not come 

up to the standard: after the words have been spoken 

and after the deeds have been done— perhaps to the 

very best of our ability— we realize that they have 

come short of the glory of God, and short of our 

own ideals, desires and efforts. How consoling it 

is to us, then, to know that our imperfect work shall 

be acceptable through Christ to God; that the Lord 

counts us according to our intentions, according to 

our wills. Praise his name! We would have no 

hope of coming up to any standard of perfection which 

he would approve, were it not for his gracious arrangement 

by which our imperfections are covered by 

our Redeemer's perfection and sacrifice, and our 

works accepted according to the intentions and desires 

of our hearts. 

The Apostle rejoiced that by the Lord's counting 
him according to his intentions, and not according 
to his deeds, he was counted worthy a place in the 
ministry. Let us similarly rejoice, and let us remember 
that the word "ministry" signifies service, 
and the word "minister" signifies servant. Let us 
remember that all of the Royal Priesthood, all of the 
truly consecrated Church of God, are ministers, servants 
of God and of each other. The Lord has put 
us all into the ministry; and there is a ministry, a service 
of kindness and of love toward the Lord, in 
honoring his name and declaring his righteousness; 
and a ministry toward the brethren, in opening the 
eyes of their understanding and enabling them to 



appreciate the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the Lord's character. A share in this ministry 
belongs to each one of us, and it is a great privilege. 
It is a ministry, or service which, if neglected, 

R3002 : page 134 

or in proportion as neglected, brings us corresponding 
loss in spiritual progress and character. Let us 
count this privilege a valuable asset, to carry over 
into the new year, to be used with greater diligence 
than ever in the service of our King. 

The Apostle, in writing to the Church at Thessalonica 
(2 Thes. 1:5), says, "That ye may be counted 
worthy of the Kingdom for which ye also suffer." 
Ah, yes; this is more of the Lord's counting. We are 
not worthy of the Kingdom of God. No human being 
is worthy; but the Lord purposes to count his 
faithful ones worthy. He will do this through the 
merit of his own great atonement-sacrifice which permits 
the acceptance of our wills, our intentions, as instead 
of the perfect works of righteousness. Thank 
God for this generous accounting! Let it encourage 
us, and let us remember the Apostle's statement that 
those who will be counted of our Lord thus fit for 
the Kingdom, will be such as suffer something for 
it. Let us then strive in a reasonable, rational manner, 
according to the divine Word and plan, to suffer 
for the Kingdom's sake. 

We are not to seek suffering in a foolish way, by 
doing foolish things. We have no such example in 
our Lord's case, nor in the case of the apostles. It 
is not even necessary that we should suffer martyrdom 
or physical persecution. Possibly the extent 
of our sufferings may be the wounding of our feelings, 
when— "The workers of iniquity. ..whet their 
tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot 
their arrows, even bitter words, that they may shoot 
in secret at the innocent." (Psa. 64:3.) Perhaps 
our sufferings, even, will be still less than this, as the 
Apostle explains (Heb. 10:33-35): "Partly whilst ye 
were made a gazingstock, both by reproaches and 
afflictions, and partly whilst ye became companions of 
them that were so used." Let us resolve to carry this 
good asset over into the new year, rejoicing that we 
have been privileged thus far to suffer some little for 
the Lord's sake and for the sake of the truth, and in 
companionship with the brethren; heeding the Apostle's 
words, "Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, 
which hath great recompense of reward." God 
wishes us to trust him according to his promises, and 
will reward such faith. 

We conclude this exhortation to spiritual accounting, 
by calling attention to the Apostle's words: 
"We pray always for you— that God would count you 
worthy of this calling and fulfill all the good pleasure 



of his goodness, and the work of faith with power." 
(2 Thess. 1:1 1.) This is our prayer for you, beloved 
in the Lord; and we trust also that this is your prayer 
for us. What more could we ask than that the Lord 
would count us worthy of the great high-calling of 
this Gospel age,— to joint-heirship with his Son in 
the Kingdom? We have his assurance respecting 
the terms on which he will count us worthy. We 
realize that the terms are very reasonable indeed, and 
that what we do sacrifice in conforming to those terms 
would be really only as loss and dross to us, so long as 
we were filled with a proper zeal for the Lord and his 
cause. And now notice the Apostle's words, that 
these good things which our heavenly Father has 
called us to receive— to prove ourselves worthy of 
receiving, according to his gracious terms in Christ 
—are not things which he offers us grudgingly, but 
things which he is well pleased to bestow. There 
was a time, perhaps, with each of us, when, under 
misinterpretations of the Lord's Word, we supposed 
that coldly and heartlessly, our Heavenly Father preferred 
not to give many blessings, and would give 
them to but few, and to them in a grudging manner, 
because impelled thereto by Jesus; and that for 
the great majority he had determined, beforehand, 
that they should be delivered over to devils for an 
eternity of misery. Thank God for a clearer opening 
of the eyes of our understanding, by which now 
we may know him as our Father, and appreciate to 
some extent his wonderful plan! 

And, as respects our own share, let us settle it in 
our hearts that these gracious things to which we 
are called are "all the good pleasure of his goodness." 
Let us start into the new year with good courage, 
remembering that if God loved us while we were yet 
sinners, strangers, aliens, foreigners, much more does 
he now love us since we have come into relationship 
with him through Jesus Christ our Lord;— since we 
are seeking to walk, not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit; since we are seeking to be copies of his dear 
Son, our Lord; since we have been begotten by his 
holy spirit. Truly, faith may confidently exclaim, 
"All things are ours, for we are Christ's and Christ 
is God's!" 



R3002 : page 134 

CONTRASTING EXPERIENCES OF THE SAINTS. 

-ACTS 12:l-9.-MAY 11.- 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear him, and delivereth them."— Psalm 34:7. 



HEROD, was a family name. There were several 

kings over Israel by this name; (1) 

Herod the Great, who flourished about the 

time of our Lord's birth, and who murdered the babes 

of Bethlehem. (2) Herod Archelaus, son and successor 

to Herod the Great— deposed A.D. 6. (3) 

Herod Antipas, another son of Herod the Great, the 

murderer of John the Baptist, who subsequently, 

with his men of war, set at naught and mocked Jesus, 

just prior to his crucifixion— deposed A.D. 40. (4) 

Herod Agrippa I., grandson of Herod the Great, 

mentioned in the present lesson as the murderer of 

the Apostle James. (5) Herod Agrippa II., the last 

of the Herods, before whom the Apostle Paul defended 

himself.-Acts 26:28. 

The Herod of our lesson (Agrippa I.) was given 
his kingdom by Claudius Caesar, Emperor of Rome, 
whom he saved from a violent death. History says 
of him, "He curried favor with the Jews in every way: 
he hung in the Temple, as a votive offering, the gold 
chain which the Emperor Caligula had given him; 
he lived in Jerusalem, and punctiliously observed the 
traditions of the fathers, and secured the fervent loyalty 
of the Pharisees. At the Feast of Tabernacles, 
A.D. 41, he took the reader's stand, and read the 
whole Book of Deuteronomy aloud, bursting into 

R3002 : page 135 

tears, as if quite overcome, when he reached the 
words, 'Thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, 
who is not thy brother.' He feared that because he 
had Edomite blood in his veins he might incur the 
hatred his grandfather, Herod the Great, had borne, 
and took this way to gain the political favor of the 
Jews, who cried out, 'Do not weep, Agrippa; thou 
art our brother.'" Within a month after the events 
of this lesson he was a corpse. His tragic end at 
Caesarea, whither he had gone to a magnificent festival, 
in honor of Claudius Caesar, is thus summed 
up by Geike, from Josephus' account:— 

"A vast multitude assembled to see the festival 
and games, and before these the king, in all the pride 
of high state, appeared in robes inwrought with silver 
threads. The time chosen was daybreak, so that the 
kindling sun shining on his grand mantle lighted 
it into dazzling splendor. Presently some of his 
flatterers, always at hand beside a king, raised the 
cry, echoing a reminiscence of the days of Caligula, 
'Deign to be gracious to us, thou divine one! 
Hitherto we have honored thee as a man; henceforth 
we own thee as more than mortal!' Instead of rebuking 
such lying servility he drank in this adulation 
with high pleasure. Next moment a great pain 
racked his bowels. Conscience-stricken at this blasphemous 
folly, the poor wretch felt that the wrath 



of God had struck him down, and the cry arose from 
him in his agony, 'See, your god must now give up 
life, and hasten into the arms of corruption!' In the 
Acts (12:23) we are told that he 'was eaten of 
worms.'" 

Knowing thus much about the man, Herod, enables 
us to understand why he made his attack upon 

R3003 : page 135 

the Church. Altho not a descendant of Jacob, but of 
Esau, he had espoused the religion prevalent in his 
kingdom, and was seeking favor with the Jews by his 
zeal for Judaism,— which meant, of course, his zeal 
and energy correspondingly against Christianity. 
As we have already seen, the Jews had begun a work 
of persecution against the Church, but were hindered 
by their own troubles with Caligula Caesar; but the 
latter was now dead, and the persecuting tendencies 
of misdirected fervor could again be exercised. The 
Lord, of course, was not subject to these conditions, 
and could have miraculously prevented the persecutions 
recorded. But, as the lesson shows, he permitted 
the evil to triumph in part and restrained it 
in part. 

The Apostle James, whose death is here recorded, 
in few words, was a matter of fact one of 
the most noble and notable of the apostles. He was 
one of the three who usually accompanied our Lord 
in the most confidential capacity;— with his brother 
John, and Peter, he was with the Lord in the Mount of 
Transfiguration. In the same company he was present 
at the awakening of Jairus' daughter. In the 
same company he was one of the inner circle of the 
Lord's friends in the trying hour in the Garden of 
Gethsemane. It was he and his brother whom our 
Lord surnamed Boanerges— "sons of thunder"— 
probably because of their eloquence and forcefulness 
of speech. It was he and his brother whose mother entreated 
the Lord that they might sit "the one on his 
right hand and the other on his left, in the Kingdom," 
and who, when questioned by our Lord, declared their 
willingness to share in his work and suffering, even 
unto death. They were both faithful, James being 
amongst the earliest of the martyrs for the cause, and 
John living to a life of old age,— being probably the 
last survivor of the apostles. Altho the record of 
James' ministry is brief in the extreme, it contains 
nothing that gives the slightest suggestion of anything 
except zeal and faithfulness to the Lord and to 
his cause. This James, who died early in the Christian 
era, should not be confounded with the other 
James, the author of the Epistle of James— known as 
"James the Less," the son of Alpheus (Cleopas— 
Mark 3:18)— husband of Mary, supposed to have been 
second cousin to our Lord, and for this reason, according 



to Jewish custom, styled "the Lord's 
brother. "-Gal. 1:19. 

When Herod saw what satisfaction it gave his 
subjects, and especially their leaders, the Pharisees, 
that he should thus persecute the Christians, he proceeded 
to take Peter also. The implication is that 
James and Peter were two of the foremost amongst 
the apostles in the Church at this time. The expression, 
"When he had apprehended him," implies that 
some delay occurred between the order for his arrest 
and the time of his imprisonment. He was delivered 
to four quaternions of soldiers. A quaternion consisted 
of four soldiers to guard a prisoner, two of 
them being chained to him, one on each side, by the 
wrists; the other two doing sentinel duty, one at the 
door of the cell and the other in an outer court. The 
four quaternions were in the nature of relief guards, 
so that each quaternion would have charge of the 
Apostle for six hours of the twenty-four. 

It was at the season of Easter, or, more properly, 
the Passover— "the days of unleavened bread." The 
time of his arrest was too close to this religious festival 
to make it proper for such a public execution as 
Herod had determined upon. He would reserve his 
show of zeal for the Jews' religion until this festival 
was at an end. Meantime, the infant Church at Jerusalem 
was evidently sadly perplexed by the trend of 
affairs— at a loss to know how to interpret the Lord's 
providences. Doubtless they held their memorial of 
the Redeemer's death at this time, as we now do, and 
their hearts were sadly stricken with a realization of 
the fact that the Lord's faithful must all drink of his 
cup— of ignominy and death. Altho a considerable 
number of Jews had accepted Jesus, as we saw in a 
previous lesson, apparently the majority of the believers 
were scattered abroad, but few of them residing 
in Jerusalem. These few it seems met in little 
groups, in private houses, for prayer and praise, for 
study of the Lord's Word and for building one another 
up in the most holy faith; and such a meeting 
was in progress during this eventful Passover week. 
We are informed that the burden of their prayer was 
for Peter. 

Well instructed by the apostles, we may be sure 
that they strove not to ask amiss; and that they copied 
the Master's petition, at least in so far as the expression, 
"Nevertheless, not my will, but thine, be done." 
We have no record that the Church met in prayer 
for James, tho quite possibly it did; neither are we 
bound to suppose that if they had not met and prayed 

R3003 : page 136 

for Peter, Herod would have succeeded in killing 
him also. It is sufficient for us that we remember 
that God has plans of his own, irrespective of the 



plans and prayers of his people, and that all of his 
good purposes will be accomplished; but it is well 
that we should note also his good pleasure that his 
people should come so fully into accord with him and 
his plans that they would neither be surprised nor 
disappointed in their fulfilment. 

Probably James' death was accomplished suddenly, 
while, as we have seen, Peter was held over in 
bonds. This gave the Church time to consider how 
much she had already lost, and how much she might 
lose further were not the Lord to interpose for her 
protection. No doubt they reasoned that they had 
already sustained a great loss; and no doubt Peter's 
life and his service seemed much more precious to 
them since the loss of James. In any event, the 
Lord's people were getting a blessing through their 
experiences and through their prayers. Peter also 
was getting a valuable experience; and doubtless the 
Lord was overruling in the matter so that a great 
blessing and stimulus to the faith of all, would ensue 
through Peter's release. 

Peter, his heart filled with the peace of God which 
passeth all understanding, was enabled to sleep peacefully 
in the prison, notwithstanding the unfavorable 
conditions in which he was placed, and his expectancy 
that on the morrow he would be called before 
the king and publicly executed. What a blessing is 
this rest of heart, this ability to entrust to the Lord 
all of life's affairs! It is written, "He giveth his beloved 
sleep." (Psa. 127:2.) We cannot say that the 
Lord's people are never troubled with insomnia, 
sleeplessness, but we can say that many, previously 
troubled with the cares of this life, exciting to nervousness, 
have by the Lord's grace been enabled 
so to cast all their care upon him that it has in great 
measure controlled their nerves and brought back to 
them the ability to enjoy sweet refreshing rest in 
sleep. Nothing is more favorable to this peace of 
heart than a full consecration to the Lord— "all to his 
wisdom resigned:" it entitles to a full confidence in the 
divine promises,— through faith in the divine wisdom, 
love and power, which has guaranteed that all things 
shall work together for good to those who love God, 
who are called according to his purpose. 

Peter was aroused from his sleep, loosed from 
his chains, bidden to arise and fasten the girdle usually 
relaxed in slumber, to put on his sandals,— 
wrap himself in his outer cloak and follow the messenger, 
the light of whose glory filled the prison cell. 
The doors opened before them; they passed the sentinel 
unobserved, and Peter was led from the castle 
of Antonia into the city proper. There the heavenly 
messenger left him. There is a simplicity to this narrative 
which, even on the surface, commends it as 
truthful. Were it a fiction doubtless the author 
would have stated matters altogether differently. He 



would have represented the angel as doing homage 
to the apostle, or delivering to him some complimentary 
message from the Lord, or lifting him up or putting 
on his sandals and fastening them for him, or 
assisting in girding him or putting on his mantle. 
He would have had him give Peter certain directions 
at the time of leaving, etc. But this simple account 
merely represents the angel as doing for Peter what 
he could not do for himself, and no more, and leaving 
him without a word as soon as he had brought 
him properly into the city. 

The record shows that Peter was so surprised 
with what had transpired that he for a time fancied 
himself in a dream, in a trance,— expecting that he 
would awaken shortly to realize himself still bound; 
but the cool morning air, between three and six 
o'clock, and being left alone, brought him to his 
senses and convinced him that he was actually at liberty. 
He knew well the usual meeting place, and 
thither he bent his steps. It was the home of Mary, 
mother of John Mark— cousin of Barnabas, (so 
"sister's son" should read in Col. 4:10.) John was 
his Hebrew name and Marcus his Latin name. It was 
this Mark who was the Evangelist, the author of the 
Book of Mark,— the same who accompanied Barnabas 
and Paul on their first missionary journey. 

Altho the hour was an unusual one, the inmates of 
the house were awake, the prayer-meeting was still 
going on at the very time when the Lord was answering 
the petition. Peter's knock on the outer door was 
responded to by the little maid-servant of the family, 
Rhoda (Rose), who, child-like, discerning the voice of 
Peter (for it was customary to make inquiries before 
opening the door) was so surprised and delighted that 
she neglected to open the door before running back 
to give word to the assembled disciples. 

The fact that the praying ones were amazed, astonished, 
and could scarcely believe that it was Peter 
who had come, does not prove that they had not faith 
in their own prayers. Rather, we may say that their 
faith in prayer was well attested by their continuance 
in it all night, and to such an hour in the morning, 
and that they were not asleep at the time Peter 
knocked; but, knowing something regarding the 
prison and the appointment of four quaternions of 
soldiers, they would reasonably expect that whatever 
answer might come to their prayers would not be a 

R3004 : page 136 

release of Peter under such circumstances, but might 
rather be some interference at the time of the trial, 
something to change the mind of the king, who would 
be the judge in this case, and thus to bring about 
Peter's release. But "God works in a mysterious 
way his wonders to perform," and not infrequently 



his ways are not as our ways, and sometimes we learn 
valuable lessons under just such circumstances. 
Doubtless the faith of some was shaken considerably 
by the death of the Apostle James; doubtless they 
queried concerning the lack of the manifestation of 
divine favor and interference for the protection of the 
Apostle and for his preservation as a helper in the 
Church. But if they were thus tempted and tried, and 
their faith sorely tested for a while, they had now, in 
Peter's experience, a valuable lesson on the other 
side— an illustration of God's power to intervene 
when he will and how he will on his people's behalf. 

Here again, in this contrast between the experiences 
of James and those of Peter, we have something 
that would be entirely contrary to the manner 
or thought of a forger attempting to write such an 
account from his imagination. It would not occur to 
him to have so marked a manifestation of divine 
providential care in the case of Peter, and to leave 
James' case with apparently no evidences of divine 

R3004 : page 137 

protection. And this calls to our mind the fact that 
divine providence seems frequently to operate along 
these lines— contrasting between the experiences of 
different members of the body of Christ, and sometimes 
instituting contrasts in our own individual experiences 
as Christians. In some of life's events we 
can see the Lord's protecting and guiding care most 
markedly, while in others it would seem absolutely 
lacking. The lesson it should bring to us is one of 
full faith in the Lord, and of full submission to all his 
providences. Indeed, we are to note that in the majority 
of cases our experiences are far more like that 
of James than like this experience of Peter's. The 
miracles which we can trace in our own experience 
are certainly few and far between. Whatever we have 
had, or whatever the apostles or others have had in 
this direction, which serves to demonstrate to us 
God's supervision of his own affairs, is evidently intended 
to give us strength and courage, whereby we 
can walk fearlessly and courageously in the dark, 
for, as the Apostle says, under divine providence we 
generally are called upon to "walk by faith, not by 
sight. "-2 Cor. 5:7. 

"IT IS HIS ANGEL!" 

"Are they [angels] not all ministering spirits 
sent forth to minister for them [unto those] who 
shall be heirs of salvation?" (Heb. 1:10.) Knowing the 
Apostle Peter to be one of the heirs of salvation, and 
never for a moment considering the possibility of his 
escape from prison, the brethren queried if their visitor 
might not be Peter's angel as his representative, 



come in answer to their prayers, to give them consolation. 
Soon, however, they realized that it was Peter 
himself, and afterward learned of his miraculous deliverance 
by the angel. 

Verse 17 implies that when the brethren realized 
that it was actually Peter who stood before them they 
were excited with joy, and would probably have created 
quite a commotion had not the Apostle beckoned 
to them with his hand that they should be quiet. 
Then calmly explaining to them his providential deliverance, 
and sending a message to James ("the 
Less") "the Lord's brother" or second cousin and to 
all the brethren, he at once left the place— left Jerusalem. 
When Peter and John were delivered from 
prison it was by the Lord's instruction that they went 
back to the Temple and continued to proclaim; but 
now, in the absence of any instruction from the Lord 
to the contrary, the Apostle wisely understood that 
his proper course, in co-operation with the Lord's 
providences, was that he should flee, that he should 
not put himself unnecessarily into danger, nor attempt 
to wage a warfare with the representative of 
the Roman government, trusting to further miraculous 
deliverances. 

We know some who would have been inclined, 
in Peter's place, to have made a great hurrah about 
the escape, and to have boasted that prison-walls 
and Roman soldiers were powerless against the Lord; 
and who, perhaps, would have gone the length of daring 
the king to arrest them again. But we believe 
such a course would not have been the will of the 
Lord, and that Peter evidently took the proper course. 
This suggestion may be valuable to some of the 
Lord's people. This is the time in which "the prince 
of this world" is permitted to maintain his general 
control; and we are to expect miraculous deliverances 
to be the exception rather than the rule, and are to 
act accordingly;— so far as lieth in us, preserving 
the peace, living peaceably with all men. Peter's conduct 
in not daring the king was not a manifestation of 
lack of confidence in divine power, but it was in obedience 
to the Master's words, "When they shall persecute 
you in one city flee ye to another." The persecution 
had reached him personally; he had been delivered 
from it, and now was his time to flee to another 
place, where doubtless, the Lord had other work for 
him to do. Let us be prompt in following a similar 
course in proportion as our circumstances correspond. 
When the persecution gets too severe, cry to 
the Lord for help, and if he opens a door of deliverance 
flee to another place or condition, where, with 
equal boldness and courage and faith you will, as before, 
lift high the royal banner. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT. 



It is comparatively easy for us to associate our 
Golden Text with Peter and his deliverance, and with 
ourselves in instances of peculiar assistance from the 
Lord in our affairs, temporal or spiritual; but it is 
much more difficult for us to associate it with the experiences 
of the Apostle James and with our own experiences, 
in which disasters, difficulties and fiery 
trials are permitted to come upon us. Such experiences 
are doubtless sent of the Lord for the development 
and testing of our faith. The Lord's providential 
care was none the less in the case of James, 
and we may be sure that nothing happened to him 
contrary to divine intention and permission; and so 
with ourselves; we may be sure, not only that the 
Lord knoweth them that are his, but sure also that 
"Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his 
saints," and that he "will not suffer us to be tempted 
above that we are able, but will with the temptation 
provide also a way of escape." In James' case the "escape" 
was final and decisive, in Peter's it was 
temporary. 

Our trials and difficulties are not, therefore, to be 
esteemed as the results of divine carelessness in respect 
to our interests, but as the outworkings of divine 
providence for our good. Those who are able to view 
the matter from this standpoint are thus enabled to 
learn some of the very best and most helpful of life's 
lessons, and are thereby prepared for the glorious 
things coming; whereas those who allow faith to falter 
in times of trial, and who will walk with the Lord and 
have confidence in him only when they are the recipients 
of miraculous favors, are correspondingly weak, 
and correspondingly unprepared for the Kingdom. 
And as these lessons are necessary to the individual, 
so they are necessary also to the Church as a whole, 
as in the case of James and the Church in our lesson. 
So far as James was concerned, it could matter little 
to him which way the Lord effected his "escape" if, 
in the Lord's wisdom, he had finished his course, 
perfected his character and stood the test. As for the 
Church, it could learn an important lesson; viz., that 
God, while pleased to use the Apostles and various 
agencies in the prosecution of his work, was not at all 
dependent upon them, but that one or all of them 
could be dropped out, and yet the Lord be thoroughly 
competent to manage his own work and to accomplish 
all the gracious promises of his Word. 

R3007 : page 138 

"THY WILL BE DONE!" 



My Lord, thy will not mine be done: 

Whatever path thy love shall choose for me, 



Through desert sands, or if beside the sea,— 
Thy will be done! 

Oh, may thy will in me be done! 

Should "harvest" labor be for me thy will, 
Or if I may but suffer and be still,— 
Thy will be done! 

My Father, let thy will be done: 

If sweet the Cup thou pourest for me to drink, 
I'll praise thee; but, if bitter, I'll not shrink,— 
Thy will be done! 

Forever may thy will be done: 

I would not choose, I leave it all with thee,— 
The pilgrimage, if short or long it be,— 
Thy will be done! 

-G. W. Seibert. 



R3004 : page 138 

THE EARLY CHRISTIAN MISSIONARIES. 

-ACTS 13:1-12.-MAY 18, 1902.- 

"Go ye therefore, and teach all nations."— Matt. 28:19. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT is aptly illustrated in 

this lesson. Our Lord's commission* was 

not, as some have supposed, a command 

to convert the world, nor is there any suggestion anywhere 

in the Scriptures that the preaching of the gospel 

was with such an end in view. Quite to the contrary, 

every intimation of our Lord's parables illustrating 

the subject, and all of the words of the apostles, 

were to the effect that at the end of the age, at 

the second coming of Christ, he would not find faith 

predominating in the earth; he would not find God's 

will done on earth as in heaven; but he would find 

merely a little flock, selected from the world through 

the preaching of the truth. These would be made 

meet to be the Bride, the Lamb's wife, and joint-heir 

with him in the glorious Kingdom then to be established 

for the purpose of binding Satan, restraining 

evil, and causing truth and righteousness to fill the 

earth and bless all the nations.— Luke 18:8; 12:32; 

Rev. 20:1-3. 

The commission meant merely— You are no 
longer restricted to the Jews in preaching this Gospel 
of the Kingdom; you may now deliver it to all the 
world, every nation, so that "he that hath an ear" may 
hear— to the intent that a little flock, the elect, spiritual 
Israel, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar 



*The word "therefore" in this text, is omitted by the 
oldest Greek MS., the Sinaitic, and also by the Alexandrine. 

R3005 : page 138 

people, may be selected from all nations for future 

service in the Kingdom. In accord with this, 

our Lord's instruction, as related by Luke, says, "Repentance 

and remission of sins should be preached in 

his name unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." 

(Luke 24:47.) And again, as recorded in Acts 1:8, 

he said, "Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem 

and in all Judea and in Samaria and unto the 

uttermost parts of the earth." The apostles evidently 

did not at first comprehend the scope of the 

Master's commission. They were ready enough to 

begin at Jerusalem; ready also, as we have seen, to 

extend the work throughout Judea; ready also when 

the Lord's providence so led, to preach to the Samaritans; 

but it required very special instructions for 

Peter to preach to the Gentiles also. As the Gospel 

was not intended to convert all of the Jews, but only 

to take from them a remnant while the rest were left 

blinded for a time, so, likewise, it was intended to take 

from amongst the Gentiles also only a remnant, 

so that the entire company of the elect of this age is 

properly termed "a little flock," to whom it is the 

Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom,— which 

Kingdom, it is also the Father's good pleasure, shall 

bless all the families of the earth. 

Antioch was the first church of believers, so far 
as we know, outside of Palestine— the first church 
amongst the Gentiles. Its members were probably 
chiefly Jews, and these chiefly foreign born. The 
Jews residing abroad doubtless appreciated the fact 
that amongst their Gentile neighbors were some of 
noble character, not less worthy of divine favor than 
were the Jews; and these doubtless would, on this 
account, the more quickly fall into line with the 
Lord's instruction and leading respecting the gospel 
—that it was thenceforth not for Jews exclusively, 
but for people of all nationalities who were in heart-readiness 
to receive it. 

A previous lesson showed us Barnabas and Paul 
meeting with the brethren at Antioch, for a considerable 
time, in the worship of the Lord and in the study 
of his Word. The result of these studies was to develop 
the Church as a whole, and to bring it to the 
point of considering and praying about means for the 
service of the truth— the spread of the Gospel. There 
were a number of prophets (public orators) and teachers 
in the Church, and evidently they began to think 
of how they might be used to the glory of God and 
to the blessing of others, as they themselves had been 



blessed by the truth. This is always the case with those 

who receive the truth into good and honest hearts. 

Properly enough, they desire to feed thereon themselves 

and to grow strong in the Lord, but just so 

surely as the truth is received, with its spirit, it gives a 

strength and a desire to use that strength. This is 

as true today as it was then: the consecration which 

the truth brings is identical with our begetting of 

the spirit; and the energy for service corresponds 

to the quickening of the spirit. 

We see a distinction drawn in our lesson between 
prophets and teachers. The Greek word rendered 
"prophet" signifies a "forth-teller." It might 
be understood to mean one who tells in advance, or 
foretells, or prophesies coming events; but in its general 
use in the New Testament the word seems to 
indicate one who tells forth, in the sense of proclaiming, 
giving public utterance to, or standing up before 
the people in declaration of the Lord's message. 
The distinction between prophets and teachers, as 
here used, seems to be that the former were persons 
of natural talent and ability for teaching the truth in 
a public manner, in orderly discourse, etc., while the 
teachers would be those possessing talent as instructors, 
but not necessarily in a public, or oratorical 

R3005 : page 139 

manner. The same distinctions are true today 
amongst the Lord's people; comparatively few have 
the qualifications for public speaking— for presenting 
an address in an orderly manner, that will be truly 
helpful to the hearers. Some others, who have not 
ability as public discoursers, have talent for presenting 
the truth in a less public manner, as in Bible 
studies, etc. 

It is for the Lord to supply the talents as he may 
deem best, and it is for each individual and the Church 
as a whole to utilize the talents of which they find 
themselves possessed. Little companies of the 
Lord's people are not to determine that they must 
have public preaching, and then endeavor to have 
it, good or bad. Rather, they are to seek to know 
the mind of the Lord on the subject, and to have such 
meetings as the Lord's providence may make possible 
and proper. If there be one or two or more 
brethren in the congregation who have the ability to 
teach— to conduct the services of the Church, and 
to draw out the brethren in questions and answers as 
a Bible class, in a Bible study, giving their own opinions 
with the others, the Church should seek to use 
such brethren in its services as they may consent. 
And if there be in the number one or more with talent 
for a public or connected presentation, in the nature 
of a discourse, let them also, if they will, be put into 
service. The object of the Church should, in every 



case, be to develop, to use, to exercise, all of its different 
members: each according to his ability and development, 
spiritual and natural. 

It would be specially unfortunate if any companies 
of the Lord's people whom he had brought 
into the light of present truth should become ensnared 
with the wrong views and wrong practices of 
the nominal church systems, so as to consider public 
preaching (prophesying) the only proper and satisfactory 
service. Rather, let us remember to look 
for the various members whom the Lord shall set in 
the body and endeavor to use all of them. (I Cor. 12.) 
We will find that he sets many more teachers 
than prophets, orators; and we will find that our blessing, 
as little companies of his people, will be greater 
in proportion as we note the Lord's providences and 
fall in line with them. We trust that the new Bibles 
will prove very helpful in this respect— in enabling 
many to teach— to lead meetings— to draw out the 
thoughts of the brethren— to present before their 
minds the Word of the Lord and the true understanding 
of the same. The Topical Index will be found 
very helpful too we trust. 

The Church at Antioch evidently had an over-supply 
of teachers, as compared to its own requirements; 
but having the proper spirit in the matter, desiring 
to accomplish as large results in the Lord's service 
as possible, the brethren had no thought of 
crushing out or holding down any who manifested 
ability for the Lord's service. On the contrary, they 
began to look about them for larger fields of usefulness. 
They were uncertain regarding the course they 
should pursue, and hence looked to the Lord as the 
real Head and guide in the Church's affairs. They 
served and they fasted, and we may be sure that they 
prayed also; and as a result they came to the conclusion 
to send forth two of their number— Barnabas 
and Paul— as representatives of the whole in mission 
work. We are not informed in what manner the 
Lord directed them to this. It is possible that it was 
after the same manner that we today, under similar 
circumstances, considering such a case, would 
say— We believe, after studying the Scriptures and 
praying, and seeking to know the mind of the Lord, 
that it would be his will that such ones of our number 
should go out for a public service of the truth. 
We believe that we are guided to this conclusion, not 
by any wrong spirit of pride or fond ambition to have 
the name of sending out missionaries, nor with any 
mercenary motive,— but that we are actuated by the 
spirit of the truth, the spirit of Christ, the holy spirit, 
in this determination,— that our motives are sincere. 
We believe that we have the Lord's mind on the subject; 
we believe that it is the Lord's will that we as 
a congregation should send forth these two as representatives 
of our number, to carry the light to others. 



In this manner, or in some manner, the conviction 
came strongly to the entire Church at Antioch 
that this was its duty and its privilege. It is worthy of 
note, too, that it sought out its very best for this service 
—thus letting the spirit of self-sacrifice prevail. 
They still had Simeon Niger and Lucius and Menaen, 
talented brethren, and the latter one of considerable 
worldly standing and influence, tho evidently an aged 
man— foster-brother to Herod Antipas. But none 
of these remaining were the equals of Paul and Barnabas. 
This liberal disposition on the part of the 
Church is worthy of praise, and we are sure brought 
to it a large measure of the Lord's blessing. Not 
that we should be reckless of the interests of the home 
congregation in serving others, so as to leave ourselves 
destitute; but in making our sacrifices to the 
Lord and his service we are to seek to give of the best 
we have. No doubt the Lord blessed the Church correspondingly, 
and made up to them the loss sustained 
in the giving of these two brethren to the mission 
work. No doubt the other members of the congregation 
were all the more energized, stimulated, brought 
forward in activity, and made the more useful. 

The proper course decided upon, the congregation 
fasted and prayed and laid their hands on Paul 
and Barnabas, and sent them on their missionary 
tour with their blessing and God-speed. In our 
practical time some of us may be inclined to pay too 
little heed to incidentals of this kind; there might 
be today too much disposition amongst us to take a 
vote on what we believed to be the Lord's will, and 
to shake hands with the brethren, and say "Goodbye," 
without the fasting and praying and imposition 
of hands. We would be inclined to ask, What good 
would these things do? What purpose would they 
serve? They would do good to all; they would serve 
to impress upon all— the missionaries starting and 
the brethren remaining— the importance of the 
Lord's service, and the fact that those who remained 
were having a share with those who went. The laying 
on of hands would probably be done by the congregation, 
through the other representatives or 
Elders. But this proceeding did not signify, as is 
generally understood today, an "Ordination;" for 
the Apostle Paul and Barnabas had been recognized 
in the Church at Antioch for a considerable time as 
amongst their principal prophets and teachers. It 
would not signify authority to preach, as Ordination 

R3006 : page 140 

sometimes means today amongst Christians of various 
sects and parties. It simply meant that— We, 
the congregation, by this laying on of hands of our 
representative Elders, are sending forth these two 
men, Paul and Barnabas, on a missionary tour; and 



that they go, not only as the representatives of the 
Lord, and as representatives of themselves, but also 
as representatives of the Church of the Lord at Antioch, 
and as such we hold ourselves responsible for 
their maintenance. We will supply them the needful 
assistance, and thus will be co-laborers with them,— 
sharers in their labors, sympathizers with them in 
their difficulties and trials, helpers of them in their 
necessities, and partakers with them also in whatever 
results shall come to the Lord's praise through 
their efforts. Accordingly, we find that after this 
missionary tour the two brethren returned to Antioch, 
and made report. It would appear that subsequently 
the Apostle Paul, at least, travelled without 
any such dependence upon the Church at Antioch, 
—without any such praying and laying on of hands, 
and without any subsequent reports of results of labors, 
— tho still in love and in sympathy with them, so 
far as we may judge. 

The nature of the praying offered in connection 
with the sending forth of the missionaries we can 
readily imagine;— they were, doubtless, prayers for 
the Lord's blessing upon them, for their guidance, for 
their support and strengthening, and that their journey 
might be profitable and to the Lord's praise. 
But why the fasting? says one. What advantage 
could accrue from fasting at such a time? We answer 
that the Lord and the apostles and prophets 
have all set us an example in the matter of fasting. 
It is claimed, no doubt with truth, that many people 
overeat, and that restraints in the matter of diet would 
be profitable to them physically and mentally and 
morally, without any reference whatever to its being 
a sacrifice or oblation unto the Lord. No doubt 
this is true, yet it is for each person to decide for himself 
as to what would be the proper amount and kind 
of food for him— best calculated to help him in spiritual 
matters, that his time and talent and influence 
may count as largely as possible for the Lord's praise 
and for his own spiritual progress. We remind our 
readers again that there are other appetites besides 
those for food and drink which may properly be considered 
in connection with this matter of fasting— all 
the various desires of the flesh need restraining, and 
such self-restraint and the bringing of our minds, our 
thoughts, our words, our conduct and our food under 
such restraints as will be most beneficial to us as new 
creatures in Christ, is the very essence and spirit of 
true fasting, and such fasting will surely bring a 
blessing and permit a closer approach to the Lord 
and a keener realization of his love and favor. 

Luke, the narrator, keeps prominently before us 
the fact that these two missionaries were not sent 
forth regardless of the Lord's will, but by the holy 
spirit— however the Lord's mind may have been ascertained. 
We believe that it was ascertained by 



a vote of the Church; that the Church, having come 
into the attitude of harmony with God, through 
prayer, fasting, consecration, etc., was possessed of 
the holy spirit, and that to such a degree that their 
action would properly be considered the action of the 
holy spirit through them. 

The missionaries went from Antioch, a distance 
of eighteen miles, to the seaport town of Seleucia, 
where they took ship for the nearest large city in the 
Island of Cyprus. It was probably as good a place to 
begin as any, and had the advantage of being the 
home country of Barnabas, who would be familiar 
with the dialect of the people, their customs, etc. 

John Mark, the writer of the Gospel by Mark, 
cousin of Barnabas, and son of one of the Marys at 
Jerusalem (Acts 12:12,25), is noted as being their 
minister, attendant servant, and this, together with 
the fact that he was not sent out by the Church as 
a missionary with the others, shows us clearly that 
while all brethren are to be very highly esteemed as 
brethren this does not signify that they have all one 
office or one work. It is the same lesson which the 
apostle inculcates in I Cor. 12, saying, "If the whole 
body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the 
whole were hearing, where were the smelling? But 
now hath God set the members every one of them in 
the body, as it hath pleased him." The eye serves the 
hand in some respects; the hand serves the eye in 
other respects; the foot serves both in still other respects, 
and both hand and eye serve the foot. 
The lesson here is that each of us should seek to find 
the position in which the Lord is pleased to have us 
and to use us, and finding this we are to exercise ourselves 
therein as best we are able;— continuing, if the 
will of God be such, to abide in that condition and 
service forever, and thankful for the privilege of serving 
the body of Christ in any capacity. In the Lord's 
providence, however, those who serve faithfully in the 
humbler positions of service are very apt to be advanced 
to some still greater and more important 
service. Nevertheless, it is not for us to cultivate 
ambitions, with their accompanying spirit of envy; 
but to say rather, 

"Content whatever lot I see 

Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 

If the Lord opens before us more important 
doors of service, and we are sure that the opening is 
of him, we are to go forward rejoicing in his service 
in any capacity, and confident of a blessing in return. 

Altho these brethren, Paul and Barnabas, fully 
appreciated the fact that Gentiles might now have access 
to the blessings of the Gospel, nevertheless, in 
every place they entered into the synagogues of the 
Jews; because the Jews who already believed Moses 
and the prophets, and who already expected Messiah, 
would necessarily be in a much better attitude of 



mind to receive their message, than would be the Gentiles, 

who had no knowledge of such matters, and 

who, therefore, would have to approach the subject 

more gradually, and would require more instruction. 

Indeed, we may suppose that the larger proportion of 

converts made between the time of our Lord's resurrection 

and the fall of Jerusalem, A.D. 70, were 

made amongst the Jews, and that comparatively few 

Gentiles accepted Christ up to that time. Even tho 

the door was open for them, still we are to remember 

that only those who had the hearing ear could 

hear the message; that only those with the anointed 

sight could see and appreciate the open door. 

R3006 :page 141 

Similarly, now, in the end of this Gospel age, the 
work is chiefly with Christians— it is a harvest work. 
As Paul and Barnabas went chiefly to the synagogues, 
so we today are to go chiefly to the churches. 
As they found in the synagogues a few ready to 
receive their message, so we today find a few in the 
churches who are prepared to receive the truth as 
it is now shining in the Lord's Word. The majority, 
now as then, are deeply immersed in formalism, and 
draw nigh to the Lord with their lips when their 
hearts are far from him, set upon the cares of this 
life, or filled with endeavors to attain riches, or fame 
or something. We today are at a disadvantage in 
that the sects of Christendom and their synagogues 
are determinedly shut against the Gospel of the Kingdom; 
whereas, in the apostle's day there was access 
and an opportunity, at least, for the presentation of 
the truth. Now, even our attempt to speak to the 
sheep, through the printed page, on the outside of their 
synagogues would be resisted;— if the laws of the 
world would permit it there would be no opportunity 
for even handing a tract or a paper to our dear brethren, 
whom we long to help into the glorious light 
of present truth, which has done so much for us. 

The missionary tour consumed probably considerable 
time, as the three went from village to village, 
preaching Christ, until they reached the city 
of Paphos, at the far end of the island. We are not 
to suppose they made many converts. What they did 
do was to witness to the truth;— here and there finding 
an "Israelite indeed" who would have an "ear" 
and receive a blessing. At Paphos they found Sergius 
Paulus, a man of good judgment, the governor 
of the island, procurator or representative of the Roman 
Senate. He had a hearing ear even before the 
apostles got there, and the Adversary, noting this, 
was at work upon him through one of his servants, 
Elymas, a sorcerer or magician, who had already ingratiated 
himself with the proconsul and gained considerable 
influence, and was esteemed his friend. We 



are not to wonder that a man of sound judgment, as 
the proconsul is represented to have been, should be 
so interested in the magician and his doings. We 
are to remember, on the contrary, that similarly there 
are some men of ability today who are to some extent 
under the influence of the same Adversary and 
his bewitching agents— spirit mediums. Besides, 
the magicians in olden times were a compound or 
mixture of scientists and miracle workers, and usually 
very bright men. 

When the proconsul heard something respecting 
the teachings of Paul and Barnabas he sent for them, 
desiring to know more. Then came a conflict between 
the powers of light and the powers of darkness, 
between the truth and the error. There is no harmony 
between the two, there can be no partnership; 
they are opponents at every point; and so in this case, 
as soon as the magician discovered that the proconsul 
was coming under the influence of the truth, he 
used his every power to dissuade him, to turn him 
from the doctrines— doubtless by misrepresentation, 
which is one of the Adversary's most common methods; 

R3007 :page 141 

perhaps also by slander, back-biting, evil speaking, 
which are works of the flesh and of the devil, but 
never works of the Lord or prompted by his spirit. 

This furnished the occasion for a remarkable 
manifestation of divine power through the Apostle 
Paul, who denounced the magician, and pronounced 
upon him, in the name of the Lord, a curse, that is, 
a blight— blindness for a time. We are not to understand 
that such power and authority belong to us, 
or the Lord's people in general; nor did it belong even 
to Barnabas. Paul was chosen of the Lord to be an 
apostle— to take the place of Judas— and the power of 
discerning spirits and of restraining them was accordingly 
his. It was appropriate that some such manifestation 
of divine power should be given at the beginning 
of this age, not only for the establishment of 
the truth then, and thus the establishment of the 
believers of that time, but also for the establishment 
and information of all the household of faith from 
then until now. 

The Apostle upbraided the magician by a plain 
statement of his case— that he was full of cunning and 
deceit and villainy; that the spirit operating in him 
was not the spirit of God but the spirit of the Adversary 
of God, and that therefore he was an enemy 
of all that was right and true, and seeking to pervert 
the right ways of the Lord; and that as a punishment 
the hand of the Lord (not the hand of Paul)— the 
judgment of the Lord— was upon him; and that he 
would become so blind that he could not even see 
the light of the sun for a time. The blindness came 



upon him gradually, first a mistiness, which 
subsequently settled into complete darkness. 

We are not to think of the apostle as pronouncing 
this sentence in any harsh attitude of mind. We 
believe, on the contrary, that he was full of sympathetic 
interest and kindly desire for the wrong doer, 
hoping that the result of his experiences would be 
profitable to him. Doubtless Paul remembered his 
own case, and what blessing had come to him when 
he was smitten with blindness, and doubtless he 
hoped for the magician a similar recognition of the 
Lord and similarly the opening of the eyes of his 
understanding, as well as of his natural eyes. 

This manifestation of the Lord's power was convincing 
to the deputy (proconsul)— not that this incident 
converted him, but that having already heard 
the teachings, and being in the process of comparing 
these, in his judgment contrasting them with his previous 
views, and with the presentation of Elymas, 
he was enabled, by this incident, to reach the right 
conclusion; and to decide his matters on the Lord's side. 

It would be difficult to find an exact parallel to 
this in our experiences. The nearest approach probably 
would be when the truth comes in conflict with 
the error, when the sword of the spirit, wielded by 
some of the Lord's simple followers, proves mighty 
in the overthrow of error; when the light of present 
truth, and the clearness with which it is presented, 
and the beauty in which it can be seen and appreciated, 
is contrasted with the error, the result is either 
that the truth is seen in its beauty, or the erring one 
opposing it becomes more densely blinded than before. 
But only for a season, let us hope; the time is 
near at hand when the great Deliverer, in his Millennial 
Kingdom, shall not only restrain the great Adversary, 
but spoil all of his house, overthrowing all 
the works of evil, and opening the blinded eyes and 
permitting all to see out of the obscurity of sin and 
darkness and misconception and prejudice. 



page 142 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

All that I can do is to thank you very sincerely for 
your kindness to me during the last three years in 
sending me copies of all the good things which you 
have been giving to the world. 

Looking back over the past, I do not see how I 
could have gotten along without them. 

For 45 years, including boyhood, I could find no 



"Bible Story" that satisfied me: whichever way I 

turned I found an incomplete gospel. I was so constituted 

that I could believe nothing that was not 

complete and rational,— fitted to my intellectual capacity. 

I believed that God's words of guidance and admonition 
if for me would be that which I could understand. 
Many cardinal errors as preached and understood 
by many, called from me only indignant denials. 
I said, If it were for me I could understand it, 
and not be dodging around obstacles to my reason, 
in a vain effort to hold on and believe. 

You can imagine my eager and glad surprise when 
the 1st Vol. of "Millennial Dawn" came into my hands. 
I could take it up and read it 10 minutes or an hour 
at a time with the greatest satisfaction. It was a 
never failing satisfaction, very unlike any other book 
I ever read. I had read the Bible a great deal— and 
as I followed you along,— so calmly and dispassionately 
—each deduction so built up by quotations from 
the Bible, most of them being "old friends" of mine, 
and as I saw that you built nothing except on the 
"solid rock" the Word of God, I said, At last! At 
last I do understand! 

And so with great joy and comfort I am still following 
on— feasting on the truth day by day. I shall be 
72 years old on the 14th day of January, 1902. 

I am yours gratefully, 

F. B. Browne,— California. 



Dear Brother Russell:— Thank you very much for 
your welcome letter of the 4th. 

I had a good letter from a sister, who says of herself 
something very encouraging to me— that she read 
a little in the DAWNS for seven years before she became 
really interested. About a year or more ago, she and 
her husband left the Methodist Church in which both 
held prominent positions, and have been alone in the 
truth in their town since then, though she says others 
are partially interested. 

How very true is the suggestion in our last Sunday's 
lesson about our life here being to our Lord's life on 
earth as 1 to 100! I can easily see myself 99-hundredths 
dead as compared with a perfect human being; 
and yet how Christ hath sweetened the scrap of life I 
possess, so that it is full of blessing despite its enveloping 
and pressing and constant limitations. Such a 
poor little scrap as to be quite despicable in the eyes 
of worldly health and healthy mental quickness and 
strength, yet how far I am from being willing to exchange 
with any one else! Once in a while I realize 
how my old friends stand aloof and former acquaintances 
have forgotten me, and feel like protesting with 
a bit of indignation, Why, I'm not dead! And then 
I recollect that I am dead, with Christ, and that hence 



am privileged to live with Christ, as I look up and 
give thanks to be in Him. And I often think of even 
Emerson's words "No man ever yet stated his griefs 
as lightly as he might;" so if he could say that, it is 
much more true of the little flock. Who can so easily 
afford to lose earthly friends as we who have tasted 
of the heavenly friendship! And besides, our loss is 
but temporary, maybe only in appearance now. The 
Lord is able and willing and glad to be our all, in all, 
and fills our needs better than everything else could do. 
Your Sister in Christ, 

Alice L. Darlington,— Pennsylvania. 



Dear Brother Russell: I have been reading the 
"Dawns" and "Towers" for over three years, and have 
never written to thank you; but I can assure you they 
have been appreciated, and have established us in the 
precious faith. I am a widow and advanced in years; 
have been a member of the Baptist Church for 
twenty-five years, but am now excluded, with fourteen 
others for advocating the "Millennial Dawn" 
doctrines. Dear brethren I am so glad that God has 
given me "ears to hear" the good tidings of great joy. 
I have been loaning my "Watch Towers" to all that 
had ears to hear that I could supply. 
Yours truly, 
Mrs. J. E. Cox,— Tennessee. 



page 143 

REDUCED WHOLESALE RATES ON 

New and Old Silver Texts and Tablets. 

Boldly Stamped in Silver on Light or Dark Ground, with Cord for Hanging. 

These Silver Texts and Tablets are of choice designs and excellent 
finish. As Decorations for the Home they are tasteful and very 
praise-inspiring. They constantly remind us of the better 
things and assist us in "overcoming the world and its spirit." 

These texts are often hung in pairs, and as text thus answers 
to text, the power of each to suggest helpful and 
inspiring thoughts is markedly increased. 

As single texts are more likely to receive damage in the mails than 
are quantities, we recommend that friends send their orders together, when 
practicable to do so. Besides the advantage already mentioned, postage 
expenses are decreased by this method. 

Extra postage on single texts will be as stated in the list, but on orders 
amounting to 50c. the extra postage will be 10c; on $1.00 lots the extra 
postage 



will be 10c; on lots valued above $1.00 add extra postage at the rate of 16c. 
to the $1.00. 

The 15c. texts are offered at 2 for 25c, Postage extra 8c; the 8c texts 
at 2 for 15c, Postage extra 5c; the 3c texts at 2 for 5c, Postage extra 2c 
Order by number and letter; do not write out the text. Please name your second 
choice, peradventure your first be out of stock. All orders will be filled as 
accurately as possible. 

As limited space does not permit us to describe all the beautiful mottoes 
that we have in stock, we propose to make up 
EXTRA VALUE PACKAGES, Postpaid for $1.16, 

which we feel sure will commend themselves to our friends, for they would 
contain 
more than you could include in a package of your own assortment at this price. 

These texts occupy valuable space and are more or less a care, but the 
desirability of having such reminders of the grace of God in the homes seems to 
indicate that we should keep a stock on hand; and this we will do, not looking 
for profit in handling them, but seeking the spiritual welfare of the Lord's 
flock. 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, BIBLE HOUSE, ALLEGHENY, PA. 

For prices of these texts in Great Britain, please apply to the Society's 
British Branch, 131 Green St., Forest Gate, London. 

No. 1. NEW TABLETS 16x10. 

VERY BRIGHT. 25c EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 8c 

a Walk in Love, as Christ also hath loved us. 

b As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. 

c He that overcometh shall inherit all things. 

d The Beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety. 

No. 3. MOTTO FOR HOMES 16 x 10. 

DISTINCT LETTERING. 25c EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 8c 

Christ is the Head of this House, the Unseen Guest 
at every meal, the Silent Listener to every Conversation. 

No. 3a. SAME WORDS AS IN NO. 3 10-1/2x8-1/2. 
15c EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c 

No. 5. CONFIDENCE AND STRENGTH 13x8. 
15c EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c 

a Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? 
b In quietness and confidence shall be your strength, 
c Rest in the Lord, wait patiently for Him. 

No. 7. SCRIPTURE SCREENS 18-1/4x8-1/4. 

THREE-FOLD, TO STAND ON MANTEL. 25c EACH. POSTAGE 8c 

a Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to-day and forever. 

Casting all your anxiety upon Him, because He careth for you. 
b Consider how great things the Lord hath done for you. 

I have called thee by thy name, thou art Mine. 

No. 8. THE CHRISTIAN'S DESIRE 1 1-1/2 x 8-1/2. 
15c EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c 
LORD JESUS make Thyself to me 

A living bright reality! 
More present to FAITH'S vision keen 



Than any outward object seen— 
More dear, more intimately nigh, 
Than e'en the sweetest earthly tie. 

No. 9. RULES FOR TODAY 11-1/2 x 8-1/2. 

SAME STYLE AS NO. 8. 15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

No. 10. CAMEO SERIES A 12-3/4x8-1/4. 

RAISED CAMEO TEXTS. 15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Serve Him with all your heart. 

b My God shall supply all your need. 

No. 1 1. CAMEO SERIES B 8-1/2 x 6. 

8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

a Kept by the power of God. 

b The Lord Bless thee and Keep thee. 

c The Love of Christ constraineth us. 

d My grace is sufficient for thee. 

No. 13. LARGE SHIELDS 12-1/2x9-1/2. 

15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Behold, I have graven thee on the palms of My Hands. 

b As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. 

c Be strong in the Lord and in the power of His might. 

d Mine eyes shall see the King in His Beauty. 

e The Beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety. 

f When He giveth quietness, who then can make trouble. 

No. 14. PRECIOUS WORDS 8-1/4x10-1/4. 

BOLD LETTERING, WITH FLOWERS IN COLORS. 

15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Justified freely by His Grace. 

b He will abundantly pardon. 

c Able to keep you from falling. 

d Christ hath redeemed us. 

e Jesus Himself drew near. 

f We dwell in Him and He in us. 

No. 15. SMALL TABLETS 13x8. 
15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord, 
b Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and forever, 
c Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely, 
d All things work together for good to them that love God. 

No. 16. ROYAL BANNERS 8 x 9-1/2. 
10c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 4c. 

a In all thy ways acknowledge Him. 
b He knoweth the way that I take, 
c I will trust and not be afraid, 
d My Grace is sufficient for thee. 

No. 17. GOSPEL TRUTHS 13 x 8. 

15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved. 

b Draw nigh to God and He will draw nigh to thee. 



c Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. 

d Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out. 

e Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, I will give you rest. 

f The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin. 

No. 18. 12-1/2x6-1/4. 

15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a God hath given to us Eternal Life. 

b My Grace is sufficient for thee. 

c The Lord will go before you. 

d He knoweth the way that I take. 

e Bear ye one another's burdens. 

f He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God. 

No. 19. EMMANUEL 13 x 6-1/2. 

LARGE LETTERS. 15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Mighty to Save. 

b He faileth not. 

c Jesus Only. 

d Praise the Lord. 

e God Bless our Home. 

f Lovest thou Me? 

g Abide with Me. 

No. 20. KING'S MESSAGES 10-3/4x6-1/2. 
UNIQUE DESIGN. 10c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 4c. 
a Abide in Me. 
b Mighty to Save, 
c He Faileth Not. 
d God is Love, 
e He leadeth me. 
f Jesus only. 

No. 21. STRENGTH AND COMFORT 9-1/2 x 7. 

LARGE LETTERS, HANDSOME SCROLL AND FLORAL BORDER. 

10c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 4c. 

a God Himself is with us. 

b He careth for you. 

c Ye belong to Christ. 

d Trust in the Living God. 

e Kept by the power of God. 

f The Lord is my Shepherd. 

page 144 

No. 22. JEWELS A 17-1/2 x 12. 

LIGHT BACKGROUND, LARGE LETTERING, ELEGANT. 

25c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 8c. 

a As thy Days so shall thy Strength be. 

b The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil. 

c I can do all things through Christ. 

d The Lord knoweth them that are His. 

No. 24. JEWELS B 12x8-7/8. 

SIMILAR TO No. 22. 15c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 5c. 

a Kept by the power of God. 



b The Lord is my helper, 
c God Himself is with us. 
d Our sufficiency is of God. 

No. 25. REDEMPTION 10-1/4x7-3/4. 

LIGHT GROUND. BRIGHT DESIGNS. 8c. EACH. POSTAGE, 3c. 

a The Gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ, 
b Behold, now is the day of Salvation, 
c Jesus Christ.. .Who gave Himself for me. 
d We have redemption through His Blood. 

No. 26. SHEPHERD'S CARE 8-1/2x5-3/4. 

APPROPRIATE FOR THE YOUNG. 

5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a Lead me in Thy truth and teach me. 

b He shall gather the Lambs with His arm. 

c Suffer the little children to come unto Me. 

d Commit thy way unto the Lord. 

No. 27. LIFE ABUNDANT 8-1/2x5-3/4. 

SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF CHRIST. 

5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a Jesus said: If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink. 

b Jesus said: Lo, I am with you alway. 

c Jesus said: Have faith in God. 

d Jesus said: I am come that they might have life. 

No. 28. FANS 10 x 6-1/2. 

STRIKING AND ARTISTIC. 

10c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 4c. 

a Be not weary in well-doing. 

b God hath power to help. 

c My peace I give unto you. 

d Very great are His mercies. 

No. 29. HELPFUL WORDS 12x4-1/2. 

CUT-OUT DESIGNS. 8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

a MIGHTY TO SAVE. He giveth power to the faint. 

b HE FAILETH NOT. He shall save His people. 

c FOLLOW HIS STEPS. His way is perfect. 

d REST IN THE LORD. Be quiet, fear not. 

e REJOICE IN HIM. My heart shall rejoice. 

f GOD IS FAITHFUL. We trust in the living God. 

No. 30. SURE CONFIDENCE 10 x 5-1/4. 

8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

a The Lord shall be thy confidence. 

b Your Father knoweth what things ye have need of. 

c His children shall have a place of refuge. 

d Trust in the Lord with all thine heart. 

e Certainly, I will be with thee. 

f Let not your heart be troubled. 

No. 31. TODAY POEM 6-3/4x5. 
8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 



No. 32. WHEN TO TRUST 6-3/4 x 5. 
VERSE CARDS. 12 CHOICE MOTTOES. 
8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 
MY TIMES ARE IN THY HAND 
He knows and loves and cares. 

Nothing this truth can dim: 
He gives His very best to those 

Who leave the choice to Him. 
K. 
No. 33. GARLANDS 8-1/2x4-3/4. 

WITH DECORATED BORDER. 8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 
a Not I, but Christ, 
b By Faith ye Stand, 
c God is my Salvation, 
d What would Jesus do? 
e He careth for you. 
f Emmanuel, God with us. 

No. 34. VERY CHOICE FANS 9 x 4-3/4. 

CHOICE, ENGRAVED BORDER. 8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

4 CHOICE MOTTOES. 

No. 35. WORDS OF LOVE 13x5. 

EXCELLENT VALUE. 

8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

a The Lord Himself is my keeper. 

b Serve the Lord with gladness. 

c Christ in you the hope of glory. 

d Fear not, I will help thee. 

No. 36. SMALL FANS 7-3/4x4-1/2. 

SUITABLE FOR VASES. 5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

SIX CHOICE MOTTOES. 

No. 37. WONDROUS WORDS 8-1/2x6-1/2. 

8c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 3c. 

a The Lord shall guide thee continually. 

b The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety. 

c His children shall have a place of refuge. 

d Saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation. 

No. 38. HELPS BY THE WAY 7x5. 

5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a Wait on the Lord and keep His way. 

b In all thy ways acknowledge Him. 

c The Lord knoweth the way of the righteous. 

d Teach me thy way, O Lord. 

e I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. 

f Commit thy way unto the Lord. 

No. 39. MEDIUM SHIELDS 6 x 8-1/2. 

5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a Your life is hid with Christ, etc. 

b It is God that girdeth me, etc. 

c Shew me Thy way, O Lord, etc. 

d Come unto Me, and I will give you rest. 



e I am the Way, etc. 

f Casting all your care upon Him, etc. 

No. 40. GLEANINGS 7-3/4x5. 

5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. 

b My refuge is in God. 

c Fear not.. The Lord will be with thee. 

d Cast thy burden upon the Lord. 

e The Lord knoweth them that are His. 

f Fear not. .He will not fail thee. 

No. 41. GOOD TIDINGS 9x3-1/2. 

LARGE, PLAIN LETTERS. 5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

TWELVE CHOICE MOTTOES. 

No. 42. GRACIOUS PROMISES 7x5. 

FLORAL DESIGN. 5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

SIX CHOICE MOTTOES. 

No. 43. SHINING LIGHT 6-1/2x4-3/4. 

SILVER BACKGROUND. 5c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, 2c. 

a Watch and pray. 

b Christ died for us. 

c God is Love. 

d Seek ye the Lord. 

e He is our Peace. 

fThy Will be done. 

No. 44. SUNBEAMS 5-1/2x8-1/2. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

a All for Jesus. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. 

b As thy days so shall thy strength be. 

c The Almighty shall be thy defence. 

d Ye are My witnesses, said the Lord. 

e Do all to the glory of God. 

f Thou art mine. 

No. 45. GOLDEN WORDS 6x4. 

STAMPED IN GOLD. FLORAL. EIGHT CHOICE MOTTOES. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

The Lord will bless His people with Peace. 

No. 46. NEW RUSTIC SERIES 5-3/4 x 4. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

a The Eternal God is thy refuge. 

b The Lord is my Defence. 

c Lord teach us to pray. 

d Lo! I am with thee alway. 

e Walk as children of light. 

f God knoweth your hearts. 

No. 47. FRUITFUL SERVICE 5x5. 
3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 
a Bring forth fruit unto God. 
b God is a refuge for us. 



c The Lord is my portion, 
d From Me is thy fruit found, 
e Abide in My love, 
f Christ hath made us free. 

No. 48. GEMS 5-1/4x4. 

LANDSCAPES. 3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

TWELVE CHOICE MOTTOES. 

No. 49. RUBIES 6-1/2x3-3/4. 

SIX CHOICE MOTTOES. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

GOD FIRST That in all things He might have the Pre-eminence. 

No. 50. GOSPEL GEMS 6-1/2x3-3/4. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

a Whosoever will, let him taste the water of Life freely. 

b Whoso trusteth in the Lord, happy is he. 

c He that believeth on the Son hath Everlasting Life. 

d By Grace are ye saved through faith. 

e The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon Him. 

f We have redemption through His blood. 

No. 51. SCROLLS 5-1/2x4. 

3c. EACH. POSTAGE EXTRA, lc. 

a Ye belong to Christ. 

b God is Faithful. 

c My Refuge is in God. 

d He careth for you. 

e What would Jesus do? 

f Thou God seest me. 



page 145 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 