From Our Readers
Prisons  Thank you so much for your articles on the subject “Can Prisoners Be Reformed?” (May 8, 2001) I served 14 years in prison. While there, I came in contact with Jehovah’s Witnesses and began studying the Bible. Upon my release, I continued studying, and I was baptized shortly thereafter. Prisoners can be reformed if they follow the principles taught in the Bible. They can also be grateful—as I am—for hardworking Witnesses who give of their time to help those who are imprisoned.
R. S., United States
I am currently in a correctional facility where there is a wonderful teaching program that Jehovah’s Witnesses were allowed to set up. One prisoner has been baptized, and many others are studying the Bible. How wonderful it is to serve Jehovah wherever we are!
J.A.M., United States
Here in Japan I sometimes feel that it is difficult to have conversations with people about the Bible. But I was encouraged by these brothers who rely on Jehovah and study the Bible with prisoners. I am grateful that you inform us of how hard these brothers work. These are the last days, so each one of us must strengthen our bond with Jehovah all the more.
K. D., Japan
Having been in prison for the past eight years, I see firsthand that prisons aren’t accomplishing their purpose. What is successful is the Bible educational work that you do. As an inmate, I am truly grateful to Jehovah’s Witnesses, who show love to those of us who have made a mistake but are trying to correct it and become better people.
R. J., United States
As I picked up this issue, I wondered who it might appeal to. That very night I received a phone call. My mother had been attacked, and her car was stolen. As my workmates and I talked about crime, criminals, and prisons, I remembered that I had the magazine in my locker. What excellent articles! The next day I was able to give copies to my workmates and to my mother. These articles truly live up to the purpose of Awake!—as it “probes beneath the surface and points to the real meaning behind current events.”
R. S., United States
I first heard of Jehovah’s Witnesses from my cell mate. I’m truly grateful to read that Jehovah’s Witnesses have the courage to venture inside these fences and walls to help people like me to find Jehovah before it’s too late. The Witnesses should be commended for the love that they show.
M. N., United States
These articles are useful to those of us who work in prisons because they show that the Bible can help inmates to make a change on the inside, in their mind and heart. They also help prisoners to understand our role in helping them learn to do Jehovah’s will. The examples on page 10 make clear why we should not get involved in the legal problems of prisoners but rather teach them the Bible and try to reach their heart.
A. I., Romania
Safari  I am 13 years old, and I really enjoyed reading the article “On Safari in Ghana.” (May 8, 2001) I love reading about animals. Please do not stop printing the magazines!
J. W., United States

