Support and Compassion From Many Parts
VOLUNTEERS came from other parts of the United States as well as from other countries. One such volunteer was Tom (shown above), aged 29, a fire fighter from Ottawa, Canada. He told Awake!: “I saw the events on TV and wanted to give moral support to my brother fire fighters in New York. I drove down on Friday and went to Ground Zero on Saturday to offer my help. I was put in the so-called bucket brigade, moving out debris bucket by bucket.
“We slowly sifted through the rubble, a shovelful at a time, looking for items that might be clues to the identity of fallen firemen. I found a Halligan tool used to open locked doors, as well as couplings from a hose. It was painstaking toil. With about 50 volunteers, it took two hours to fill one dump truck.
“On Monday, September 17, we pulled out the bodies of some fire fighters who had rushed into the building on the previous Tuesday. I will never forget that scene—all the rescue workers stopped working, took off their hard hats and helmets, and stood—out of respect for our fallen colleagues.
“As I was standing viewing the scene at Ground Zero, I was struck with how fragile life is today. It made me reflect on my life, my job, my family. Regardless of the risks, my job is very rewarding—being able to help people and even save lives.”
Witnesses Offer Practical Help
The first two days of the disaster, about 70 people sought refuge at the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Some who had lost their hotel rooms and luggage were given a place to stay and replacement clothing. They were fed. Perhaps more important, they were given emotional support by experienced Christian elders.
Jehovah’s Witnesses also sent needed emergency equipment and supplies for the search-and-rescue crews working at what came to be called Ground Zero. Transportation was also made available to the fire department to get fire fighters to the rescue area. Ricardo (at right, top), a 39-year-old Witness and sanitation worker, was involved, along with hundreds of others, in removing tons of debris day after day. He told Awake!: “The sights were very stressful, especially for fire fighters, who were looking for their lost comrades. I saw them pull out one fireman alive. Another fireman had been killed by a falling body. Many firemen were weeping. I broke down and cried. On that day nobody was more courageous than they were.”
“Time and Unforeseen Occurrence”
Thousands of people died in the disaster. Among these are at least 14 Witnesses, who happened to be at or near the scene of the tragedy. Joyce Cummings, aged 65 and originally from Trinidad, had a dental appointment near the World Trade Center. Unfortunately, it was about the time of the disaster. She was apparently overcome by smoke and was rushed to a nearby hospital. They were not able to save her. Hers was one of many cases of people suffering the effects of “time and unforeseen occurrence.” (Ecclesiastes 9:11) She was known as a very zealous evangelizer.
Calvin Dawson (see box) worked at a brokerage firm on the 84th floor of the south tower. He was in his office and had a clear view of the north tower immediately after it was struck by a plane. His employer, who was away from the office, called in by phone to find out what had happened. He said: “Calvin was trying to tell me what he saw. He said, ‘People are jumping!’ I told him to get out of there and get the others out of the office.” Calvin did not make it out. The employer continued: “Calvin was a wonderful man and appreciated by us all, even by those of us who are not spiritual. We admired his godliness and his humanity.”
Another Witness victim was James Amato (lower right on opposite page), father of four children and a captain in the New York fire department. Those who knew him said that he was so courageous that “he would go up into a burning building even though people were running away.” James was promoted in absentia to the rank of battalion chief.
Another Witness fire fighter, with seven years of experience, was George DiPasquale. He was married to Melissa and had a two-year-old daughter, Georgia Rose. He was an elder in a Staten Island congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses and was on the tenth floor of the south tower when it collapsed. He too paid with his life as he tried to save others.
These are just two of the hundreds of fire fighters, policemen, and emergency workers who lost their lives as they valiantly tried to rescue people. The bravery of these rescuers cannot be overemphasized. New York City mayor Rudolph Giuliani later said to a group of promoted firemen: “Your willingness to go forward undaunted in the most difficult of circumstances is an inspiration to all of us. . . . And there is . . . no better example of courage than the Fire Department of the City of New York.”
A Ministry of Comfort
During the days after the tragedy, about 900,000 of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the United States made a determined effort nationwide to offer comfort to those who were grieving. Love of neighbor moved them to comfort mourning ones. (Matthew 22:39) In their ministry they have also endeavored to point to the only true hope for distressed humanity.—2 Peter 3:13.
The Witnesses were compassionate in their approach to the public. Their intention was to offer comfort from the Scriptures and imitate the refreshing example of Christ, who said: “Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will find refreshment for your souls. For my yoke is kindly and my load is light.”—Matthew 11:28-30.
Groups of elders from local Manhattan congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses were allowed into the Ground Zero area to talk to and comfort the rescue workers there. The response was very favorable. These ministers commented: “The men had tears in their eyes as we shared scriptures with them.” Rescue workers were recovering on a boat at a marina. “The men were looking so lost, with their heads bowed, just not able to cope with what they had seen. We sat down with them and shared texts from the Bible. The men thanked us so much for coming, saying that they really needed this comfort.”
People contacted after the tragedy often wanted something to read, and thousands of brochures were given to them freely. Some of these were When Someone You Love Dies, Will There Ever Be a World Without War?, and Does God Really Care About Us? Also, the cover series in two issues of Awake! were given special attention: “The New Look of Terrorism” (May 22, 2001) and “Coping With Post-traumatic Stress” (August 22, 2001). In many cases the Witnesses explained the Bible’s hope of a resurrection. (John 5:28, 29; Acts 24:15) Perhaps millions of people were reached with this comforting message.
It Should Make Us Reflect
Tragedies like this one in New York City should make all of us reflect on what we are doing with our lives. Are we living just for selfish pursuits, or do we try to contribute to the happiness of others? The prophet Micah asked: “What is Jehovah asking back from you but to exercise justice and to love kindness and to be modest in walking with your God?” (Micah 6:8) Modesty should impel us to go to God’s Word to find the true hope for the dead and to discover what God will soon do to reestablish Paradise conditions on this earth. If you wish to know more about the Bible’s promises, we urge you to contact Jehovah’s Witnesses in your neighborhood.—Isaiah 65:17, 21-25; Revelation 21:1-4.
[Box/Pictures on page 11]
TATIANA’S PRAYER
  Calvin Dawson’s widow, Lena, told Awake! about the prayer that her seven-year-old daughter said a few days after she knew that her father would not be coming home. Lena had said a prayer, and Tatiana asked, “Can I say a prayer, Mommy?” The mother agreed. Tatiana prayed: “Jehovah, our heavenly Father, we want to thank you for this food and for this day of life. And we want to ask that your spirit be with me and Mommy so that we can be strong. And we want to ask that your spirit be with Daddy, so that he can be strong when he comes back. And when he comes back, that he’ll be nice, strong, and happy and healthy, and we’ll see him again. In Jesus’ name . . . oh, and don’t forget to make Mommy strong. Amen.”
  Lena, not quite sure if Tatiana had understood, said: “Tiana, that was beautiful. But, Honey, did you know that Daddy is not coming back?” Immediately, a look of shock swept over Tatiana’s face. “He’s not?” she said. “No,” said her mother. “I thought I told you that. I thought you understood that Daddy’s not coming back.” Tatiana said: “But you always told me that he was coming back in the new world!” Finally, realizing what her daughter meant, Lena said: “I’m sorry, Tatiana. I misunderstood you. I thought you meant that Daddy was coming back tomorrow.” Lena observed: “I felt good knowing that the new world is that real to her.”

