From Our Readers
Communication  Thank you for the wonderful series “Communication in Marriage.” (January 22, 1994) I have been married for 26 years. A few years ago, my marriage became extremely strained, and we were on the verge of a crisis. The problem was our lack of communication. I searched the Watch Tower Society’s publications and tried to apply what I read. My husband also began studying the Bible. But these articles have given me additional points to work on. They are helping me to cultivate discernment and have motivated me to put the suggestions into practice.
Y. K., Japan
Young People Ask  The article “Young People Ask . . . What About Hanging Out?” (June 22, 1993) really set me in the right direction. I live in an area where hanging out is very common. I believe that many youths like me will benefit from this material.
T. S., Nigeria
The article on “Why Are My Parents So Moody?” (November 8, 1993) was of special interest to me because I have a father who gets mad at me for what my brother does. Sometimes I go to work with my father, and now I realize how much pressure he goes through.
A. K., United States
Thank you very much for the articles “Am I Developing Normally?” and “Why Am I Developing So Quickly?” (September 22 and October 8, 1993) I am 11 years old, and some people say I am too small for my age. The articles were really great.
J. R. P., Germany
I am 11 years old and have been the target of cruel jokes about my height. Thank you for helping me to see that I am not alone in this area and that I am normal. I am just developing more quickly than others. I have really been helped by these articles.
E. Q., England
I wish I’d had this article several years ago when one of our sons started into puberty and shot up to his present six-​foot-​nine-​inch [206 cm] height. I cannot tell you how many times the first thing people said was, ‘Boy, are you tall!’ or, ‘What’s the weather like up there?’ instead of, ‘Hello, how are you?’ Needless to say, it made an awkward age even more difficult. We need to help youths to feel comfortable with the bodies they have inherited. Your article was most appreciated.
M. D., United States
Faithful Father  Thank you for the encouraging article “My Father’s Faithful Example.” (December 22, 1993) My own dad died faithful almost two years ago. His legs were so swollen that the last month he couldn’t walk. But he did preach to every person that came to his bedside down to his last day. He spent close to 20 hours telling others about his faith during his last month. The article reminded me that ‘the same things in the way of suffering are befalling the whole association of our brothers.’​—1 Peter 5:9.
D. P., United States
Blood Transfusions  I would like to express my thanks for the article “Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Medical Profession Cooperate.” (November 22, 1993) It showed Jehovah’s concern for our physical as well as our spiritual welfare. I had a blood transfusion forced on me nearly 13 years ago following childbirth. So I realize the importance of having Christian men who are trained to come to our aid when needed. I hope and pray that others will be spared from experiencing what I experienced.
K. T., United States

