Life Without Pain At Hand!
THE body’s complex mechanisms that protect us from harm are certainly a marvel. A study of them should move us to praise the Creator, as did the Bible psalmist who wrote: “I shall laud you because in a fear-​inspiring way I am wonderfully made.” (Psalm 139:14) Truly, only God can make possible life without pain! But how will this be accomplished?
Note that just prior to the promise about pain and tears being eliminated, the Bible tells of “a new heaven and a new earth; for the former heaven and the former earth had passed away.” (Revelation 21:1, 4) Of course, the Bible is not speaking of our literal heaven and earth passing away. Rather, it is saying, in short, that a completely new system of things will replace this present one. Yes, a new, superhuman government will make it possible to enjoy a painless life right here on earth.
In describing this government, the Bible says that “the God of heaven will set up a kingdom [or, government] that will . . . crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” (Daniel 2:44) When Jesus Christ was on earth, he taught us to pray for this Kingdom government when he said: “Pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.”​—Matthew 6:9, 10, King James Version.
How, though, can the fulfillment of that prayer mean a life without pain for you?
A Ruler With Superhuman Power
The key lies in the wisdom and power of the one whom God has chosen to head His government. That one is Jesus Christ himself. Of him, a Bible prophecy says: “The government shall be upon his shoulder . . . Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end.”​—Isaiah 9:6, 7, KJ.
The wisdom of Jesus, now in heaven, is far greater than that of all earthly physicians. He fully understands the workings of our physical body, including its systems for protecting itself from injury. When he was a man on earth over 1,900 years ago, there was not a disease or affliction that he could not cure. He thus demonstrated what he will do on a larger scale as Ruler of God’s Kingdom. Of one instance, the Bible says:
“Then great crowds approached him, having along with them people that were lame, maimed, blind, dumb, and many otherwise, and they fairly threw them at his feet, and he cured them; so that the crowd felt amazement as they saw the dumb speaking and the lame walking and the blind seeing.” (Matthew 15:30, 31) Among the afflictions that Jesus will cure during his Kingdom rule is that dreadful one, chronic pain.
Indeed, what a marvelous blessing that will be! And it will not be accomplished in behalf of just a few. The Creator’s promise is: “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’” (Isaiah 33:24) Then, under the rule of God’s Kingdom, the promise will be fulfilled, “neither will . . . pain be anymore.”​—Revelation. 21:4.
Under Christ’s glorious Kingdom rule, our many body mechanisms, including those that protect us from harm, will function perfectly because inherited sin will have been removed. Our body’s alarm system will never again turn into a tormentor. Happily, according to Bible prophecies now undergoing fulfillment, we are at the very threshold of that new world, in which pain will never cause suffering.​—Matthew 24:3-14, 36-39; 2 Timothy 3:1-5; 2 Peter 3:11-13.
You can enjoy life under God’s Kingdom when the kind of pain that now plagues millions of people no longer exists. But you need to do something. Jesus Christ pointed to a fundamental requirement when he said in prayer to God: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”​—John 17:3.
Jehovah’s Witnesses will be happy to assist you in acquiring this vital knowledge. Just ask one of them in your area, or write to the publishers of this magazine, expressing your wish to have a Bible study in your home or at any other convenient location. Arrangements will then be made for you to learn more about God’s purposes for humans to enjoy a life without pain.

