From Our Readers
A Drink That Saves Lives
I would like to express appreciation for your timely article “A Salty Drink That Saves Lives!” (September 22, 1985) My two daughters frequently go into the hospital for dehydration because of a medical problem called A. G. Syndrome. I tried this drink on my youngest daughter when she was ill. This is the solution they are given when in the hospital, and it has saved their lives many times. I thank you again for this information, most helpful to me and many others.
C. R. G., Indiana
The Catholic Church and Marriage
Your view of Catholicism’s position on sex is mistaken and, worse, derogatory and insulting. (November 8, 1985) You are so wrong that it is ridiculous. You paint the picture of all Catholics as being sexually guilt ridden, which is totally ridiculous also.
F. P., Colorado
Your articles on “The Catholic Church​—Its View of Sex” are an eye-opener. This magazine raised many eyebrows. You get your point across very well by using Catholic reference books. Please send me more detailed information on the Catholic reference works. Your magazine is read regularly by this devoted Catholic.
P. W., Alabama
I just wanted to tell you how much I appreciated your article “The Bible’s View on Matters of Sex.” I was raised a Catholic, and on becoming a teenager, I tried to figure out what I wanted to do with my life, get married and raise a family or serve God by becoming a nun. I chose to get married, but even then I felt wrong in having sex with my husband. This article helped me to realize some of the reasons why I felt that way. I think the scriptures in this article will help me to be more balanced.
B. J., Arkansas
In your issue about “The Catholic Church​—Its View of Sex” you show a caption stating, “The Mary symbol links Christianity with ancient religions and mother goddesses,” but you show with the caption a picture of Saint Theresa.
P. G., France
We apologize. The wrong illustration was selected for this caption.​—ED.
Child Molesting and Crime
Please send 30 copies of your issue on “Child Molesting.” (January 22, 1985) The detective captain of our town’s police department was very impressed with the article and would like to distribute it to his youth bureau. Another captain is basing many of his lectures on your issue on crime. (August 8, 1985) Many of the patrolmen and the chief have received copies of both magazines.
D. G., Connecticut
“Young People Ask . . . ”
These articles have really helped promote communication between young people and parents. Truly, without these special articles, our young ones would not be as open to us as they have been.
L. C., Arkansas

