How Can Peace Become a Reality?
What are some of the major stumbling stones that prevent permanent peace from being a reality? From our previous article, we can identify the following:
(1) Selfish elite ruling classes (political, military, commercial, and religious) that have manipulated the people.
(2) A system of educational conditioning based on extreme nationalism that teaches “sacred egoism,” national superiority, mistrust, and hatred.
(3) The overall control and direction by ‘the god of this system of things, who has blinded the minds of the unbelievers,’ namely, Satan the Devil.​—2 Corinthians 4:4.
ON A world scale, there has to be a change of thinking, a change of heart. And that means a change of education​—to teach all peoples peace, love, and mutual respect. And that also means a worldwide change of leadership to a unified leadership that will be respected by all nations​—an incorruptible world government. In turn, that means a change of world control​—from the rule of Satan to the rule of God! But how are these changes going to be brought about?
The Bible prophesied over 2,500 years ago that in the time of the end for this system of things ‘the God of heaven would set up a kingdom that would never be brought to ruin.’ (Daniel 2:44) This is the everlasting Kingdom for which Jesus taught his followers to pray: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 6:9, 10) That kingdom means a new rulership by Christ Jesus, from the heavens, for all the earth, even as the prophet Daniel wrote: “His rulership [or, sovereignty] is an indefinitely lasting rulership that will not pass away, and his kingdom one that will not be brought to ruin.”​—Daniel 7:13, 14.
This heavenly government in the hands of Christ is the new arrangement that will replace the divisive, selfish elite classes that have misruled mankind for millenniums. It forms the governing part of the “new heavens and a new earth” that “we are awaiting according to [God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Peter 3:13) This government is the true “cradle of future world destiny,” not the United Nations in New York that is advocated by Robert Muller, an assistant secretary-general to the UN. In spite of the UN proclamation of 1986 as the International Year of Peace, true peace can only come through the divinely approved channel of God’s Kingdom.
The Role of Education
Millions of people are already preparing themselves to live in peace under the rule of that Kingdom government. For over a hundred years a tremendous educational campaign has been extended throughout the nations to bring the message of that Kingdom to all people. Probably you have had a peaceful representative of that government call at your home, although at the time you perhaps did not realize the importance of that visit. He or she was participating in the most extensive educational work ever in human history. Who was the visitor? One of Jehovah’s Witnesses. And why do the Witnesses visit you?
The Witnesses offer to study the Bible with any sincerely disposed person who desires to learn about Jehovah’s way to peace. This free education is already helping millions “to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears.” The prophet Isaiah states: “Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”​—Isaiah 2:4.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are already fulfilling this prophecy in contrast with the members of the United Nations, who still wage verbal or physical war one against another. And how have the Witnesses achieved this? By studying the Bible to get the mind of Christ on matters; by learning that God truly is love and that they must reflect his love to their fellowman of all nations and races. For that reason they maintain a strict stand of neutrality on political issues and refuse to participate in any war or conflict, come what may.​—1 John 4:8; John 13:34, 35.
According to fulfilled Bible prophecy, the time is near for God’s Kingdom to take action. (Matthew 24:3-35) Soon God’s war of Armageddon will put an end to Satan’s rule with all its divisive and destructive politics. (Revelation 16:14-16; 19:17-21) Now is the time to turn to God and his Word. Jehovah’s Witnesses in your neighborhood will gladly help you to prove for yourself that everlasting peace is not an elusive dream but a reality that will soon be worldwide. Or feel free to write to the publishers of this magazine for further information and help.
[Blurb on page 8]
“There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”​—Peter the apostle
[Blurb on page 9]
“By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”​—Jesus Christ
[Picture on page 9]
“And they will have to beat their swords into plowshares . . . Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”​—Isaiah the prophet

