Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JULY 1, 1917 


No. 13 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

"WHAT SHALL BE THE SIGN OP THY PRESENCE!" 


"AND THESE SHALL BE FAMINES" 

One of the leading economists in the United States, Arthur 
R. Harsh* recently wrote in the N. Y. City World regarding the 
earth's food supply as follows (the article speaks for itself) : 

"If there be any virtue in publicity, the people of this 
country are now completely informed of the seriousness of the 
present and prospective food situation throughout the world. 
It may perhaps be doubted, however, whether they have as yet 
really passed from the stage of intellectual apperception of the 
facts to that of personal realization of what these facts will 
ultimately mean for themselves as individuals. 

"The people of the United States have to face, certainly 
for the coming twelvemonth, and in all probability for more 
than one year thereafter, a condition of things with respect 
to their supply of food the like of which has not been seen 
on the North American Continent since its earliest colonization
 by the white race, unless exception perhaps be made of 
the first winter of the Pilgrim Fathers. 

GBEAT DBAIN UPON OUR OWN GRAIN STOCKS 

"The American crop season of 1916 was relatively one of 
the most unpropitious experienced in this country within the 
memory of any persons now living. Two of our major food 
crops, wheat and potatoes, were short of a comfortable provision
 for our own population; a third food crop, corn, fell 
three or four hundred millions of bushels below the aggregate 
of the natural domestic demands upon it. The production of 
vegetables was scanty in proportion to our own needs. Of 
only two or three of the minor crops could it be said that 
they gave a full yield. Taking all our crops together and 
adding to them the food reserves brought forward from the 
previous year or years, the total food supply for the crop 
season 1916-1017 was a close fit against our domestic requirements
 for consumption, seed and carry-over, and afforded 
nothing in the way of a surplus out of which a reasonable 
amount of exports could be drawn. 

"With such a crop out-turn for 1916 in the United States 
for the period up to the harvesting of the crop *>f 1917 it 
was obvious that the important food-importing countries of 
the world should look elsewhere than to us for their supplies. 
This, however, was not to be; on the contrary, the needs of 
these countries are greater than ever before, while the production
 of the other food-exporting countries has been disastrously
 small in comparison with that of recent normal 


years, while at least two of these countries — Russia and Rou 
mania — are to a very large extent cut off from any exportation 
of foodstuffs by reason of the war situation. Accordingly 
we have been subjected to an insistent demand for considerable
 portions of this supply for export, and under conditions 
such that we could not well refuse to let it go. 

SITUATION MOST THREATENING KNOWN 

"It is unnecessary to dilate upon the ieally appalling seriousness
 of the situation — a situation so threatening that no 
one now living in a civilized country has ever known its like. 
On the basis of the most trustworthy statistics' and estimates 
obtainable, we have been forced to the conclusion that, with 
every elevator in the world drained of its contents, with every 
bin and crib in the world scraped to the bottom, the world's 
supply of the grains usable for human food, whether directly 
or in the form of meat, not only would not suffice to meet 
the requirements of the unblockaded countries from April to 
August, but would fall 130,000,000 bushels short of those requirements
. 

'With the severest restriction of their consumption by 
multitudes of people somewhere, the last weeks of the period 
must be weeks of positive privation in some or all of the 
countries affected; and, except by chance here and there, not 
a bushel of these grains would remain at the end of the 
present crop year to serve as a surplus to supplement any 
possible deficiencies of the production of the coming year. 

FAMINE THREATENS PREMATURE AND INCONCLUSIVE 
PEACE 

"The case presented by the International Institute of Agriculture
, was by no means as bad as the actual facts. In its 
calculations the Institute undoubtedly assumed that the winter 
wheat crop of the United States would be at least of normal 
size, as its acreage was record-breaking and it was not known, 
even as late as the end of March, that the average condition 
of the growing crop had been extensively impaired. When, 
however, the Department of Agriculture, on April 7, estimated 
the condition of the crop at practically 23 per cent, lower than 
the past ten year's average, and indicative of a production 
of only 430,000,000 bushels of winter wheat, as compared with 
481,744,000 bushels last year and 673,947,000 bushels in 1915, 
it was seen at a glance that but an infinitesimal chance remained
 that the total wheat production of the United States 
in J917 would even fairly come up to our own normal re- 


[6107] 


(195-196) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


quirements for consumption and seed — about 640,000,000 
bushels—to say nothing of leaving an exportable surplus of 
proportions commensurate with the requirements of our allies 
in Europe. 

"The first outstanding fact, as shown above, is that assuming
 only normal crops (aside from winter wheat in the 
United States in 1917 for the food-exporting countries of the 
Northern Hemisphere and a normal consumption and distribution
 of the same, our European allies in the great war for 
democratic civilization have to face so great a shortage of 
their supply of grain that both their armies and their populations
 can scarcely hope to avoid the severest privations for 
more than a year to come and may conceivably have to yield 
that to hunger which they would never have yielded to the 
force of arms- — a premature and inconclusive peace, with 

NONE OF THE GREAT ENDS OF THE WAB ATTAINED!" 

"AND THE FIELDS SHALL YIELD NO MEAT" 

"Americans should get along on two meals a day during 
the war," Carl Vrooman, Assistant United States Secretary of 
Agriculture, told the members of the Medico-Psychological 
Association at the Hotel Astor, in a speech in which he made 
a bitter attack on food speculators and asked the physicians' 
help to arouse public sentiment that would 'club them into 
submission/ 

"In advocating two meals a day for the duration of the 
war, Mr. Vrooman said that at that we would be eating twice 
as much as the Germans get to eat. 

" 'There are more than 30,000,000 people in Germany who 
have had less than one square meal a day for weeks,' he said, 
'There is not a country in Europe where the people are on 
full rations. We can get along very well on two meals a day/ 

"Mr. Vrooman asked the heads of institutions present to 
see that enough food was raised on their farms to feed the 
inmates. He said that not only was this country called upon 
to feed itself and the Allies, but that at the end of the war it 
would be called upon to feed the decimated millions of the 
Central Powers. 

" 1 don't intend to make any statements to you that are 
exaggerations/ he said, because it would be impossible to 
exaggerate the seriousness of the war and what goes with it. 
Tt is America's problem to see that more men do not starve in 
Europe this year than were killed in the trenches last year. 
Famine is looking over the sky-line of every European country
. If we do not keep starvation away from the capitals of 
Europe it will not be kept away. Our crops are all that stand 
between mankind and starvation in the months to come. It 
is not humanly possible to overstate the seriousness of the 
food shortage the world is facing today/ " — New York Times. 
"THE PBUDENT HIDETH HIMSELF" 
[Proverbs 22:31 
From The Watch Tower, Nov. 1, 1914: 

Let no one suppose that it will be possible to escape the 
difficulties and trials of the great time of trouble, whose 
shadow is now beclouding the earth. The most and the best 
that could be hoped in this direction would he an amelioration 
of the conditions by the exercise of that wisdom which cometh 
from above, described by the Apostle, who says that it is 
"first pure, then peaceable, easy of entreatment, full of mercy 
and good fruits." To whatever extent any individual, anywhere
, shall follow this prescription of heavenly wisdom, to 
that extent we may be sure he will have God's favor; and that 
favor guarantees to the recipient that "all things shall work 
together for his good." 

The most valuable lessons that any parent or counselor can 
give to those subject to his direction would be,, first, the 
Golden Rule-^inculcating absolute justice — nothing less; second
, in addition to justice as represented by the Golden Rule, 
should be the lesson of mercy, compassion, sympathy, the 
spirit of helpfulness. The third lesson in the series should 
be meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering. The fourth 
lesson should be economy in everything — avoidance of waste — 
the realization that what he does not need, some one else does 
need. 

In suggesting the foregoing lessons, we are presupposing 
a Christian basis — that our readers are themselves children 
of God, who have been feeding at the Lord's table upon spiritual
, heavenly food; and that they have been seeking to bless 
their families by training them in harmony with God's will. 
A PARENT'S BEST HERITAGE TO BIS CHILD 

For the dire distress which we see nearing, such character 
preparation is the best heritage that anv parent could leave 
to his children. Bonds and stocks will be unavailable for 
food; bank accounts may become uncertain; and the possession
 of money may become a temptation to the vicious to rob 
and to murder; but a good character cannot be taken away. 


Its possession will give a measure of peace, security and confidence
 in the Lord that is beyond all price. 

We recommend that none be urged unduly to make a full 
consecration of their hearts, their lives, their all, to the Lord 
and to his service. The lives of God's people should in every 
case be "living epistles, known and read of all men" — especially
 by their own families. Those lives should testify not 
only to the completeness of the consecration to the Lora, but 
also to the peace, joy and comfort resulting. "Let the peace 
of God rule in your hearts; and be ye thankful/ 5 (Colossians 
3:15) Your being a living epistle, without a single word of 
exhortation, will be powerful in its lessons to all those directly
 under your influence. Additionally, at a suitable time, 
it would be proper to intimate to your family, friends and 
neighbors the comfort and joy, the peace and blessing, which 
you have received through a full acceptance of the Lord Jesus 
Christ and the message of his Word, and what a pleasure it 
would be to you to see your dear ones similarly blessed, comforted
 and -spiritually healed. 

It is better, however, that your children and friends should 
refrain from any profession of consecration to the Lord 
which would be a mere hypocrisy. There are too many hypocritical
 professors already. They are doing harm to the 
cause of Christ as well as harming themselves; for hypocrisy 
seems to be especially disdained of the Lord, and an insurmountable
 wall of hindrance to the hypocrite himself. Our 
influence, therefore, should always be on the side of honesty, 
not only in matters financial and social, but also, and particularly
, in respect to God and religion. 

ALSO FBOVIDE THINGS HONEST 

The Apostle urges God's people to provide for their own — 
for their own families — their necessities; and he also urges 
that such provision shall be honestly made — if not honestly, 
then not at all. Again, he exhorts the Lord's people to "labor 
wita their hands," that they may have to give to others who 
may be in need. These exhortations are not to be understood 
as recommendations to lay up earthly treasure — an earthly 
fortune. The Lord's people are to live in harmony with their 
faith — to lay up their treasure in heaven. These suggestions, 
therefore, respecting temporalities are not recommendations to 
hoard wealth, but merely "to use this world as not abusing it." 

In harmony with the heading of this article, and in accordance
 with our views of the possibilities of the future, we 
have some recommendations to offer to our readers. While 
we are not certain that all the dire calamities of the day of 
the Lord will befall the earth within the next eleven months, 
nevertheless there seems to he a sufficient possibility of this 
to warrant us in making certain provisions against the distress 
of that time — in the interest of our families, our friends and 
our neighbors. 

We recommend to those having clean, dry cellars or other 
places suitable and well-ventilated, to lay in a good stock of 
life's necessities; for instance, a large supply of coal, of rice, 
dried peas, dry beans, rolled oats, wheat, barley, sugar, molasses
, fish, etc. Have in mind the keeping qualities and 
nutritive values of foods — especially the fact that soups are 
economical and nourishing. Do not be afraid of having too 
much of such commodities as will keep well until the heat of 
next summer begins even if it were necessary to sell them at 
a loss, to prevent spoiling. Think of this hoard to eat, not 
too selfishly, but as being a provision for any who may be in 
need, and who in the Lord's providence may come your" way — 
"that you may have to give to those who lack." — Eph. 4:28. 

Do not sound a trumpet before you, telling of your provisions
, intentions, etc. "Hast thou faith? Have it to thyself 
before God." Only your own family should know of this 
storing of food, and they should be under strict injunctions 
not to tell it to others. At most, suggest to your friends or 
neighbors the wisdom of keeping a stock of staple foods ahead 
in view of the possibilities of storms, strikes, etc., during the 
winter. Do not attempt to go into too great details respecting
 the time of trouble; for the majority of people are blind 
and deaf anyway on this subject. 

Do not make these purchases on credit if you have not the 
money. Leave the matter, and exercise the more faith, remembering
 that the Golden Rule is the very lowest standard 
that can be recognized by the Lord's people, and that it comes 
in advance of any kind of charity. 

BAT CORN AND SAVE MONET 
From the Literary Digest: 

One way to reduce the cost of food, according to specialists
 in the United States Department of Agriculture, is to use 
more corn-meal. At present prices charged in retail stores, 
corn-meal costs about half as much per pound as wheat-flour, 
one-third as much as rolled oats, one-fourth as much as rolled 
wheat, and about half as much as broken rice. That is, it 


[6108] 


July 1, 191? 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(196-197) 


costs less than any of the other popular cereal foods, yet "Look forward! Look to the end! Look to the golden 

even the bolted meal usually sold has a food value that com- year!" 

pares favorably with that of wheat-flour. Says the author of A noticeable absence in the Doctor's article is the failure 

a recent food-bulletin issued by the Department: to attribute the crumbling thrones of earth to the presence of 

"'The old-fashioned unbolted corn-meal made from the earth's new King and the imminence of the time for the eswhole
 grain, which can often be obtained by the farmer who tablishment of his kingdom, for which the true church haswill
 take his grain to mill, and can often be purchased in shops so long and earnestly prayed, "Thy kingdom come!" 

and markets, contains more of the tissue-building material and WHOM DO WE SEBVE? 

has what many consider even a better flavor than the bolted As we advance into this time of "distress of nations" 

meal, and is much liked for making some forms of corn-bread. (Luke 21:25), the wiles of the devil will be more and more 

"'Any family, in town or country, can have the best of exerted through every device of his cunning to befog and encorn
-meal by grinding it at home in a hand grist-mill. The city trap the awakening masses of the world. 

man can buy corn by the bushel at a grain-store. He can We are admoniajied that "there is a time for every purgrmd
 it coarse or fine, to suit the taste of the family, and in p oae under heaven" (Ecclesiastes 3:1-8) ; and from the signs 
quantities to last a day or a week, or longer. Most people will 9 f the tianes we know that God is judging the nations (Psalm 
agree that this meal containing the germ is very palatable 82:8), gathering them into "the Valley of Jehoshaphat" to 
and compares well in this respect with that ordinarily pur- execute retribution upon them for their wickedness, manichased
 ready ground. Prices of hand-mills of substantial fested in misrule and oppression. (Joel 3:2, 12, 13; Jeremiah 
make run from $2.50 to $5. A small mill can be had for 25:15-29) These conditions are of man, under the madias
 httle as $1.50, though this probably would prove too tedious inations of the arch-enemy— Satan. Forseeing the issue in 
to use, except for small quantities.' the permission of evil, God designed to permit this time of 

"In this connection, Dr. Arthur W. Smith, a consulting war> "the day of vengeance of our God" (Isaiah 01:2), that 
chemist of Baltimore, writes us that he has recently made an u 3 fruitage, as a great object lesson, should help to demonexhaustive
 investigation of the comparative food-value of the strate the exceeding evil of evil, the exceeding sinfulness of 
products of white corn, and that the results show these prod- sin— sin in its full fruition. "The harvest is ripe."— Joel 
ucts to be much more economical than many of the foods com- 3:13, 
monly used. He says: _ In the arrangement for the delivery of President Wilson's 

" "The food value of one pound of corn- meal, grits, or horn- wa r message, one of the most notable electrical displays was 

iny, costing three cents, is equal to the food-value of any of entitled, "Jesus, The Light of the World," thus by implication 

the following used foods: ^ proclaiming that this nation was going forth in its mission 

1 pound of wheat flour, costing $0.06 under the authority of the Prince of Peace — a claim which 

1 pound rice, costing 09 every one of the warring nations has made. It is true that the 

iy 2 pounds of cheese, costing 60 position of this country is unique. It is standing squarely on 

2% pounds of round steak, costing 80 international law and believes it is fighting for the mainte- 

2 dozen eggs, costing, . . 90 nance of justice and liberty. Truly a noble purpose ! But the 

x k neck of potatoes, costing 45 Prince of Peace, while upholding the law- of justice, taught 

6 pints of milk, costing 30 and exemplified another law for himself and his followers ; 

** 'The South knows and appreciates the value of white corn i. e ., the law of love, in which by laying down his life, "the 

for table use; why not the North, the East, and the West?' " Just for the unjust," he satisfies the claims of divine justice 

"THE MEAHING OP THE DAT" against condemned man, and brings life and immortality to 

~ - ,, ,. , _. , m± ^ light, "leaving us an example that we should follow in his 

One of the most widely known syndicate writers, Dr. s teps » 1 Peter 2-21 

Frank Crane, has recently penned something which corres- OUB LOBD'S IKSTETTCTIONS TO HIS TOIXOWEBS 

ponds so well with what The Watch Tower publications have ' u . . , ° ^ , 7 i Y , ? , a Z a «w> + 

from Bible chronology and prophecy advanced for about forty .. When in judgment before Pilate our Lord was asked about 

years that we append it here. The Lord of the harvest is J« kingdom, he specifically stated, "My kingdom is not of 

surelv waking up the nations: Hi 18 world f° rder] ; lf my WrTw^ thlS world / order J> 

"this is ffie strange day. This is the day of his coming. *» would my servants fight" mth the weapons of carnal 

"Terrible and strange Is his coming; with trampling* of J^S* ♦ (^18:36) The Apostle Paul, truly taught of 

innumerable armies, desolate and salt-sown fields, strewn 2» M * Bter > <******" tfce o^™* ^ 8tlH ♦ furtW JTft 

with corpses; soil- ploughed, crater-furrowed with monstrous 7* 0u f ™ walk in f e nesh we do not war after tiie 

shells; the night sk P y Ld and streaked with deadly shrap- tf^^l* ^th™^^^ 

'"It is the day of judgment. It is the end of the world. ****** do^ l^MtioM and every high thing that exalteth 

"History has two phages. One, a slow preparation-forces }£" ^.^ft ±£°*^ & o^nX 
brewing, fires long kindling, waters gathering, electricity gen- J™* ™7 fought to the obedience of Christ. -2 Connecting
. The other, a sudden change; at last the barrier falls, tlua jJ s *u.4, o. 

the vessel explodes, the electric force leaps out in flash and , Recognizing our Lord Jesus' word as not his own, but that 

fury, the dan? breaks, the floods roar forth. ?* * he heavenly Father we recall that he taught positively 

''This is the day of accomplishment. The bell has rung. that neither he nor his faithful church was to resist by force 

The signal has been given. iL titanic potencies accumulat- * he ™J™« P:??™'> «* m fidelity to his teaching he laid 

ing through centuries have come to a head* dwn *" °™ b a' ^ v" ^P^ized-proved-his stateS
 -Evolution moves slowly, as a glacier; but at times leaps, ment ^ "the Son of Man is come not to destroy men's 

as an avalanche * lve8 > but to save them " (Luke 9:56) The servant is not 

«T^ a i a i-hJ ov +^ rt , T «« rt „+ a«~ *i, a* ~* «, i^j * greater than his Master; and "as he was, so are we in this 

thei^Ub£o^ ™}*" .(1 Jota4.1T) This being true of the individual, 

tirrv \a • a i . iV * j rp. , ,. it is perforce true of any association of individuals m his 

The world is drunk with freedom. They are toppling over name / If therefore this 4 ere a nat ion of obedient followers 

old thrones, sweeping away ancient dynasties,bursting through of j H wouM ^^ it clahns to ^—a Christian nation. 

venerable creeds, snapping the rusted chains of tradition, If aa a nation it is not obedien t to this fundamental doctrine, 

smashing impregnable institutions can it rightfully claim to be a Christian nation? 

Nature has her own plans. God maketh the wrath of "Well," one says, "if we were a Christian nation, should 

man to praise him. What began as a ouarrel between rival ^ e unresistingly endure all that has been put on us? If so, 

nations will end as a triumph for humanity. Out of the dash tnia ^.n^d nation buffeting us would destroy us!" True, 

of kings the people will emerge victorious. Democracy is us- prov i ded God himself in his own power and way did not 

mg 3 e ^ a " e11 !?* ? ut0C1 * a «es to kill each other. protect. In his protection of the Jewish nation under the 

Terrible is the day of the Lord and past understanding. j^ dispensation, when faithful, we see his protecting power 

Yet his purposes are for the health of the world. After the exemplified. Again, it was demonstrated in Jesus' experience; 

storm, the ozone-laden sunshine. After the volcanic upheaval, for w he n his enemies would destroy him, he could go out 

the smiling and fertile continent. irom their midst unarmed, and this repeatedly, under divine 

"And after all this destruction— peace, with law. He is protection, until "his time was come." And ? 'when his time 

trampling the wine press; ffom the crushed grapes shall flow ^ ft s come," he suffered willingly, 

the sweet wine. A DEVICE OF THE ADVEBSABY 

"After this the ships of the world shall sail more safely, As our Lord was taken up into an exceedingly high mounthe
 lanes of commerce shall be opened, the barriers between tain and shown the kingdoms of the world and their glory, 

nations weaker, and their bonds stronger. After this shall and was offered them by Satan — who was permitted dominion 

men work with gladder songs, and women love with less fear. ior a predetermined time — so now as his lease expires, and 

VIl-19 [6109] 


(198-204) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


he is being dethroned, he seems to be taking apostate Christianity
 into a high mountain and showing them the kingdoms 
of the world, and a prospective glory, if they will worship him. 
And they are accepting the terms and worshiping him as they 
cause their sons and their daughters to go through the awful 
fire of this most demoniacal war. It is a cunning device, and 
belongs among the things that will deceive, if possible, the 
very elect. — Matthew 24:24. 

We are reminded that the Master spake a parable of this 
time, saying, "Strait is the gate and narrow the way which 
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. Beware of 
false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but 
inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by 
their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs 
of thistles? Even sq every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; 
but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree 
cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring 
forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good 
fruit is hewn dowit and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their 


fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that saith unto me, 
Lord, Lord, sfcall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he 
that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many 
will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied
 in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and 
in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I 
profess unto them, I never knew you j depart from me, ye that 
work iniquity. 

"Therefore whosoever heareth these saying3 of mine, and 
doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which build his 
house upon a rock; and the Tain descended, and the floods 
came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it 
fell not; for it was founded upon a rock. And every one 
that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall 
be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the 
sand; and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the 
winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell; and great 
was the fall of it."— Matthew 7:13-27, 


HEZEKIAH, THE FAITHFUL KING 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Hezekiah's Great Passover/ ' published in issue of November 1, 1898, which please 

see.] 

SENNACHERIB'S INVASION OF ISRAEL 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Two Prayers and Their Answers," published in issue of November 1, 1898, which 

please see.] 

GOD'S GRACIOUS INVITATION 

[This article was a reprint of that which appeared in issue of July 15, 1905, under the title "God's Ways Higher Than Man's 

Ways," which please see.] 

GOVERNMENT RECOGNIZES OUR ASSOCIATION 

D. L. Roscoe, Captain of Cavalry, U. S. A. 

WAR DEPARTMENT 

Office of Provost Marshal General 

Washington 

BULLETIN 

Concerning Exemptions, Exclusions and Discharges 

1. From the lists of persons registered on June 5th, names 
will, on a day to be announced later, be drawn by lot by the 
fairest system that can be devised. Persons whose names 
are drawn, and other persons interested, will be given an 
opportunity to present claims for exemption, exclusion or 
discharge from the draft and to support such claims by 
evidence. 

2. The determination of whether a particular claim for 
exemption, exclusion or discharge shall be granted, will be 
made by boards to be appointed by the* President. These 
boards will function under the law and under regulations prescribed
 by the President. Regulations governing the determination
 of exemptions, exclusions and discharges will, when 
promulgated, be made available to all concerned at the offices 
of the local and District Boards. Until such regulations have 
been promulgated further information cannot be given, as 
it might later prove misleading; and even after the regulations
 have been made public, decisions concerning exemptions, 
exclusions or discharges in individual cases cannot be made 
by this office, since the law provides that all such cases shall 
he heard and determined by the Boards to be established 
for that purpose. The President's Regulations, for the execution
 of the draft, will be given to the public as soon as 
possible. 

3. The law provides for the exemption from draft, of 
persons in the military and naval service of the United States, 
of officers of the legislative, executive, or judicial departments 
of the United States and of the several States, Territories and 
District of Columbia; of regular or duly ordained ministers 
of religion and students who on May 18th were preparing 
for the ministry in recognized theological or divinity schools, 
of aliens and of subjects of Germany whether they have or 
have not taken out their first papers. 

4. Persons who are members of well-recognized religious 
sects or organizations, organized and existing on May 18th, 
and whose creed at that time, forbade its members to participate
 in war in any form, and whose religious convictions are 
against war or participation therein in accordance with the 
creed or principles of said religious organizations, cannot be 
compelled to serve in any of the military forces created by 
the Selective Service Act of ^lay 18th, but no such person shall 
be exempted from any service which the President may declare
 to be non-combatant. 

5-a. The President is authorized to exclude or discharge 
from the selective draft, or to draft for partial military servThe
 appended correspondence between this office and the 
War Department in Washington, D. C, is self-explanatory. 
We believe it will be read with interest by our many friends. 
We call attention especially to paragraph No. 4 of the Official 
Bulletin of the War Department which states that members 
of religious bodies which were organized and existing on May 
18th, and whose religious convictions are against war or participating
 therein, according to the principles of said organization
, cannot be compelled to serve in any of the military forces. 
The War Department has on file a statement from our Association
, showing it has been a recognized religious Association 
for more than thirty years. We publish the correspondence, 
together with the Bulletin for the benefit of our readers: 
OTO LETTER 

June 15, 1917 
Gen. E, H. Cbowdeb, Provost Marshal, 
Office of Provost Marshal General, 
Washington, D. C. 
Deab SiBS: — 

On the 24th of May, 1917, we filed with you a statement 
of the International Bible Students Association, which 
is a religious organization, setting forth the reasons why 
such Association comes within the purview of the Selective 
Draft Act with reference to exemption. We understand that 
the question of exemption will, of course, be determined by 
courts constituted by the President for that purpose, in due 
time. 

The County Clerk of one County has made statements to 
some of our members that his office has received from the 
Government a list of such religious organizations as would 
be recognized, and that the Government had not recognized 
the International Bible Students Association; and this 
statement is disturbing some of our people. 

We will thank you to kindly write us concerning this matter
, so that we may be able to set at rest the minds of many 
who are disturbed and to assure them that in due time the 
Government will consider their application for exemption 
along with any others claiming exemption because their religious
 belief or teaching forbids them to engage in war, as 
provided by law. An early reply hereto will be very much 
appreciated. 

Very respectfully yours, 

International Bible Students Association. 
PROVOST MARSHAL'S REPLY 

June 19, 1917 
International Bible Students Assn., 
Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Deab Sirs: — 

Receipt is acknowledged of your letter of June 15th. 

For your information I enclose herewith bulletin No, 1, 
which covers the subject of your inquiry. 

By direction of General Cbowdeb: 


[6110] 


Juf.y 1, 1917 


r II E WA T C II T O IV E R 


(204-20=;) 


ice only, persons of, the following classes: County and 
municipal officials; customhouse clerks; persons employed by 
the United States in the transmission of the mails; artificers 
and workmen employed in the armories, arsenals and navy 
yards of the United States and such other persons employed 
in the service of the United States as the President may 
designate; pilots; mariners actually employed in the sea service
 of any citizen or merchant within the United States ; 
those in a status with respect to persons dependent upon them 
for support which renders their exclusion or discharge advisable
; and those found to be physically or morally deficient
; 

(b) Also, persons engaged in industries, including agriculture
, found to be necessary to the maintenance of the 
Military Establishment or the effective operation of the Military
 forces or the maintenance of national interest during 
the emergency, 

6. No exemption or exclusion shall continue when a cause 
therefore no longer exists. 

7. Whether or not any class or any individual, falls within 


the meaning of any of the above enumerated provisions, is 
a question of fact and must, in order to constitute a proper 
claim for exemption, he proved and established before the 
boards to bo appointed by the President for the purpose of 
passing upon all such claims. 

8. There will be one board in each county or, in large 
cities, one for each 30,000 inhabitants. These boards will 
hear and determine, subject to review by District Boards, all 
questions of exemptions except those coming under Par. 5-b 
above. Those coming under the provision of that paragraph 
must be determined by District Boards, one of which will 
be appointed by the President for each Federal District. 
These District Boards, in addition to having original jurisdiction
 over the classes falling under Par. 5-b, shall also on 
appeal, have the power to affirm, modify or reverse any 
decision of any local board, and the decision of such District 
Boards will be final, except that the President may affirm, 
modify or reverse such decision under such rules and regulations
 as the President may prescribe. 

E. II. Chowder, Provost Marshal General. 


"FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH" 


'"Faithful unto death!' Lord, day by day, 
Help me thus to keep the narrow way! 
Strengthen me to bear the scorn and shamePortion
 of all those who take thy name. 
'Faithful unto death!' When all is done, 


Cross is changed to crown, the victory won, 
Let me hear thee say, O, blessed Lord, 
'Child, come enter into thy reward! 
Faithful thou hast been, come share with me 
Glory, honor, immortality!'" 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


"MUCH DIVERSIFIED WISDOM OP 0OX>" 

Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings and much love in Christ! My former studies in 
connection with light and optics have enabled me to appreciate
 so much Brother Russell's valued remarks in regard to 
the colors of the 'Tabernacle in the Wilderness," and especially
 those found in the garments of the high priest. 

How appropriate that the sun is a symbol of the divine 
Creator, seeing that the sun is the source of light, warmth 
and color, and God the source of life, love and grace! (Malachi 
4:2; John 8:12; 1 John 1:5) It is generally known among 
optical students that sunlight is vibration of that elastic, subtle
 medium pervading space and termed ether. These vibrations
 are due to the disturbing influence of the sun, which 
affects the ether just as a stone dropped into a pool of water 
sets up circular ripples therein. 

It is interesting to note that just as love is the sum of all 
the divine graces, so white sunlight is the sum of all the 
known varied hues; for the prismatic effect of rain, which 
produces the bow, tells this story of a complication of colors 
derived from sunlight. 

Moreover, it is the same white light that falls on every 
object perceived by the eye, and yet in what exquisite variety 
of shades is the light reflected! This is due to the intrinsic 
property of the material upon which the light falls, which 
absorbs certain vibratory wave-lengths, responsible for color, 
and reflects others. 

There is a beautiful harmony found in the scientific and 
Scriptural viewpoint of all this : for instance, note how unselfishly
 white objects will reflect the purity of the sunlight, 
and how it is written that white raiment is reserved for those 
who will most unselfishly reflect divine grace and truth* — 
2 Chronicles 5:12; Revelation 3:4, 5; 19:8. 

We note, too, in vivid contrast how black objects will 
practically absorb all white light. They destroy every beauteous
 ray from the sun, so that darkness and blackness are 
apparent; and so, too, for all who will not reflect divine 
grace and truth* is reserved blackness and darkness forever. 
(Jude 13; 2 Peter 2:17) The wearing of black mourning 
apparel tells the sad story of a "light" gone from a home. 
Hence black is synonymous with death. Other Scriptures are 
harmonious with the thought.— Canticles 1:5,6; Isaiah 50:3. 

Scarlet reminds one of Bhed blood, the penalty of sin, and 
is a symbol of the precious blood of our dear Redeemer, who 
took the sinner's place. The saving and cleansing power 
symbolized by this color permeates throughout Scripture. — 
Ex. 12:13; Lev. 14:51, 52; Josh. 2:18-20; Isa. 1:18; 1 John 
1:7. 

Blue implies faith. The very heavens cast this beautiful 
color into the eyes of all observers, and that while they reflect 
on the importance of a faithful law-giver. The necessity of 
maintaining full control of the stellar system is evidenced 
when we are told that the system containing more than a 
thousand million suns with their satellites is traveling at 


about twelve miles a second through space, and yet order and 
harmony are so accurate that positions and eclipses may be 
gauged thousands of years apart with perfect accuracy. 

"Thy faithfulness." says the Psalmist, "shall thou establish 
in the. very heavens." 

The sign of blue as representing faith is general; for we 
remember the Blue Ribbon League and the street guardians 
clothed in blue and the Scriptural testimony including the blue 
robe of the ephod.— Psalm 89:1,2; Num. 15:38; Isa. 54:11. 

It is interesting to note how this color tells in such plain 
language that none should be a king unless he prove faithful 
unto the shedding of blood, or death. 

In history, purple has been a sign of royalty, and mention 
is made of this fact so far back as the time of Israel's judges. 
— Judges 8:26. 

Purple is a compound of blue and red, blue implying faithfulness
, and this, together with red, implying faithfulness even 
unto death. 

It is remarkable that it was just at the appropriate time. 
when Jesus bad practically demonstrated bis wortbiness of 
the kingly title, that he was arrayed in this regal-colored 
apparel, even though through the scornful mockery of base 
men.— Mark 15:9-20. 

Gold seems a very fitting symbol of divinity. It is wonderfully
 malleable — one ounce of beaten gold covering the area 
of 1466 square feet, thus portraying how divine glory may 
spread throughout the universe. Further, of all metals, it is 
most like the sun in appearance, and the sun has light within 
itself and can impart the same without apparent exhaustion, 
And so, too, the divine nature with its inherent life.— Lamentations
 4:1,2; Psalm 45:9,13; Exodus 25:10,11, 

Green, being like fresh vegetation, tells it* own story in 
Scripture. — Psalm 23:2; Luke 23:31; Revelation 8:7. 

Where many colors are manifest there is portrayed the 
manifold glory of sunlight, from which all the colors are 
derived, and herein lies the appropriateness of the Scriptural 
symbol generally portrayed by the rainbow; for just as in the 
latter beautiful elementary colors are seen by the natural 
vision, so by the eyes of understanding the graces divine are 
manifest as we gaze and reflect upon the covenants. — Genesis 
9:11-17; Ezekiel 1:28; Rev. 4:3rEzekiel 28:13; Isaiah 54:11. 

It was upon the reflection of this latter thought that I 
felt impressed with Brother Russell's statements in regard to 
the ephod and its jeweled breastplate; for he says that the 
ephod represented the Abrahamic and the New Covenant. 
Truly, as we meditate on the meaning of each of its five 
colors, and see how they twine about, it must be so, for 
the covenants in question very particularly manifest th* 1 
manifold glory of God, which will be revealed to all mankind 
in due time. 

This had led me, dear Brethren, to alter a few words here 
and there of the beautiful poem found in the Divine Plan 
of the Ages, and illuminating the thought just given: 


[6111] 


(205-206) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Loveliest to the fairest eyes, 

Grand the mystic ephod lies; 

Soft and smooth and glory shedding, 

As if made for angels* treading — 

Wondrous tintings, touching ever, 

White and hlue and these together 

With purple, red and shining gold: 

In God's own Word it all is told. 

Every color has its meaning 

(Deeper thoughts from deeper gleaning), 

And illumined — what a riddle — 

By the gems that deck the middle! 

There is a truth — though some reject it — 
That its light is all reflected, 
That the ephod's hues are given 
By the sun that shines in heaven; 
And 'tis thought — by saints believing — 
That great God himself is weaving, 
Bringing out the world's dark history, 
To the light of truth — its mystery ; 
And as works of men dimmish, 
Comes the grand and glorious finish, 
When begin the Golden Ages, 
Long foretold by seers and sages. 

With much love in our dear Redeemer, 
Your Brother, rejoicing in the glorious hope, through 
divine favor, Frederick Lardext. — England. 

SWEDISH— NORWEGIAN— DAMlSH—mmiSH REPORT 

Dear Brethren: — 

It is herewith my privilege to send you the usual financial 
report for the last quarter and at the same time to be able to 
add that the harvest work continues to make very good 
progress here. Our present prospects are still better. 

During the past three months, Nov., 1916, to Jan., 1917, 
the Orebro office has sent out more than 12,000 copies of the 
Studies and about 3,000 other books, Drama Scenarios, 
Mannas, etc. Tn that same period of time we have received 
2,034 subscriptions to the Swedish Watch Toweb, and 2,724 
letters and cards. The letters and cards sent out amount to 
2,481, and the total number of sendings (by mail and by railroad
) from this office is 18,658. The number of meetings 
held under its direction was 427, and the nuimber of kilometers
 traveled in its service, 29,340. It may be of interest 
to you to know that I had four meetings in Stockholm yesterday
, amongst which was one baptismal service, in which 10 
brethren and 9 sisters (all belonging to the class in Stockholm
), symbolized their consecration. At the beginning of 
this year (Dec. 30, 31 and Jan. 1), we had a splendid and 
very well attended convention in Gothenburgh. This week 
I am going to Norway, in order, D. V., to give some more 
"push" to the Society's work there, by some necessary changes 
and improvements in the Christiania office, etc. 

From that (the Norwegian) office I am able to give you 
the following report, or figures, for Nov. 1 to Jan. 31: 
Studies sent out, 1,245; other books, Mannas, Drama, Scenarios
, etc., 1,187; letters received, 96; letters sent out, 58. 
Expenditures, kr. 874:18; receipts, kr. 851:15. 

The Danish office has during this same quarter sent out 
2,333 copies of the Studies and 881 other books, Mannas, 
etc. Tts income during the time was kr. 5,185: 58, and its 
expenditures kr. 5,436: 90. It has amongst other meetings 
during the quarter also given 73 Deama presentations at different
 places in Denmark and attended by 23,395 people. 

The Finnish report for the quarter (Oct. 15 to Jan 15) 
shows the following figures: Studies sent out, 1,472; other 
books and booklets, 1,582; letters and cards sent out, 1,285; 
letters and cards received, 276; subscriptions to the Finnish 
Tower, 477; meetings held, 109; kilometers traveled in preaching
 tours, 10,360; receipts, Fmrk. 7,872: 93; expenditures, 
Fmrk. 5,166: 07. 

We continue the printing of the Dano-Norwegian Studies 
and pamphlets and tracts here in Orebro as rapidly as possible
. By the Dord*s grace I hope that our next quarterly report
 will show you a not insignificant increase above this 
one. 

Assuring you of our deep appreciation of the great privilege
 of being your (and the Lord's) colaborers, and asking 
you to kindly accept our heartiest greetings and love in Christ, 
I remain as ever, 

Yours in our dear Redeemer's blessed name and service, 

August Lundboeg. — Sweden. 


EXPENDITURES : 
NOV., 1916— JAN., 1917 

Deficit in cash Nov. 1, 1916 kr. 38,441.42 

Pilgrim, convention and other 

meetings kr. 4,450.33 

Printing " 2,618.71 

Printing paper « 7,794.00 

Binding " 332.04 

Freights and postage " 1,443.73 

Translations and other helps- " 954.68 

Bibles, Cards, etc., for sale.. " 3,496.80 

The newspaper service " 20.65 

Expenses for the work in Norway
 and Denmark " 135.00 

Helps to poor colporteurs.. . . " 840.31 
Office expenses, rent, light, 

heat, inventory, etc " 2,166.01 

Paid on debts from foregoing
 quarter " 16,586.58 

kr. 40,838.84 kr. 40,838.84 

RECEIPTS: kr. 79,280.26 

Voluntary donations to the 

Tract Fund kr. 9,487.02 

Swedish Watch Tower subscriptions
 " 4,870.56 

Books sold and other incomes. " 22,021.20 


kr. 36,378.78 kr. 36,378.78 
Deficit in the cash Feb. I, 1917 kr. 42,901.48 


kr. 79,280.26 
August Lundboro. — Sweden. 

_ NOT ASHAMED OF THE TBTJTH 

Dear Doctor: — 

Your kind letter we have received. To say that it did not 
cost us a severe pang of sorrow to think of severing our connection
 with the Central Church, would be to say what is 
untrue; but when it comes to a matter of conscience, there is 
One above and beyond all others to whom we owe first allegiance
. "Lovest thou me more than these V applies to all 
sincere and consecrated followers of Jesus. 

I doubt whether you fully realize with what implicit faith 
I received the interpretation of our "orthodox" preachers as 
to the meaning of the Greek text. I verily believe that they 
were giving us the full benefit of the true meaning. Instead, 
1 find upon personal inquiry, after learning through Pastor 
Russell's clear interpretation, that the Bible does not teach, 
for instance, the doctrine of eternal torment, which the ministers
 have to adimit. Now the truth is that eternal torment 
is publicly preached and privately denied. I for one cannot 
conscientiously stand for this. Do they not realize in permitting
 the world to think they stand tor this devilish doctrine
 that they are defaming God's character? I have always 
had to keep this doctrine behind my back, as it were, in 
order not to go too deep in questioning God's love and mercy. 
Tlunk of the many who have not only questioned, but have 
given up all faith and trust in a God whom they were taught 
could inflict such punishment upon humanity! I do not 

think, dear Dr. , that our ministers realize how fully 

the common people trusted! I now have the Greek Testament 
and see for myself that the true meaning is not eternal torment
, but is the aiortian cutting off (Matt. 25:46), as of a 
branch cut off, this being in the second death — everlasting destruction
. 

Then there is the great doctrine of restitution, which I certainly
 never was taught in either of the Baptist churches with 
which I was affiliated, and yet this is clearly taught by the 
apostles. And, oh, what a wonderful, glorious doctrine it is! 
How clearly we can understand in this light why God has been 
selecting a kittle flock" in this Gospel age, of consecrated believers
, to be the bride of Christ, who with him are to reign 
for the thousand years on the spirit plane. All humanity, 
those brought forth from their graves as well as those who 
shall be on the earth when he begins his glorious reign, shall 
have an opportunity to be raised to a perfect^ human condition
, those not accepting this great offer of mfcrcy being cut 
off in the second death. 

How beautifully clear and Scriptural it all is to me now! 
In view of all that I now see clearly, and which I fully believe, 
I cannot remain in a church which would prevent my expressing
 these views. I should be looked upon as a heretic. 
I also believe that there should he no division in the church; 
it should be one body of consecrated believers — Christ being
 the Head, and the little groups being the congregations; 


[6112J 


July 1, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(206 20/) 


as we read in the Greek; the congregation at Corinth, Philippi, 
etc. 

Mr. A and I are therefore identifying ourselves with 

these followers of Christ, who we believe are more nearly 
keeping to the simple form our Savior instituted. You remember
, Dr. , there was no recorded membership in the 

early church — take instance after instance in the book of the 
Acts, and there is no word of such an arrangement; there was 
only a bond between Christ and the believer. I believe out of 
a recorded membership many evils grow. 

We meet Sunday morning and evening for worship and 
have the mid-week prayer and testimony meeting, so surely 
we are not neglected. 

You mentioned in conversation with me that Pastor Russell
 teaches that Christ is a created being. Yea, do not the 
Scriptures so teach? For instance, Rev. 3:14, which says that 
he was "the beginning of the creation of God"? 

NoW as to the last matter mentioned. You will recall, 
perhaps, that my reason for leaving the People's Church was 
the disreputable character of the minister. Leaving there almost
 cost me the loss of my class of young men, of whom, 
as you know, I was extremely fond, yet I could not stand 

for this. You may rest assured, therefore, that Mr. A 

and I have been and are fully convinced, after a very careful 
investigation of all the evil things that have been brought 
against Pastor Russell, that these accusations are wholly false. 
If one will take the trouble and time to inquire into many of 
the evil reports one hears of others, he will as a rule find 
them to be untrue. You remember our Savior's words: "Woe 
unto you when all men speak well of you!" "If any man will 
live godly in this life he shall suffer persecution." "If they 
have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more 
shall they call them of his household!" 

It is my sincere desire that with an unprejudiced mind you 
may look into this matter for yourself, letting God's Spirit 
guide you into all truth. With sincere appreciation of your 
kind offer of friendship for us both, I am 

Yours sincerely, . 

HARVESTING IN MEXICO 
Dear Brethren: — 

In Bending you this letter, I desire to tell you of my, joy 
in the precious message which brought light to my mind — 
this precious light which has come to awaken us out of the 
sleep in which we were, to recognize the presence of the Great 
Anointed of Jehovah, who will be the King, both of the living
 and of those sleeping in the tomb. 

This message has completely changed my plans. 1 was 
thinking of studying medicine; but since I have come to 
know of the glorious work of our Head and his glorious 
body during the Millennium, already begun, I have changed 
from medicine such as men teach, to the great plan of God. 

I came here to this place with the object of presenting the 
glad tidings to the Indians who live here. Yesterday I gave 
them an explanation of the plan of the ages, with a chart 
given to me by Brother Moreyra, of San Antonio, Texas. 
After the talk, I distributed copies of the Bible Students' 
Monthly, and took a note of those who wished to have books 
on the Divine Plan and the Scenarios, These persons already
 number fifteen. 

In the evening I celebrated the Memorial Supper of our 
Lord, in which several brethren took part. May the Lord 
give me more of his spirit, that I may be faithful to my 
vow, renewed on partaking of the symbols of his body and 
his blood, offered for our benefit. 

This morning, I gave another explanation of the divine 
plan, the brethren having been very desirous of hearing it. 
On concluding, I distributed more B. S. M.'s. In these places, 
as in many others in Mexico, the sickle of the Lord has not 
yet been put in for the ingathering of the wheat, which is 
scattered in many places. I thank the Lord for this grand 
blessing granted me of participation in the work of the harvest. 
Truly, "the harvest is great, but the laborers are few!" 

I am in expectation of receiving literature for which I 
asked Brother Montero of Los Angeles, to distribute at once. 

I beg that you will be so good as to send me a copy of 
the second edition of the Memorial number of The Watch 
Toweb of the pilgrimage here of our dear brother, Pastor 
Russell, whom I had not the pleasure of knowing in this life, 
but whom T hope to see, by the grace of God, in the glorious 
kingdom of our Savior Jesus Christ. For the moment, I want 
to know more of his character, so full of zeal for our Redeemer
 and the brethren, and of his ardent zeal in the upholding
 of the truth at all costs. The portion of his life which he 
left in the Studies in the Scriptures has been for me a 
powerful influence. All we who love him rejoice to know that 
he is already participating in the joy of our Lord. 


With Christian love, and praying the Father of mercies that 
he may bless you richly in the precious work that is in your 
hands, 

Your brother in the Lord, Abel Ortega. — Mexico. 

FAITH IN GOD VS. FAITH IN OHBISTENDOM 
Dear Brethren: — 

We are taking this opportunity of conveying our love to 
you in the Lord. We almost feel as if we were intruding 
on your time in writing you; but as no reply is expected, it 
would perhaps be a little relaxation for you to know how 
we are getting along over here. Our great thanks go out to 
Almighty God for his great goodness in permitting us to bask 
in the light of his glorious revelation as contained in the 
divine Word, when many others are in darkness. We realize 
that every good and perfect jjift cometh from the Father, and 
rejoice that Pastor Russell has been favored above so 
many to unfold to the household of faith the things both new 
and old from the divine storehouse. 

We are truly living (( in the days of the Son of Man," and 
we in this country are receiving at the present time many 
evidences of the establishment of the kingdom, and that the 
adversary has but a short time in power. We would like 
you to know that our faith in God, in spite of the dark 
clouds on the world, is increasing in contrast to the faith 
in Christendom, which is almost at vanishing point. 

The classes in Liverpool and district are, we consider, in 
a healthy condition, and all the dear brethren are eager to 
cooperate in the harvest work. We have had a number of 
productions of the Photo-Drama here and in this vicinity, 
and with the "follow-up" meetings our time has been very 
well occupied. The seating accommodation at our Sunday 
meeting-place in the city is limited and prevents us from having
 as large attendance as we would like. Our efforts to get 
another place have been unsuccessful. 

We are now every second or third month having what 
we call "home gatherings," when all the brethren in the 
suburbs, etc., join in a combine meeting. On the last occasion
 we had the use of the Deutsche Church {it not being 
in use on account of so many being interned), and we had 
an attendance of about 300. We have, regularly, afternoon 
and evening meetings every Sunday in five places in the 
district, and seventeen week-night meetings. Then we have 
also calls upon us for "follow-up" meetings in districts beyond
 our own. 

Last year we had a convention under the auspices of the 
Society, resulting in a most uplifting time for all. We would 
like another if we can induce the London friends to move; 
and we are still hopeful that we may succeed. There are, of 
course, no excursion fares here since the outbreak of the war, 
but everybody is employed, and money is being spent freely. 
We have a nice number of young men in our meetings; and as 
you know, they are under a severe test just now. I am pleased 
to say that their faith in him to whom they have consecrated 
themselves is unwavering, and they aTe prepared to show their 
loyalty to the Lord even unto death, and despite all the pressure
 that may be brought to bear upon them by the powers that 
were. We think that the British thinking people are being 
sobered by this war now. Of course, we know that we are 
the Lord's peculiar care, and that no evil can befall us, everything
 being of his permission. 

And now, with much love in the Lord from Sister McCloy, 
myself and all our household, T remain 

Your fellow-servant in the Lord, 

Thomson McClot, — England. 
TROTH STANDS MAJESTIC AS THE GLUTS 
Dearly Beloved in Christ: — 

I received your kind letter telling me of Pastor Russell's 
death. He rests from his labors and his works do follow. 
How true this is of him! My daily prayer before the throne 
of grace is that we may be strong enough to carry out the 
noble work he has left us to do. We should endeavor to grow 
stronger all the while; for it does seem as if the blessed 
Master thought we were able to carry on this grand work now 
which was so well done by our dear, faithful Pastor, 

How many times daily do I thank our dear Master for 
sending us such a teacher as our beloved Pastor was! We 
will certainly miss him, although it had never been my pleasure
 to meet him. I always looked forward to having the 
pleasure of doing so sometime. 

We are very isolated here — no one of like precious faith. 
They will not even let one of the pilgrims speak here. It 
makes life almost unbearable. My daughter is such a good 
Bible student and longs to get near some class. I am trying 
to teach the truth to all my little ones, and we have our 
music in our home every eve. Pray for me, for it is a great 
undertaking it guide these little feet alone, I have been a 


[6113] 


(207-212) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


widow for three years and I need your prayers, and be assured
 you have mine daily. 

Let us go on with this grand work until, like our Pastor, 
we hear the sweet words, "Well done." May we be just as 
well prepared as he was, and I feel all will go well for us. I 
am always so glad to hear from the Bethel Home. 

Please pardon me for taking so much of your time, but 
I feel as if I must tell you a little of my life experiences and 
how I came into present truth. It was just a short time 
before my husband's death — about a week, 1 suppose. We 
were in the South for my husband's health, when one day a 
book agent came to my house. I would not talk to him at 
first, but I saw the title "Watch Tower" on a paper in his 
pocket, and immediately became interested, because several 
years before I had seen and read some of them, but could 
never get any more. 

We bought the hooks and my husband would have mo 


read to him from them. He did not live more than one week 
afterwards. So I have found a great deal of comfort from 
the books. The man who Bold to me was a dear, good pilgrim, 
ire came back to our house when he heard of my husband's 
death, and gave a lecture, and I found more relief from the 
sweet, simple story, the way he told it, than ever before; and 
I have been tried as by fire since coming into the light. But 
the truth stands out as majestically as the cliffs along the 
shore that are lashed by the waves. When the furious storms 
abate, the clifTs are there just the same. So it is with me; 
when my people and my friends turn me down, the truth 
stands there just as plain as ever, and I can say, "Why can 
1 hey not are, too? 1 ' Oh, what a joy to know that I have come 
from dirkness into <day! God bless you and keep you all, i^ 
the prayer of 

Your humble servant, Mrs. Anna Brockweix. — Mo, 

