A Teacher Changes Her View
▪ A few years ago, a teacher in Batumi, in the country of Georgia, asked her students to list the Ten Commandments. To the amazement of the teacher, one of her students, Anna, recited them correctly. She also answered other Bible questions in an impressive way. The teacher, intrigued, asked her how she knew so much. When Anna replied that she studied the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, the teacher cut her off, saying that she considered them fanatics.
On one occasion, the teacher asked the students to write an essay on life in Georgia and the various problems the country faced. At the end of her essay, Anna wrote: “Any effort by people to correct society radically will be unsuccessful because, as Jeremiah 10:23 says: ‘To earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.’ All the problems will only be solved by God’s Kingdom.”
The next day the teacher commended Anna’s essay to the class and said: “I enjoyed Anna’s unique work, which she wrote in her own words. In it she explained how it is possible for world conditions to be changed.” The teacher was also impressed with Anna’s behavior, praising her in front of the whole class for her good manners and modest dress.
When Jehovah’s Witnesses contacted the teacher at home, she told them that earlier she had regarded them as fanatics but that she had changed her view because of her student Anna. In 2007, the teacher attended the Memorial of Jesus Christ’s death together with Jehovah’s Witnesses and listened attentively to the program.
After the Memorial, Anna’s teacher admitted that she was deeply impressed with how well Jehovah’s Witnesses know the Bible. Now Witnesses are regularly studying the Bible with her. No doubt, like this teacher, you have an open mind that prompts you to look into what is behind others’ beliefs and behavior. Why not ask one of Jehovah’s Witnesses for a free home Bible study?
[Picture on page 21]
Anna writing her essay

