From Our Readers
Breast Cancer  Thank you very much for publishing the series “Breast Cancer​—Every Woman’s Fear.” (April 8, 1994) I have checked myself from time to time and have simply thought that my glands were hard. Feeling very uncertain, I did nothing about it. However, after reading the article, I went to the hospital and learned I had cancer. Arrangements were made for me to have an operation. I thank you from the bottom of my heart.
T. Y., Japan
Since my surgery, I haven’t been able to read anything about cancer. So when the magazine came out, I wasn’t thrilled about it. But I usually read all issues of Awake! from cover to cover, and that night I decided to read a little and stop if I got scared. Well, I couldn’t stop reading it. It was so well-​done, so informative, and so caring.
G. K., United States
The article helped me see how Jehovah understands our fears of facing a life-​threatening illness. I had always thought people were weak or lacked faith if they felt this way. It really helped me to see the deep compassion Jehovah has.
K. G., United States
If ever a magazine spoke to someone, that issue surely spoke to me. My husband and I sat on the couch with our medical bills for my breast-​cancer surgery spread all around us. As we wrote check after check, the mailman delivered this issue of Awake! I read the article that very day, with more than ordinary interest. Thank you on behalf of all the women who will draw courage from the articles.
E. J., United States
Cities  I am 16 years old and was thrilled to read the series on cities. In geography class we were asked to give a short talk on the subject of our choice. I based mine on the article “The City That Was Abundant With People.” (January 22, 1994) After I read my talk out loud in class, everyone applauded. Thanks for helping me to improve my understanding of geography.
T. R., Germany
In the article “Let Us Build Ourselves a City,” you said: “In 1900, London was the only city in all the world with a population of one million.” (January 8, 1994) But in the following issue, you said: “By the mid-1800’s it [Edo, now called Tokyo] had a population well in excess of a million people.” Which is correct?
S. T., Japan
The statement regarding London was apparently in error. It was based on the 1985 edition of the “Illustrated Atlas of the World” (Rand McNally and Company). However, “The World Almanac and Book of Facts 1993” appears to be correct in saying that several cities had populations of over a million as of 1900. Sorry for the confusion.​—ED.
The Money Chase  As a young reader of Awake!, I was really touched by the series “The Money Chase​—Where Will It End?” (March 22, 1994) It seems to me that my peers have only one goal: to fill their wallets. However, to follow what Jehovah teaches is much more honorable than to worship things that are perishable.
K. R., France
Sports  Thanks for the item “Does God Take Sides in Sports?” (February 8, 1994) I have made the mistake of praying for victory in a track race; I’ve also prayed for the defeat of my competitors. Now I know that Jehovah’s will is not connected with sports. I am dedicating my life to Jehovah, and I feel more comfortable knowing that he is really listening to my prayers.
J. T., United States

