Could You Share in Evening Witnessing?
 1. According to one scholar, when did the apostle Paul preach from house to house?
1 According to the book Daily Life in Bible Times, the apostle Paul typically shared in the house-to-house ministry “from 4 p.m. till far into the night.” We do not know whether this was Paul’s actual schedule, but we do know that Paul was willing to “do all things for the sake of the good news.” (1 Cor. 9:19-23) This would have included arranging his affairs to go from house to house when it was most productive to do so.
 2. Why are evenings a good time to share in the ministry?
2 Publishers in many places have traditionally gone from house to house in the mornings during the week. However, in your area, is this still the best time? One pioneer relates regarding his territory: “Hardly anyone is at home during the day. But most people are home in the evening.” Evening witnessing may provide the best opportunity to reach men, in particular, with the good news. Householders are often more relaxed and willing to converse. If it is beneficial to do so, elders should arrange meetings for service in the evening.
 3. How may we show discernment when engaging in evening witnessing?
3 Use Discernment: When sharing in evening witnessing, discernment is important. For example, if you happen to call on someone at an inopportune time, such as during his dinner, it is best to offer to come back later. If it is dark, stand where the householder can see you, and quickly identify yourself and the purpose of your visit. It is also wise to work in pairs or in groups and to stay on well-lit streets where you are not isolated. Do not call so late that you disturb householders preparing to retire for the night. (2 Cor. 6:3) If a neighborhood is unsafe after dark, preach there during the early evening.—Prov. 22:3.
 4. What blessings come from evening witnessing?
4 Blessings: The ministry is far more enjoyable when we are able to give a witness. And the more we are able to witness, the more opportunities we will have to help others to “be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Could you adjust your schedule to share in evening witnessing?

