Use Tracts to Spread the Good News
 1. How have tracts been used by God’s people?
1 Bible tracts have long been used by Jehovah’s people to spread the good news. In 1880, C. T. Russell and his associates began to produce Bible Students’ Tracts, and these were provided to readers of the Watch Tower for distribution to the public. Tracts were considered so important that in 1884 when C. T. Russell registered a non-profit legal corporation for the purpose of furthering Kingdom interests, the word “tract” was included in the name, Zion’s Watch Tower Tract Society, now called the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania. By 1918, more than 300 million tracts had been distributed by the Bible Students. Tracts continue to be an effective witnessing tool.
 2. Why are tracts effective?
2 Why Effective: Tracts are colorful and eye-catching. The concise message they contain is absorbing and informative. They are appealing to householders who may be intimidated by a magazine or a book. Tracts are easy to offer, even by new publishers and children. In addition, tracts are a handy size and easy for us to carry.
 3. Relate a personal or published experience that illustrates the value of tracts.
3 Many first come in contact with the truth by means of a tract. For example, a woman in Haiti noticed one of our tracts on the street. She picked it up, read it, and exclaimed, “I have found the truth!” Eventually, she went to the Kingdom Hall, began studying the Bible, and was baptized—all because of the power of God’s Word found in a tract.
 4. What is our goal when tracts are the offer for the month?
4 From House to House: Since tracts are an effective tool for giving a witness, they will be the offer for the month from time to time, beginning in November. Our goal is not just to hand out tracts but to use the tracts to start conversations. If there is interest on the initial call or on the return visit, we can demonstrate a Bible study by using the Bible Teach book or another study publication. How might we offer tracts from house to house? Each tract is different, so we need to be familiar with those we are offering.
 5. How may we offer tracts from house to house?
5 Our presentation should be tailored to the territory and the tract we are using. We could start the conversation by handing the tract to the householder. The attractive cover may well arouse his interest. Or we could show several tracts and allow the householder to choose what interests him. When working territory where people hesitate to open their door, we could hold the tract where the householder can see the cover, or we might ask to slide something under the door that we would like to get his opinion on. If the title of the tract is a question, we could then ask him to express his opinion on it. Or we can formulate our own question that will arouse interest and stimulate conversation. We could then read a portion of the tract’s contents with the householder, pausing at the questions in the text and inviting the householder to express himself. Key scriptures can be read from the Bible. After considering some of the material, we can conclude the discussion and make definite arrangements to return. If the congregation normally leaves literature at not-at-homes, we may leave a tract out of sight if the householder is not home.
 6. How could tracts be used in street witnessing?
6 Street Witnessing: Have you used tracts in street witnessing? Some passersby are in a hurry and not inclined to stop to converse with us. It may be difficult to determine their level of interest. Instead of handing them the latest magazines without knowing whether they will read them, why not give them a tract instead? Because the cover is appealing and the message is brief, curiosity may move people to read the tract when they have a few minutes. Of course, if they are not in a hurry, we can discuss some of the contents of the tract with them.
 7. Relate experiences showing how to use tracts when witnessing informally.
7 Informal Witnessing: It is easy to witness informally with tracts. One brother puts a few in his pocket whenever he leaves home. When he meets someone, such as a store clerk, he simply offers to give him something to read and hands him a tract. When one couple went to New York City to do some sightseeing, they realized that they would come in contact with people from various countries. So they took along the Nations booklet and several tracts in different languages. Then, when they heard someone speaking in a foreign language who was selling items on the sidewalk or who was sitting near them in the park or in a restaurant, they would offer him a tract in his native tongue.
 8. In what way are tracts like seed?
8 “Sow Your Seed”: Tracts can be likened to seed. A farmer scatters his seed liberally because he does not know which ones will germinate and sprout. Ecclesiastes 11:6 says: “In the morning sow your seed and until the evening do not let your hand rest; for you are not knowing where this will have success, either here or there, or whether both of them will alike be good.” Therefore, may we “keep scattering knowledge” by means of this very effective witnessing tool.—Prov. 15:7.
[Blurb on page 3]
Since tracts are an effective tool for giving a witness, they will be the offer for the month from time to time, beginning in November

