Abound in Love Toward One Another
1 Love is a quality that all true Christians are obligated to have. (1 John 4:11) Within the Christian congregation, brotherly love is being demonstrated. But can we “go on doing it in fuller measure”?—1 Thess. 4:9, 10.
HOW TO DEMONSTRATE LOVE
2 Concern and thoughtfulness are qualities that we all appreciate when they are demonstrated toward us. When we show thoughtfulness to our elderly and our infirm brothers we imitate our God, Jehovah, who highly regards “gray-headedness . . . when it is found in the way of righteousness.” (Prov. 16:31) But how can we show love for these older ones? By picking them up for meetings, visiting them in their home, going shopping for them, running errands, inviting them over to our home for a meal, and so forth. (Gal. 6:10) How about the fatherless boys? Have we shown concern for them lately?
3 Good manners are always in order for true Christians. How refreshing it was to be reminded, in the September 1982, Our Kingdom Ministry, of the need always to manifest good manners! Reviewing this information periodically will help impress it on our mind. Why not discuss it as a family?
4 “Look! Sons are an inheritance from Jehovah,” says the psalmist. (Ps. 127:3) Thus, parents have a weighty responsibility before Jehovah to train their young ones in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah. (Eph. 6:4) These young ones need to learn how to demonstrate love to one another too. Parents need to remind their children always to be respectful, not to run in the Kingdom Hall or put gum or candy on the chairs or on the floor.
5 Since love is so important in the life of all of us, we need to demonstrate it to new ones that are coming into Jehovah’s organization. It is only proper that we give them a warm welcome when they visit the Kingdom Hall. When they are shown sincere interest they see that we are following the command to love one another from the heart. Time and again individuals have written to the Society, expressing appreciation for the love that was shown to them. Can we “widen out” in our heart to include new ones?—2 Cor. 6:13.
6 When brothers or sisters become seriously ill or have family members in the hospital, how do we respond? Our brotherly love will move us to see how we can support them in their time of need.
7 The apostle Peter writes: “Above all things, have intense love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins.” (1 Pet. 4:8-10) The Greek word rendered “intense” means ‘stretched out.’ The love that we should be demonstrating toward our Christian brothers should not be halfhearted, restricted to doing only what we feel we must do, or what we feel will not inconvenience us. Nor should we limit it to just a favored few in the congregation. We also need to back up our love with Christian deeds that will bring lasting blessings to our brothers.
8 By thus responding in love we will be giving others much to say about the God that we worship. As an organization, we are doing well in this. How about each one of us individually? If we need to make some improvements, why not do so now? Then we will truly be imitating our loving God, Jehovah, who has shown the greatest love for us.—John 3:16.

