Announcements
● Literature offer for March: Any two of the older 192-page books listed in February Our Kingdom Ministry, for contribution of $1.00. (See February Our Kingdom Ministry for instructions regarding credit.) April and May: Subscription for The Watchtower on a contribution of $3.50 per year for semimonthly editions, $2.00 for six-month subscriptions and monthly editions. Awake! subscription may also be offered. June and July: “Let Your Kingdom Come” on contribution of 75c. When meeting illiterate persons or poor readers, the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! may be offered on a contribution of 25c.
● We are pleased to announce that a large-print edition of The Watchtower, for the benefit of those with limited eyesight, will be published beginning July 1, 1983. For the present, it will be published only for the United States and only in English. This will be regular magazine size with 32 pages and will contain only the study articles with questions. The price will be the same as for the regular semimonthly edition. It can be ordered by individual subscription or as distributors’ copies sent through the congregation. To order, use the regular Watchtower subscription slip (M-1) or the Distributors’ Order form (M-202) and mark clearly in the upper right-hand corner, “LARGE PRINT.”
● All should carefully study the article “Honor Godly Marriage!” that appears in The Watchtower of March 15, 1983. Direction is given showing the need to avoid being caught up in the permissiveness and unnatural sex perversions that abound in the world today.
● Congregation accounts should be audited by March 1 or as soon as possible thereafter by the presiding overseer or someone appointed by him.
● Questions have been raised as to how long one must wait after a reproof or reinstatement before qualifying for appointment as an auxiliary pioneer. Since all pioneers are required to be exemplary in conduct, this privilege may not be extended to one until at least one year has passed following a reproof or reinstatement from disfellowshipping or disassociation. All restrictions imposed by the judicial committee must already have been removed.
● The Society has produced three new booklets in English for the special purpose of helping people of certain religious backgrounds. The booklet The Time for True Submission to God (sm) is designed to help Muslims to understand the truth. In Search of a Father (sc) has been written for people indoctrinated in the Buddhism of southeast Asia. And, From Kurukshetra to Armageddon—And Your Survival (ku) has been prepared to help persons of Hindu background. Congregations that have English-speaking persons with these backgrounds in their territory may wish to order a small supply of these booklets. As these become available in other languages, announcement will be made.
● New Publications Available:
My Book of Bible Stories—Malayalam, Trukese
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth—Sepedi, Tsonga, Tswana
Bible Topics for Discussion—Cebuano, Tagalog, Turkish
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!—Ewe, Gun, Hausa, Kisi, Otetela, Tahitian, Twi
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1976-1980—French
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Beware of Losing Faith by Drawing Away From Jehovah—Drama (single cassette)—Korean
Kingdom Recordings Album (empty, for 24 cassettes)—Danish, French, German, Italian
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand!—English, Spanish

