How Will You ‘Count Your Days’ in April?
1 A life expectancy of 70 years gives hope of somewhat more than 25,500 days in all. When young, this may seem to be many days, but how quickly they pass! (Ps. 90:10) Even these are not guaranteed to us in this system, as ‘we do not know what our life will be tomorrow.’ (Jas. 4:13-15) Since our days are so few and time is also running out for this world, how appropriate is the prayer of Moses: “Show us just how to count our days in such a way that we may bring a heart of wisdom in.” (Ps. 90:12) Do you desire Jehovah’s help in making the most of each day of your life? Yes, we want to count, or evaluate, our days properly so as to honor Jehovah and benefit our fellow humans.
2 If we have wasted time in the past, we cannot retrieve it. But we can do something about our future if we plan ahead. Thirty precious days lie before us in April. Now is the time to consider how these days can be used to best advantage. Ask yourself: Will these be good days for me? Will I use them wisely? What will I accomplish? Will I do others lasting good? Will Jehovah God be pleased with my use of these days?
WHAT WILL HAPPEN THIS APRIL?
3 Many of Jehovah’s people have found that April is an opportune month to auxiliary pioneer. The weather is often mild, and some have time off from secular work and school due to worldly holidays. Do you remember how many auxiliary pioneers we had in April 1982? In anticipation of last April’s activity, the March 1982, Our Kingdom Ministry, commented: “What a grand witness to Jehovah God we would give this year if at least ten percent, over 55,000 of us, are auxiliary pioneers in April!” What a happy surprise all of us received when we learned that 75,538—over 13 percent—shared in the auxiliary pioneer service! What a fine response to Jehovah’s invitation! But what will happen in April 1983?
4 Can you make it your goal to pioneer as a family during April? Why not talk it over and make it a subject of your united prayers to Jehovah? We are confident you will find that the blessings far outweigh the effort and the sacrifice made. One year in April an entire family decided to share in the pioneer work. The mother was already a regular pioneer. The father had a full-time job and was serving as an elder. Nevertheless, he saw how he could be an auxiliary pioneer by scheduling time during the evenings and on weekends. The three children had school vacation during the first two weeks of April. During the last two weeks they joined their parents in service after school and on weekends. What were the results? They report: “When the family has one goal—that of trying to help as many people as possible within an allotted time—they are all drawn together and there is much more cooperation.” Furthermore, two of the children were thrilled to be able to start Bible studies, and as a family, they devoted 351 hours in Jehovah’s service!
5 As a congregation, what will be your goal for April? Can your congregation surpass the number of auxiliary pioneers of last year? It appears that the 60-hour quota is an achievable one for many publishers if all work together and put their faith in Jehovah God to supply “the power beyond what is normal.” (2 Cor. 4:7) One small congregation of 29 publishers rejoiced to have 12 enrolled as auxiliary pioneers. It was not easy for many of them. Some had the added responsibility of serving as elders or ministerial servants. Several sisters had unbelieving husbands and small children. One was a faithful 70-year-old publisher, not in the best of health. When the month ended, was their faith rewarded? All of them had reached their quota of 60 hours and the group actually averaged 72 hours. During the month they covered their entire territory thoroughly, including not-at-homes, and many other publishers, unable to pioneer, were stimulated to do more. The presiding overseer commented: “This has drawn the congregation closer to Jehovah and to one another.”
6 We recommend that the body of elders include on their elders’ meeting agenda for the month of March a discussion of what can be done to encourage and support the auxiliary pioneer service during April. Some congregations have scheduled additional meetings for service during such special months of activity. For example, besides early morning meetings for service, they have also scheduled afternoon meetings at 3:00 for schoolchildren and then one later around 5:00 p.m. for those who were secularly employed. Also, extra attention may be required to care for the territory and literature needs of those pioneering.
JEHOVAH SHOWS US HOW
7 Jehovah God shows us how to count our days by providing his example of making good use of time. His days are filled with productive work that benefits his creatures. (John 5:17) Imitating him can make each day in April a good one for you and those who listen to you. (1 Tim. 4:16) May they be happy days and may Jehovah add days without number to your lifetime.

