Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 27
Song 83
 5 min: Introduction and local announcements.
20 min: “Showing Appreciation for the Ransom Provision.” Question-and-answer discussion. Read paragraphs as time allows. Highlight benefit of completing suggested Bible reading during Memorial week. Invite comments from congregation as to personal benefits received from doing this.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—With Older Publications.” Talk. Have qualified publisher demonstrate offer using current Topic for Conversation.
 5 min: Encourage support for field service first Sunday of month, March 6. Explain which older books the congregation has in stock and encourage publishers to obtain supplies after close of meeting. Encourage all, including families, to consider auxiliary pioneering during April.
Song 118 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 6
Song 27
 8 min: Introduction, local announcements and Announcements.
 7 min: Discuss Question Box. Highlight need for Bible students to obtain sound foundation spiritually.
10 min: Invite Bible Students to Memorial. Discussion, stressing need to direct Bible students to the organization by personally inviting them to the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal. Have demonstration of qualified publisher inviting student, using special invitation and making arrangements to provide transportation. Speaker stresses need to explain clearly the significance of the occasion, answering student’s questions.
10 min: “Who Should Partake?” Talk by qualified elder based on article from March 15, 1983, Watchtower, page 8, if available. In addition, include points from February 1, 1982, Watchtower, pages 28, 29.
10 min: Interview publishers. How did the home Bible study arrangement help them to learn the truth? What encouraged them to start attending congregation meetings and to participate in the field service? Highlight value of the Bible study arrangement. Speaker encourages all to have full share in magazine activity on second Saturday of month and to be alert to locate sheeplike persons who may desire to study the Bible.
Song 84 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 13
Song 108
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: “Abound in Love Toward One Another.” Talk. When considering paragraph 4, have parent demonstrate key points by discussing with son or daughter importance of showing concern for others.
10 min: Make Good Use of Awake! Feature “Young People Ask . . .” in Training Christian Youths. Talk by qualified elder. Show how feature can provide a basis for family discussion and can help parents to give children counsel and Scriptural direction. Arrange for the following demonstrations:
(3 min.) Two teenagers discuss articles on subject of dating from Awake! issues of June 8 and June 22, 1982, showing how this information helped them.
(3 min.) Father uses information from Awake! issue of March 8, 1983, on subject “How Can I Get Along With Others?” in counseling son on need to get along with other brothers and sisters. Speaker then reviews several subjects and highlights practical value. If time permits, invite brief comments from audience, showing how some benefited from such material.
10 min: Make Memorial Plans Now. Discussion highlighting need for all publishers to make the necessary arrangements in order to attend the Memorial. If your congregation will be meeting early, have you spoken to your employer so that you can leave work early so as not to be late for this most sacred occasion? Have arrangements been made to assist infirm publishers or others who may seldom attend meetings? Encourage all to make definite arrangements now, not waiting until the last minute.
Speaker encourages congregation to make good use of remaining time during month to have an active share in the preaching and disciple-making work. Highlight weekend field service arrangements.
Song 86 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 20
Song 58
10 min: Introduction and local announcements. Briefly demonstrate how to invite relatives to the Memorial. Publisher tactfully asks if relative ever wondered why Jesus Christ had to die. Mentions that Jehovah’s Witnesses will be observing the Memorial of his death on March 29. Comments on last year’s total attendance and warmly invites relative, giving assurance that nothing will be required of him except to observe. No collections taken. Arranges to meet person and go together. Speaker encourages all to talk to family members who are not in the truth and invite them personally.
20 min: “How Will You ‘Count Your Days’ in April?” Question-and-answer coverage. Highlight number of local auxiliary pioneers last April and number that have applied to auxiliary pioneer this April. Inform congregation of any extra meetings for service or other arrangements. Have group of former auxiliary pioneers discuss what they did to reach goal and the spiritual benefits received.
15 min: Prepare for the Memorial and the Subscription Campaign. Talk. Remind congregation that the Memorial of Christ’s death will be observed on Tuesday evening, March 29. Review local arrangements and encourage all to put forth special effort to get others to attend. In addition, congregation will want to make plans to have full share in the subscription campaign during April. All will want to become familiar with Topic for Conversation and contents of April magazines. Encourage all to be optimistic in offering subscriptions during April and May. Make plans now to share in special activity. Invite all to participate in magazine activity on Saturday as this is the fourth Saturday of March.
Song 46 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 27
Memorial—No Service Meeting scheduled.

