Showing Appreciation for the Ransom Provision
1 Due to the sin of our forefather Adam, mankind was in need of a redeemer—a perfect man who could buy back what Adam had lost. Our loving Father, Jehovah, came to our aid by sending his only-begotten Son to this earth. The life force of this mighty spirit creature was miraculously transferred to the womb of Mary. In due time Jesus was born. He grew to manhood and, in line with his heavenly Father’s will, gave his perfect life so that we might live. (Matt. 1:20, 21; John 1:1-3, 14) The effect of his sacrifice was precisely the opposite of that of Adam’s sin.—1 Cor. 15:22.
2 True Christians show appreciation for this ransom provision by exercising faith in Jesus Christ and following in his footsteps. We also manifest appreciation by obeying the Scriptural command to attend the annual celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal. (1 Cor. 11:24) This year Jehovah’s Witnesses throughout the earth will gather for this celebration after sundown on Tuesday evening, March 29.
ADVANCE PREPARATION
3 As outlined in Our Kingdom Ministry last month, elders will want to check carefully to see that necessary advance arrangements have been made. If two or more congregations will be using the same location, they will want to coordinate their efforts.
4 Individually, each one of us will want to take sufficient time to reflect on the significance of this special occasion. Elsewhere in this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry we are including a suggested Bible-reading schedule for the week leading up to the Memorial date. All should carefully consider these verses. It is suggested that, if possible, we read this material as family groups. In addition, some have found it helpful to reflect on other printed material such as pages 917-933 of the Aid book, which reviews the earthly ministry of Jesus Christ as well as his works and personal qualities. By prayerfully considering such material we will come to have a better appreciation of the sacredness of the Lord’s Evening Meal and the ransom provision.
5 Having in mind Jesus’ splendid example of wholehearted service, why not schedule some house-to-house activity for earlier in the day? However, be sure to arrange your affairs that day so that you will be alert during the discourse, listening intently to the speaker, concentrating on the information that is presented. Helpful suggestions on the art of listening were given in the May 1982 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry on pages 3 and 4. You may want to review this information.
INVITE OTHERS TO ATTEND
6 We desire that our Bible students and other interested persons be present with us on this sacred occasion. Therefore, during March we will put forth a special effort to contact them personally, making good use of the Society’s printed invitations. You may be able to invite others by telephone or by writing letters. Make arrangements to provide transportation where appropriate and practical. Some have found it helpful to make a list of all interested persons that should be contacted. Once they have been called on, their names can be checked off. Be warmly enthusiastic when inviting these interested ones. Show them the Scriptural significance of this special occasion. Whet their appetite.
7 We will want to arrive early on Tuesday evening, if possible, so that we can welcome the new and the inactive persons who may come. Make them feel at home and introduce them to others. Invite them to the special public talk that is scheduled for April 10. It is hoped that their attendance at the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal will be a stimulus that will encourage them to associate regularly with the congregation.
8 How many of the more than 4 billion people on earth will come to appreciate their opportunity for everlasting life made possible by the ransom, we do not know. But we are assured that “a great crowd” of people will exercise faith in “the blood of the Lamb” and be saved. (Rev. 7:9, 10, 14) Last year 6,252,787 persons attended the Memorial worldwide! May Jehovah bless our efforts this year as we encourage thousands more to join us in showing appreciation for the ransom provision.

