VOL. XXXI AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Members of Christ's Household 243 

Those Who Constitute the Church of 
the Present Time 243 

Those Who Will Have Their Portion 

With the Hypocrites 244 

Progressive and Completed Justification 246 

"Calleth Those Things Which Be Not 

as Though They Were" 247 

"The Better Sacrifices" 247 

Is Death Extinction? 248 

The Camel and the Needle's Eye 249 

The Blotting Out of Sins 250 

"The Parable of the Talents" 251 

Keeping Ourselves in the Love of God 252 

"Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled" 253 

Brother Russell's Reply to the Slander 253 

Some Interesting Letters 254 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 255 

page 242 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, NY., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTIONS 



LYNN, MASS., AUGUST 14 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10 
o'clock. Discourse for the interested at 7:30 in the evening 
in Castle Hall, opposite City Hall. Discourse for the Public 
by Brother Russell, Olympia Theater, Washington street and 
Central avenue, at 2:30 P.M. Topic: "Hereafter." 

UTICA, N.Y., AUGUST 21 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10:30 
o'clock. Discourse for the interested at 7:30 in the evening 
in Genesee Hall, corner Oneida and Square. Discourse for 
the Public by Bro. Russell at Shubert Theater at 3 P.M. 
Topic: "Hereafter." 

FALL RIVER, MASS., AUGUST 28 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., SEPTEMBER 4 

OLD ORCHARD, ME., SEPTEMBER 11 

DETROIT, MICH., SEPTEMBER 18 



SWEET BRIER ROSE BOOKLET 

These attractive little booklets are specially appropriate 
for enclosing with your correspondence. They contain a 
beautiful commendation of "The Divine Plan of the Ages." 
To facilitate their wide circulation we offer them at an extremely 
low price, $1 (4s. 4d.) per hundred, postpaid. Order 
now! 



R4653 : page 243 



MEMBERS OF CHRIST'S HOUSEHOLD 

THE Church of Christ is an aggregation of individuals 

which may be viewed from different 

standpoints. In the "Divine Plan of 

the Ages" we show on a chart the Gospel 

Age and its various united elements. Above 

the line of consecration are two classes, 

representing the Great Company and the 

Little Flock. Below the line of consecration 

there is another class shown, the justified, 

who do not go on to complete their 

justification by consecration. Under the line or plane of 

justification is shown another class— hangers-on, denominated 

hypocrites. In the further development of the 

chart we show these last two classes— the justified, who 

do not go on to consecration, and the "tares" or hypocrites 

—both as falling away in this day of trouble, called 

the time of the harvest, being separated from the spiritual 

classes, the Little Flock and the Great Company. 

However, during the Gospel Age, the "wheat" and the 
"tares" grow together, and together they represent the 
Kingdom of God, as the Lord Jesus shows in the parable. 
(Matthew 13.) In other words, God speaks of the 
Church as a whole, including in the appellation the baser 
adherents as well as the fully consecrated. 

This is shown again in Revelation, where the Lord 
addresses the Laodicean Church, "Be zealous, therefore, 
and repent. Behold, I stand at the door and knock." 
(Rev. 3:19,20.) He thus indicates that from his viewpoint, 
which is all wisdom, he discerns in his Church 
what we may perhaps partially discern, but could not 
definitely determine and would not be allowed to specify. 
He sees, he determines, which are the fully consecrated, 
and which are not fully consecrated. We could ascertain 
that condition only by inquiry of the individual, and even 
then if he chose to misrepresent his position and to claim 
that he is a consecrated believer, we should not be in 
a position to judge him or decide against his expression, 
except his fruitage betray his words; as the Lord says, 
"By their fruits shall ye know them"— not merely by 
their professions, but by their fruits. But aside from 
any fruits that would be injurious, we are to accept the 
profession of all who claim to be believers and consecrated. 
Hence, if there is an election in the Church, in 
which only the consecrated would be invited to participate 
—and if there are any whose outward conduct is 
moral and who make profession of being consecrated— it 
would not be within our province to sit in judgment upon 
them and condemn them and say that they are not of the 
Church. Rather we should be obligated to accept their 
vote the same as any other. 

THOSE WHO CONSTITUTE THE CHURCH OF THE 
PRESENT TIME 



In a complimentary sense all believers in Christ, who 
are approaching the Lord and who have turned from the 
world and have professed to have fellowship with God's 
consecrated people and who are giving indications of 

R4654 : page 243 

progress in that direction, and to whom the Lord is drawing 
near, may be considered probationary members of the 
Church. So the Lord says unto these, "Draw nigh unto 
me, and I will draw nigh unto you." (Jas. 4:8.) If they 
come together, then, with the Lord's people, the result 
may be their full consecration to the Lord and their begetting 
of the holy Spirit, thereby constituting them New 
Creatures in Christ. If they fail to go on, they fail to 
obtain full justification and the seal of sonship and covenant 
relationship with the Lord. Such will eventually be 
discarded entirely. The Harvest and the sifting process 
—the winnowing of the "chaff" from the "wheat"— will 
blow these away, as the Lord represented in the parable, 
and they will no longer even pretend to be of the true 
Church. The line of demarcation, before the close of the 
Harvest time, will become so distinct that it will leave 
no question as to who are and who are not of the 
Church. 

Coming down, then, more particularly to the difference 
between "the more than conquerors," the "Little 
Flock," and the conquerors, the "Great Company," we recognize 
both of these as being of the Church of Christ, both 
as being represented in the original and preliminary type 
of the Church, viz., the Passover. On that night of passing 
over, which typified this Gospel Age and the passing over 
of "the Church of the First-borns," we find that all the 
first-born of Israel were passed over, and that subsequently 
the Lord exchanged these first-borns for the 
tribe of Levi, including not only the first-born of every 
family of that tribe, but all the Levites; and so all of the 
Levite class are passed over. And the types further 
show us that both the Little Flock, the Royal Priesthood, 
and the Great Company, the antitypical Levites, are "the 
household of faith," both constituting the "Church of the 
First-born, which are written in heaven" (Hebrews 12:23); 

R4654 : page 244 

and, if not blotted out, their names will continue 

there, and they will have part in the heavenly inheritance. 

THE ANTITYPICAL TWELVE TRIBES OF ISRAEL 

The share of each of the above classes in the heavenly 
inheritance is shown in Revelation 7, where, first, the 
Little Flock is spoken of as constituting Israel— the 
twelve tribes of Israel. Those of the Jewish nation who 
maintained their relationship with God were not broken 



off from that position, but instead, were transferred from 
natural Israel and became the nucleus of spiritual Israel. 
Inasmuch as this left many of the designed number yet 
to be provided for, God arranged, as had been shown 
through the prophets would be done, that the deficiency 
should be supplied from amongst the Gentiles. So, then, 
the work of this Gospel Age has been to fill up those 
twelve tribes with Gentiles to take the places of the Jews 
who were broken off from that special place or plane of 
privilege. And we, if we make our calling and election 
sure, shall be of these twelve tribes, though we may not 
know to which tribe we shall be assigned. 

To illustrate: A man enlisting here in New York 
for military service might be sent to one or another of 
the different regiments to be filled up from time to time; 
so with us. The Lord in his providence fills up these 
tribes of Israel, the whole number being stipulated to be 
12,000 for each tribe, or 144,000 altogether. It might 
make no particular difference to us to which tribe we belong, 
and yet there is a bare possibility that since our 
Lord is "the Lion of the Tribe of Judah," there may be 
some special gradation suggested in this tribe; so this 
Royal Priesthood may be divided into twelve different 
classes. 

There is no revelation on this subject, and it behooves 
us "not to be wise above that which is written"; 
but since these tribes had different standings, as shown 
in the prophecies made respecting them, so there is 
seemingly quite a possibility that there will be twelve different 
stations or ranks among the saints. 

THE GREAT COMPANY 

Aside from the special class of overcomers, the "more 
than conquerors," as the Apostle calls them, those who 
voluntarily and willingly lay down their lives, presenting 
their bodies living sacrifices, and carrying out that consecration 
to sacrifice— aside from these, there is a large 
number of consecrated people of God. We do not know 
their number, which has not been predestinated, as is 
shown in Revelation— "Whose number no man knoweth." 
All are called to the Priesthood; all consecrate to be 
priests, but failing to make their calling and election sure 
as Priests, many of these fall back into this Great Company 
class, who not only made a consecration, but were 
begotten of the holy Spirit, and are, therefore, the Lord's, 
his children on the spirit plane. These are such as did 
not draw back in the sense in which the Apostle speaks 
when he says, "If any man draw back, my soul shall have 
no pleasure in him." We understand the Apostle here to 
mean a drawing back unto perdition— the words, "draw 
back," signifying to do despite to all the favors of God, 
to lose all relationship with the Lord, to turn back to 
wallowing in the mire of sin and to take pleasure in the 
works of the flesh and the devil— anger, malice, hatred, 
envy, strife. 



This Great Company, however, while failing to go 
forward voluntarily and gladly to perform their sacrifices, 
as they had covenanted to do, will not be cast away, because 
they are still at heart faithful to the Lord; but they 
will be dealt with in a special manner by the great Redeemer, 
the Head of the Church. His dealing with them 
will be, as Scripturally shown, to send them away "into 
the wilderness," into a great "time of trouble," where 
they will have special and severe testings, which will 
demonstrate their character definitely; and where they 
must give up their lives. Either they will renounce the 
things of the Lord and forsake him, or they will desire 
to be faithful to the Lord and to hold fast to him. If 
they thus hold fast they will be counted of that Great 
Company of whom the Revelator says (Rev. 7), "After 
this I beheld and, lo, a Great Company out of all nations 
and peoples and kindreds and tongues, stood before 
the throne. And the angel said unto me, Who are 
these? And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest; and he 
said, These are they which have come up out of the 
great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made 
them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are 
they before the throne of God and serve him day and 
night in his temple"; and palm branches were given unto 
them. 

Here we see a wide distinction between this Great 
Company of spirit-begotten ones, ultimately overcomers, 
who will be "before the throne" and have palm branches, 
palms of victory, and who will have washed their robes 
and made them white during the time of trouble, and 
the Little Flock who will sit with the Lord in his throne 
and who, instead of bearing palm branches of victory, 
will have the crowns of glory; and, instead of serving 
in the Temple, will be the Temple itself. As it is written 
of the "more than conquerors," "I will make him a pillar 
in the temple of my God."— Rev. 3:12. 

The differentiation, or separation, between these two 
classes in the "Church of the First-born" is marked, as 
indicated by the Lord's parable of the Wise and Foolish 
Virgins— a parable which, by the description, we see is 
applicable in the end of this Age. According to this 
parable certain tests will come and some will be found 
"watching" with their lamps trimmed and burning, and 
will be listening to hear the Bridegroom's call, and will 
go forth, braving opposition and hostility and darkness 
of the night through which they must pass, to go with 
their beloved Bridegroom to his home and enter in. 
When the last one of these Wise Virgins shall have gone 
in, we are told that the door will be shut, by which we 
understand that the door of privilege to enter that class 
will be closed to all the rest of mankind. But we are to 
remember that the entire ten virgins represent the Kingdom 
of Heaven, or, in other words, the Church. Hence 
a part of that Church is shut out when the door is closed. 
Not merely is the world shut out, but the Foolish Virgins 
also, who, however, are not to be counted with the 



world, because they are "Virgins." They are Virgins who 
have been associated with the Wise Virgins, and for a 
time without any distinction being apparent, but who 
in the testing time are not found worthy to be of the 
Bride class. 

THOSE WHO WILL HAVE THEIR PORTION WITH 
THE HYPOCRITES 

These Foolish Virgins, the parable shows us, will 
finally learn the way. They will get the oil and will trim 
their lamps. In other words, they will receive a larger 
measure of the holy Spirit, represented by the oil, and 
will have clearer enlightenment from the Word of God, 
represented by the lamp. They will trim their lamps and 
go forth then, that they, also, may enter into the Marriage; 
but they will find that the Wise Virgins have all 
gone in and that the door is shut. Then they will stand 

R4654 : page 245 

without and knock, saying, "Lord, Lord, open unto us" 
(Matt. 25: 1 1); we desire also to be of the Bride class; 
we desire also to enter the heavenly glory. The Lord will 
answer them, however, and say, "I know you not." I 
do not recognize you. I recognize only one "Bride." 
My Bride class has already entered in, and I cannot 
recognize others as the Bride. These shall then go away 
into the time of trouble to wash their soiled robes and 
make them white. 

This time of trouble, we understand, is the great 
"time of trouble" that is coming upon the world. It will 
also be upon this Great Company class, which will not 
"be accounted worthy to escape those things coming upon 
the earth." The Lord admonishes us prophetically that 
there would be some such; and he warns us saying, "Pray 
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all those 
things that shall come to pass and to stand before the 
Son of Man." (Luke 21:36.) The Little Flock watches 
and escapes and will stand before the Son of Man approved 
and will be received as the Bride of Christ. But 
this Great Company, although they are consecrated and 
spirit-begotten, and have never denied the Lord, have not, 
nevertheless, the proper zeal and spirit of self-sacrifice 
and will not be permitted to enter in with the Bride class, 

R4655 : page 245 

but will be thrust out and "have their portion with the 
hypocrites." 

These are not hypocrites, however, but since the time 
of trouble is properly for hypocrites, they will have their 
portion with the hypocrites. The parable shows us nothing 
further respecting these, but we are shown elsewhere 
(Rev. 7) that in that time of trouble they "will wash 
their robes and make them white in the blood of the 



Lamb." As a result they will be granted the palm 
branches and the place before the throne, to serve God in 
his Temple. 

"THE KING'S DAUGHTER--THE VIRGINS, HER COMPANIONS, 
THAT FOLLOW" 

The same thought we find given us in Psalm 45, where 
the end of this age is pictured. There our Lord is shown 
as the great King in glory. The Church, the Little Flock, 
is pictured as the Bride, and the Great Company, as her 
virgin companions, that follow her. We are also told in 
that connection that the Bride will have special adornment, 
special beauty, and will have the special place of 
preference. Another Scripture tells us that there is but 
one Bride of Christ, saying, "My dove, my undefiled, is 
but one; she is the only one of her Mother." (Cant. 6:9.) 
Reverting to Psalm 45 again: We are told that 
after the Bride, adorned in golden raiment and fine linen, 
is received by the King, the Virgins, her companions, 
shall also be brought before the King and shall enter into 
the Palace. This is in perfect agreement with the custom 
of olden times, that when a wife was taken, the 
father would present with the wife, a maid-servant, who 
would accompany her mistress and would necessarily be 
associated with her. Sometimes more than one maid-servant 
would be presented, as pictured in this Psalm. 
Now, if a Bridegroom were alluding to his family, while 
he would speak of only the one person as his wife, he 
would include as a part of his family or household her 
maid-servants. So likewise in this family of Christ. 
Not only is the Bride to be the Body of Christ, the 
Bride of Christ, and joint-heir with him, but the Virgins, 
her companions that follow her, will be members 
of his general family or household, honorable servants, 
but not on the plane of the Bride, who will share the glory, 
the honor and the nature of the Bridegroom. 

NEITHER PRIESTS NOR LEVITES HAD INHERITANCE 
IN THE LAND 

In the type of the Priesthood, and the Levites, Aaron 
and his sons constituted the Priesthood, and only these 
had to do with the offering on the Day of Atonement, and 
only these had special rights and privileges. Neither 
Priests nor Levites, however, had inheritance in the land 
with the others. (Num. 18:20; Deut. 18:1,2). Thus again 
was shown the fact that this Great Company, represented by 
the Levites, as well as the Little Flock, represented by the 
Priests, will have no inheritance in the earthly promises, 
in the earthly possession, in the earthly restitution. 
Their inheritance will be on the spirit plane, separate and 
distinct from all the remainder of the world, which will 
then come into blessing under the Royal Priesthood and 
this company of Levites or instructors. In the case of the 
Levites, we remember that they were set apart to serve 



the Tabernacle. The Great Company are said to serve in 
the Temple, and the Priest Class, the Little Flock, we 
have said before, are the Temple. In other words, the 
Great Company class will be the servant-class on the 
spirit plane; so it was in the type. The Lord said to Aaron 
that he had given all the Levites to be servants of the 
priests in their ministry; so the two figures correspond. 

Coming down then finally to the question, we see that 
in the present time it is not pertinent for us to attempt too 
closely to decide who will be of the Bride Class and who 
will be of the Great Company, as all are of the Ecclesia; 
but, as the Scriptures say, to "walk humbly," lest we ourselves 
should not be accounted worthy of the great prize. 
It is for us to trust that we may be amongst those "more 
than conquerors," who by zealously laying down their 
lives in a sacrificial manner shall be reckoned worthy to 
be of the Royal Priesthood— to "sit with him in his throne, 
even as he also overcame and is set down with the Father 
in his throne." 

Considering the Church, then, as those who will ultimately 
be accepted as of the Priesthood, it consists of the 
Bride class alone and no others; however, from another 
viewpoint, we may speak of the entire household of faith, 
including both the Great Company and the Little Flock, 
the real Church of the First-born, as an ti typical Levites. 
The Apostle speaks of the Church in its present condition, 
saying, "Ye are a Royal Priesthood," referring, of course, 
to what is the ultimate aim, the ultimate hope set before 
us all, whether we make our "election sure" or not. 
Again the Apostle Paul speaks of the Church and likens 
it to the members of the human body, saying, "The eye 
cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; neither 
the head to the foot, I have no need of thee"; for every 
member is necessary. (I Cor. 12:21.) We understand 
the Apostle here to be speaking of all of the consecrated, 
and not specially differentiating between the Little Flock 
and the Great Company. Indeed, we are not at present 
competent to form such a distinction or such a classification. 
That is decidedly the Lord's work during this 
time in which we are living, the harvest time, and he will 
separate those who are sacrificers from those who are 
not sacrificers. 

"Up, then, and linger not, thou saint of God, 
Fling from thy shoulders each impeding load; 
Be brave and wise, shake off earth's soil and sin, 
That with the Bridegroom thou mayest enter in. 
O watch and pray! 

"Gird on thy armor; face each weaponed foe; 
Deal with the sword of heaven the deadly blow; 
Forward, still forward, till the prize divine 
Rewards thy zeal, and victory is thine; 
Win thou the crown!" 



R4656 : page 246 

PROGRESSIVE AND COMPLETED JUSTIFICATION 

THE Court and the Tabernacle may properly 
be viewed from two different standpoints, 
the one representing the final accomplishment 
of the things typified and the other 
representing the tentative accomplishment 
of those things and the progress toward 
their full attainment. For instance, not 
every one who makes the consecration to 
death and passes beyond the first vail of 
consecration into the holy or spirit-begotten 
condition will be a Priest, and yet only the Priests were 
allowed in the Tabernacle. Those who come into this 
Tabernacle now by consecration and fail to become 
Priests will fail to keep their standing in this place. They 
purpose to live up to their consecration, but come short; 
hence they fail to maintain their standing as Priests, but 
fall back and become Levites. 

Likewise some come into the Court and essay to 
be antitypical Levites who do not attain to all the privileges 
of Levites because they do not conform their lives 
fully to all that is required of Levites. Such are reckoned 
as coming into the Court condition for a time, but, failing 
to go on and make consecration, lose their standing, the 
prospective standing of Levites. As it is only a tentative 
standing, originally, they must come up to certain requirements 
to make it sure, to make their selection as Levites 
firm, positive, lasting. 

STEPS NECESSARY TO BECOME A LEVITE 

Whoever takes the first step of belief and turns from 
sin and approaches the altar, and then goes on toward 
the laver, is certainly evidencing the fact that he desires 
to be one of the Levite class; but he is a member of this 
Levite class, as yet, only in this tentative or prospective 
sense. The Levites must go further than merely believing 
in Christ and turning from sin. Every Levite must figuratively 
receive the anointing oil on his ear, his thumb 
and the great toe of his right foot. He must make his 
consecration the same as that of the priests; he must be 
fully consecrated in order to serve. The person, therefore, 
who has merely turned away from sin and has 
in antitype received no recognition of the holy Spirit either 
upon his ear, thumb or toe, has not become, in the fullest 
sense, a Levite and if he does not go on and become a 
Levite in full he will not, by and by, have a right to 
any place in the Court condition— when the testing time 
shall prove that he has not gone on to make good, to 
accomplish, his consecration as a Levite. 

What, then, is necessary to become a Levite? We 
answer: The same consecration is necessary to a Levite 



that is necessary to a Priest, and those who will become 

Levites must make the consecration even unto death, and, 

if they fail to become Priests, it is because they do not 

carry out that consecration unto death. But though 

losing their position as Priests, if they still maintain 

their faith and a measure of obedience, they are counted 

as of the household of faith, typified by the Levites. In 

other words, the "Great Company" class is the Levite class, 

and no one can be of the "Great Company" class unless 

he has made a consecration; and he is counted an antitypical 

Levite only because of his failure to be of the 

priestly class, the sacrificing class. Those who never 

go on so far as to make a consecration, never get justification 

in full in the present life. Their hope will be 

the same as that of the remainder of the world, viz., a 

hope of actual justification during the Millennial Age 

—Restitution. In other words, this matter of faith-justification 

is merely an incidental feature connected with 

the consecration to death— for the selection of this special 

class which is now being called. To impute justification 

to any except these would be greatly to their 

disadvantage. 

CHRIST'S MERIT NOT IMPUTED BEFORE 
CONSECRATION 

To use an illustration: Suppose that Brother A had 
full justification accounted to him and was introduced 
to the Father, and suppose that Brother A then failed 
to maintain his justified standing; the result would be that 
he would fall into the Second Death, because he had had, 
in this faith-justification, all that Christ could give him; 
there would be nothing more to give him by and by. He 
could not come in with the world and get a share in the 
world's justification. Therefore the Lord has arranged 
that none shall have this complete faith-justification now 
except those who first turn from sin and believe in the 
Lord Jesus Christ and who, on the strength of that turning 
from sin and faith in Christ, present their bodies 
living sacrifices to God. God's arrangement for such is 
that Christ shall then step in, and that which they had 
been enjoying in a measure, previously, as regards relationship 
to God, etc., is brought to its actual fulness when 
Christ imputes his merit to that which they have fully 
consecrated to death— their earthly life, their earthly 
nature. He imputes his merit to them at the moment of 
their having presented themselves; and at that moment 
the Father accepts the sacrifice and seals or shows his 
acceptance by the impartation of the holy Spirit, begetting 
them to the new nature. So, then, none now get justification 
in this full sense except those who have made the 
consecration and been accepted, and they can never regain 
the earthly rights because these were given up. 

To suppose that any during this age would be justified 
and maintain merely justification, while others would be 
sanctified, would be to suppose that God had called two 



classes, which he has not done— "Ye are all called in the 
one hope of your calling" and that one hope and that one 
calling of the Church is to membership in Christ, to be 
of the Royal Priesthood. 

Those who merely believe and fail to lay down their 
earthly life, their earthly nature, will not get the new 
nature, and therefore will have all the rights of that 
earthly nature by and by, during the Millennial Age, 
under the terms and conditions that God has provided for 
all mankind. They still belong to the human family, for 
whom Christ died. When the time shall come for him 
to make application of his merit on behalf of Israel, and 
all the families of the earth who become Israelites, these 
will be included. The only ones not included in this will 
be those who during this Gospel Age have accepted Christ 
by faith and have made consecration of themselves and, 
having died to all earthly interests, are begotten of the 
holy Spirit. Everyone else will have a share in the 
Restitution provisions of God's great plan, which will go 
into effect as soon as the High Priest shall make the 
second sprinkling of blood antitypically on behalf of 
Israel and the world. 

Is it not true, then, someone may ask, that no one 
passes from death unto life until he has made his consecration 
and has his justification vitalized? Yes, we 
answer. No one passes "from death unto life" until 
he makes his consecration and until Christ imputes his 
merit to that consecration and the Father accepts it. 
Then he passes "from death unto life." As the Apostle 
says, "Hereby we know that we have passed from death 
unto life, because we love the brethren" and he evidently 
is speaking of the Church class exclusively. 

R4657 : page 247 

"CALLETH THOSE THINGS WHICH BE NOT AS 
THOUGH THEY WERE" 

And, again, someone may ask, how can we understand 
the following in connection with the foregoing— "God is 
not the God of the dead but of the living"? (Luke 20:38.) 
Our Lord was not speaking of things as they are actually, 
but he was looking down prophetically to the end of the 
Age. At the time this was said, we remember, the Lord was 
referring to God's statement that he was "the God of 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob." (Rom. 4:17.) Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob were dead; they were members of Adam's 
condemned race and were in the tomb and Christ had not 
yet died; therefore, they had not been justified to life 
and Jehovah's words were to be understood merely in a 
prophetic sense— that, in view of what he intended to do, 
these would have life and that he was their God, for he 
could not speak of himself as being the God of any who 
would be destroyed in the Second Death, those who would 
die like a brute beast.— 2 Pet. 2:12. 

From the time we begin to approach God we may have 



proportionately a sense of relief, because we realize that 

he is merciful and gracious; and the Scriptures assure us 

that in proportion as we draw near to him, he will draw 

near to us. This is the attitude of all those who are 

approaching God, "feeling after God if haply they may 

find him," and who desire to know God and to do his will 

and to be in harmony with him. They have a measure of 

peace, a measure of joy, a measure of blessing. They are 

going in the right direction; but it is one thing to go in 

the right direction and another to reach the right spot; 

they do not reach the right spot until they have gone all 

the way to full faith and full obedience and the acceptance 

of the Lord's provision, that if they would be his disciples, 

followers of him, they must "take up their cross" and 

walk in his steps, and, as the Apostle says, present their 

bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable unto God, 

their reasonable service. Of this class it could be truly 

said, "There is, therefore, now no condemnation to them 

that are in Christ Jesus." (Rom. 8:1.) They are in 

Christ Jesus in the sense of coming into this relationship 

of begetting of the Spirit and of being members of his 

Body. These are walking, not after the flesh, but after 

the Spirit, because they have been begotten of the holy 

Spirit. The others who turn from sin to God, but who 

never make consecration, are still under the Adamic condemnation 

because they have never "escaped the condemnation 

that is on the world," for there is only one way 

now in which we can escape and that is through the 

arrangement of this Gospel Age that we shall not only 

believe but consecrate. Thus we have the impartation of 

Christ's merit. 



R4655 : page 247 

"THE BETTER SACRIFICES" 



"For if the blood of bulls and of goats and the ashes of an heifer 
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the 
flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through 
the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, 
purge your conscience from dead works 
to serve the living God?"— Heb. 13:14. 

MOSES took the blood and sprinkled it both 
upon the Book of the Law and upon all 
the people, for the institution of the Law 
Covenant. And this was repeated year by 
year, the repetition being necessary to 
maintain the cleansing and their Covenant 
relationship with God. 

That a cleansing of a certain kind was 
accomplished is evident, because the nation 
which at the beginning of the Day of 
Atonement was counted unclean— the people being commanded 



to repent in sackcloth and ashes and to fast and 
to "eat no pleasant food"— were thus symbolically represented 
as being in great distress through sin and Divine 
condemnation until the close of this day, when the High 
Priest came out and blessed the prostrated multitudes and 
they arose with a shout of joy. This institution of the 
Law Covenant at the hand of Moses and the repetition 
of it year by year by the priests of Israel, produced a 
cleansing effect in the sense that as a nation they were 
reckoned clean, as being justified for that year, which 
began with the Day of Atonement and would last 360 
days, or until the following Day of Atonement. 

But all the while the people of Israel realized that 
they were not actually cleansed from sin; that there was 
merely a covering of their sins for the year, and that this 
was the reason why, when the year was past, it was necessary 
for them to recognize again their defilement, individually 
and collectively, and to make use afresh of the 
provisions for sin-cleansing. 

THE GREATER SACRIFICES THAN THOSE OF BULLS 
AND GOATS 

The Apostle here goes on to show that the basis for 
that reconciliation was the sacrifice represented by the 
blood, and that this, being efficacious with God— a certain 
typical merit attaching to that typical sacrifice— it 
would be an easy matter for them to understand that he 
had now, as shown in the text, provided a better sacrifice; 
that a larger value attached to this greater sacrifice, 
and that this would be sufficient— not to typically cleanse 
the people and bring them back into a temporary reconciliation 
with God, but sufficient also to establish them 
fully and completely in the Divine favor. 

This greater arrangement, then, is that Christ had 
offered himself through the eternal spirit to God, and 
this, to all who rightly accept him, cleanses from all consciousness 
of sin. We realize that it is not a covering 
for a moment, or for a day, or for a year, but a permanent 
covering, through faith, of all of our sins that are 
past. We have the basis for this in the fact that we are 
drawn of the Father and invited to approach him. When 
we do this and believe in Christ, God approaches us and 
thus he recognizes our step of justification; and when 
we come fully to him and give him our hearts, this Great 
One, who has offered himself as a Better Sacrifice, 
appears as our Advocate, to the intent that we may be 
accepted of the Father as members of Christ's Body- 
as members of the Bride class. He then applies the merit 
of his sacrifice on our behalf to make up for our Adamic 

R4656 : page 247 

sin and imperfection, that we may be acceptable sacrifices. 
Thenceforth our flesh, which is reckoned justified 
fully and freely through faith in Christ and consecration, 



is considered dead— "Ye are dead, and your life is 
hid with Christ in God."— Col. 3:3. 

And not only is the flesh counted dead, but the New 
Creature alone is thenceforth recognized of God. The 
New Creature is not the old creature; it has a new 
standing and is not responsible for the sins that are past, 
because those were all canceled when the old creature 
was accepted as a "living sacrifice" in conjunction with 
the merit of the Advocate. Hence the New Creature has 

R4656 : page 248 

a consciousness of absolute forgiveness of the sins of his 
mortal flesh reckoned dead— for "there is no condemnation 
to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after 
the flesh but after the spirit."— Rom. 8:1. 

If he should turn again to walk after the flesh he 
would incur condemnation as a New Creature. For the 
New Mind to turn wilfully to sin would imply that it had 
died, and that the Old Mind had come to life again. Such 
are "twice dead— plucked up by the roots," as the Apostle 
says (Jude 12); they have ceased to have any relationship 
with God. All who are consecrated and begotten of the 
holy Spirit and who are abiding in the Lord Jesus through 
faith, seeking to walk in his footsteps, are privileged to 
know that their sins are forgiven and that nothing in the 
past can in any sense stand against them. As the Apostle 
says, "Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that 
died;" yea, "It is God that justifieth." (Rom. 8:34,33.) 
The very One who "condemned sin in the flesh" has 
accepted us as New Creatures, has justified us and admitted 
us to his family as members (prospectively) of 
the Royal Priesthood. 

The typical yearly cleansing of the Jews was not a 
faith-cleansing; it was an actual condition of things. God 
treated them, as a people, from that standpoint. They 
had privileges and favors which they would not have had, 
had they been Gentiles. "What advantage hath the Jew? 
Much every way, but chiefly because to them were committed 
the oracles of God" (Rom. 3:1,2), and because of 
God's arrangement that if they committed a trespass the 
priest would offer a peace offering for them and cleanse 
them. All these were blessings and opportunities which 
they had as Jews by virtue of their covenant relationship 
established through Moses. But since their rejection of 
the Messiah that nation has had no relationship with 
God. They have been cut off completely from favor and 
"wrath has come upon this people to the uttermost."— 
I Thess. 2:16. 

But, God be thanked, we now see that their long period 
of disfavor and casting off is about ended, and they 
will soon be re-engrafted into the olive tree, from which, 
through unbelief, they were broken off (Rom. 1 1:17-24), 
and shall again share the fatness thereof, and, under the 
Christ glorified, will bring blessings to all the families of 
the earth. 



R4657 : page 248 

IS DEATH EXTINCTION? 

THE spark of animal energy which God supplied 

to Adam and which he in turn dispensed 

to his offspring and which was forfeited 

for him and his posterity by his act 

of disobedience, passes at death from the 

individual, as absolutely as it does from a 

brute beast. But the word "life" as used in 

a large number of instances does not stand 

merely for the spark of animal energy, but 

is a synonym for soul or being. 

In God's purpose and arrangement this being has not 
in death become extinct, because he has provided for it a 
future. There is, however, no sentient being in the sense 
of consciousness, or knowledge, or appreciation of pain or 
joy, or of any other experience, but the Divine Creator 
who first gave being has declared that in the case of Adam 
and his children it is his purpose to provide a Redeemer 
through whom all may be restored as completely as before 
they came under the death sentence. The world, 
which does not recognize God or his power, and which 
has no knowledge of the promise of resurrection through 
the merit of Christ's redemptive work, might properly 
enough speak of one in death as being as extinct as a 
dead animal; and this is the standpoint of the agnostic; 
but by believers instructed of God respecting his purpose 
in Christ, and the resurrection of the dead, eventually, 
and the opportunity of eternal life to every one, this matter 
is to be viewed from the same standpoint that our 
Lord viewed it when he said, "To God all are alive"— 
that is, God purposes their awakening, and speaks of the 
present condition of Adamic death as merely a suspension 
of life, and not as extinction. 

WAS CHRIST EXTINCT DURING THE PERIOD OF 
HIS DEATH? 

It may be asked, Was not our Lord extinct from the 
time of his death until his resurrection? The Scriptures 
tell us that the man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom 
for all— a corresponding price. Again they tell us that 
"Christ died for our sins," and that he "arose again on 
the third day." But we do not understand that the One 
who arose was the same in all particulars as the One who 
died. He was "put to death in flesh"; he was "quickened 
(made alive) in spirit." In his case, therefore, the matter 
may be viewed from these two standpoints, viz., he died 
in the flesh, as a man, and as a man has never come to 
life again, and he never intends to use again, for himself, 
those manhood qualities. He has been raised from the 



dead a Spirit— "Now the Lord is that Spirit"— and this 
glorious Spirit Being whom "God has highly exalted and 
given a name above every name," is the One who will 
ultimately bless the world; he has the authority to do this 
great work in due time. 

This power and authority rest in the fact of his sacrifice. 
The manhood that he laid down, in death, relinquished, 
he is to give ultimately to Adam and all his race 
in harmony with the Apostle's statement that "as by man 
came death, by man will come also the resurrection of the 
dead," and "as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall 
be made alive," all who will come into relationship and 
harmony with God, through Christ, during this age or 
the Millennial Age. 

We see that the Church, the Body of Christ, has now 
the imputed merit of his sacrifice to cover all its imperfections 
and blemishes, enabling them to offer a sacrifice 
acceptable to God, holy in his sight, that we, by suffering 
with our Lord, might be accounted worthy to reign with 
him. 

We see that God's arrangement was that our Lord 
Jesus should first sacrifice his human nature at Jordan. 
He was reckoned dead from that time forward, throughout 
the three and a half years of his ministry, as well as 
during the three days he was in the tomb. He was dead 
so far as his earthly life was concerned, for he had fully 
surrendered this. At the time he made his consecration 
God gave him the holy Spirit and the Scriptures explain 
that this impartation of the holy Spirit signified a 
begetting of the spirit to a new life; in other words, that 
a new life there began. That new life developed during 
the three and a half years; and so with us. From the time 
we make our consecration and receive the begettal of the 
holy Spirit, this new life develops and progresses, only 
that with our Lord the progress was much more rapid 
in the graces, in all knowledge and harmony with the 
Father and in the development of himself as a New 
Creature and in enduring all the necessary tests and 
trials, because we are handicapped by the imperfections 
of the flesh, while he was perfect. 

R4657 : page 249 

THE LIFE OF THE FLESH VS. THE LIFE OF THE NEW 
CREATURE 

But as it is true with us that the New Creature thrives 
in proportion as the old creature dies, so it was with our 
Lord Jesus. He was coming nearer to perfection as a 
New Creature with every trial and every victory. He 
was approaching that standard which the Father would 
approve in the great High Priest and Head of the New 
Creation, until, at the time of his death, his words were, 
"It is finished"— his sacrificing of the flesh was finished, 
and that life which he had consecrated to sacrifice three 
and one-half years before and which was reckoned as 



passed away at that time, actually ceased on the cross. 
The New Creature was not brought forth in the birth of 
the resurrection, until the third day, but it was there in 
the Divine sight; it was "not possible that he should 
be holden of death." The whole matter was in harmony 
with the Divine plan. As he was born from the dead on 
the third day he must have been begotten previous to that 
birth, and his begetting was, as we have seen, at Jordan, 
when the Spirit of God was seen descending in the form 
of a dove. 

So, then, coming to the direct question, there are two 
standpoints of viewing the whole matter and to ignore 
either would not be wise. That physically our Lord died, 
lost the spark of life and all conscious existence as absolutely 
as any others lose it, or as any brute beast ever lost 
it, there can be no doubt. But the important point is as 
respects his soul or being. He never forfeited his right 
to life and it was when he made a consecration of it to 
death that the Father gave him the new life, and this 
resurrection life he lived during the three and one-half 
years of his ministry. The New Creature was counted 
alive from the Divine standpoint, as in the type he is 
pictured as the great High Priest in the Holy, offering 
incense. Just so it is with us, his followers. We are 
counted as risen with him from the time we make our 
consecration and are begotten of the holy Spirit. We are 
not only dead with him, but we shall reign with him, and 
we are risen with him through faith in the operation of 
God's power. If we were to lose faith in this operation 
of God's power we would then be taking our place with 
the world, for they ignore this power. It is for us to 
maintain the standpoint of faith, and, while recognizing 
the facts as respects the real spark of life and its extinction, 
to recognize also the Lord's Word and to count, 
as does God, the things that are not yet completed as 
though they were accomplished. 

page 249 

"God moves in a mysterious way 

His wonders to perform; 
He plants his footsteps in the sea, 

And rides upon the storm. 

Deep in unfathomable mines 

Of never failing skill, 
He treasures up his bright designs 

And works his sovereign will. 

His purposes will ripen fast, 

Unfolding every hour; 
The bud may have a bitter taste, 

But sweet will be the flower. 

Blind unbelief is sure to err, 
And scan his work in vain; 



God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain. 



R4658 : page 249 

THE CAMEL AND THE NEEDLE'S EYE 

--AUG. 7.-MATT. 19:13-26.- 

Golden Text:— "Jesus said, Suffer little children to come unto me 
and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven." 

EN ROUTE toward Jerusalem the Master was 

met by mothers desiring to have his blessing 

upon their children. The Apostles, 

realizing the greatness of their Master and 

the importance of his time, forbade this 

and rebuked the mothers. When Jesus 

heard, he called them and said: "Suffer 

little children, and forbid them not, to come 

unto me; for such is the kingdom of 

heaven," and he put his hands in blessing upon their 

heads. 

From this we are not to understand that the Kingdom 
of Heaven will be composed of little children. This 
erroneous idea has gone broadcast, and such an impression 
respecting the Kingdom has thus resulted. On the 
contrary, no little children can get into the Kingdom. 
Only those who have the hearing of faith are even 
"called" to the Kingdom and its glories. Our Lord's 
blessing upon little children merely signified his sympathy 
and love and his appreciation of the purity and innocence 
of childhood. Those who will be of the Kingdom 
of God must be like little children in the sense of being 
simple hearted, true, honest and trustful of their heavenly 
Father— of such-like will be the inheritors of the 
Kingdom. 

Another account tells us of Jesus' further words to 
the effect that all who would be his disciples must become 
as little children— must be like little children in 
guilelessness, faith, etc. But those who will be heirs of 
the Kingdom will all be "overcomers." Such take up 
their cross and follow the Lord whithersoever he leadeth. 
As our Lord could not have taken up his cross when he 
was a boy of nine, so likewise children cannot become the 
followers of Christ in the Scriptural sense until they 
have reached the age of discretion, which with some 
may occur much earlier than with others. We have 
known children of twelve years or thereabouts to give 
excellent evidence of faith, obedience and consecration 
to the Lord's will and evidence of being begotten of the 
holy Spirit. These, of course, but no other children, 
could have hope of sharing with Christ in his Millennial 
Kingdom. 



THE YOUNG NOBLEMAN'S TEST 

On his journey our Lord was accosted by one who 
said, "Good Master, what good things shall I do that I 
may have eternal life?" He had the right idea, namely, 
that eternal life is the grand desideratum, the grand 
hope of all hopes before the human family. We are glad 
of the question, for it brought forth the inspired answer, 
in which everybody is interested. What is the value of 
the present life, except as it leads us up the passageway 
to eternal life? How utterly lost we should feel if assured 
that at death we would be blotted out forever! 
How little in this life would be worth consideration- 
how little it could do toward filling the longing of our 
hearts, which yearn for eternal life! 

Our Lord parried the question, in order to draw out 
the young man and make him commit himself. "Why 

R4658 : page 250 

do you call me good?" Why do you acknowledge me as 
a good teacher? I am either the Messiah, as I claim, or 
else an impostor and far from good. Do you accept my 
Messiahship? If you do not, how can you call me good 
or acknowledge that anything could be good that does 
not proceed from God, the Fountain of all goodness? 
But answering your question; if you would enter into 
eternal life, keep the commandments. The young man 
replied, Which? The Master answered, "Thou shalt do 
no murder, nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor bear false 
witness, but honor thy father and thy mother and love 
thy neighbor as thyself." The young man replied, "All 
these things have I observed from my youth. What 
lack I yet?" 

He was a model young man and Jesus loved him. 
Evidently he was keeping the Jewish Law to the extent 
of his knowledge and ability. He thought that he was 
loving his neighbor as himself; but this was a mistake 
which the Lord disclosed to him by the following suggestion: 
"If thou wouldest be perfect, go sell all that 
thou hast and give to the poor and thou shalt have treasure 
in heaven" instead of on earth; sacrifice also your 
earthly reputation and become my follower. 

Ah, how the Lord knew to put his finger on the sore 
spot! The young man had come to him very boastful, 
very sure that if any one in the world was seeking to be 
in harmony with the Divine arrangement he was that 
one. He came for the Master's approval, that he might 
hear him say, "You are the one exception to the rule." 
The Lord did not say, "If you love your neighbor as you 
love yourself you will at least put forth an effort to 
make that neighbor as comfortable as you desire to be 
comfortable." He was content to be very rich, while 
some of his neighbors whom he thought he loved as he 
loved himself were very poor— abjectly, sorrowfully so. 



When Jesus discovered to him the difficulty of his situation, 
he grasped it at once. He saw himself as never 
before. It became a new test with him. Thus it is with 
all. A previous lesson showed us the Kingdom as a 
great prize, a pearl of great value, a treasure, which to 
possess, will cost all that we have; and this lesson points 
out the same fact. 

Let us not make the mistake made by some, and suppose 
that the young man who lived so honorable a life 
and failed to gain heaven, would be thrust down into 
eternal torment because he did not sacrifice his all to 
become the Lord's disciple. His loss of the Kingdom 
was a sufficient penalty without suffering eternal torment 
in the future. Such members of the human family, 
under the blessed conditions of the Millennial Kingdom, 
will doubtless make very rapid progress and will obtain 
eternal life on the plane of human perfection, though 
not worthy of the Kingdom honors which belong only 
to the elect. And the elect are those only who are gladly 
sacrificing their lives and their all to gain the great prize. 

PASSING THROUGH THE NEEDLE'S EYE 

Our Lord commented upon the matter to his disciples 
and added that the rich must have great difficulty in connection 
with their endeavor to enter the Kingdom. He 
said, sympathetically, rather than in a denunciatory manner, 
"It is easier for a camel to go through the needle's 
eye than for the rich to enter the kingdom of God." This 
astonished the disciples very greatly, for they knew that 
the majority of the religionists of their day belonged to 
the wealthy class, the Scribes and the Pharisees. They replied, 
"Who, then, can get into the Kingdom, if these 
cannot?" Our Lord's reply was, "With men this is impossible, 
but not with God." Men would be inclined to 
say that God would find no one for the Kingdom at all 
if he rejected the rich. 

In a word, no rich man can get into the Kingdom. He 
must give up everything to the Lord or else be barred 
from a place in the Kingdom. The terms of acceptance 
are the same to the rich as to the poor. He who would 
have the "pearl of great price" must sell all that he has 
in order that he may obtain it. The rich must give up all 
to the Lord, and then as stewards of their riches will be 
held responsible for their stewardship. 

The following little poem describes the needle's eye, 
or small gate beside the larger gate, through which the 
camels might pass into the walled city after sundown 
and without any of their burden. So the rich by unloading 
and becoming poor may get into the Kingdom:— 

THROUGH THE NEEDLE'S EYE 

"Tall was my camel and laden high, 
And small the gate as a needle's eye. 



"The city within was very fair, 

And I and my camel would enter there. 

'"You must lower your load,' the porter cried, 
'You must throw away that bundle of pride.' 

"This I did, but the load was great, 
Far too wide for the narrow gate. 

"'Now,' said the porter, 'to make it less, 
Discard that hamper of selfishness.' 

"I obeyed, though with much ado, 
Yet still nor camel nor I got through. 

"'Ah,' said the porter, 'your load must hold 
Some little package of trust-in-gold.' 

"The merest handful was all I had, 
Yet 'Throw it away,' the porter bade. 

"Then lo, a marvel! the camel tall 
Shrank to the size of the portal small, 

"And all my riches, a vast estate, 
Easily passed through the narrow gate!" 



R4659 : page 250 

THE BLOTTING OUT OF SINS 

"Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted 
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the 
presence of the Lord."— Acts 3:19. 

ALL WHO have turned from sin and accepted 

Christ and made a full consecration of 

themselves to the Divine will, and have been 

accepted of God by the begetting of the 

Spirit, have their sins reckoned as covered 

or put away from Divine sight. So far as 

the New Creature is concerned, they commit 

no sin; but so far as their flesh is concerned, 

through which alone they can at 

present have conscious being, they are imperfect. 

These imperfections of the flesh, unwillingly 

theirs, are figuratively said to be covered with the Wedding 

Robe of Christ's Righteousness, imputed to them. 

The Church, however, hopes not to continue always in 

this merely imputed condition of righteousness, but to 

obtain eventually an actual righteousness. The Lord's 

Word guarantees that this shall be the Church's portion 

by virtue of a share in the "First Resurrection," "his 

resurrection." 



When that which is sown in weakness shall have been 
raised in power; when that which is sown in dishonor 
shall have been raised in glory; when that which is sown 

R4659 : page 251 

an animal body shall have been raised a spiritual body, 
then, so far as the Church is concerned, the blotting out 
of sin in the most absolute and complete sense will have 
been effected— but not until then. At present the Church's 
sins are covered, by Divine arrangement, through the 
great Advocate, Jesus. So, then, we see that this blotting 
out of the Church's sins will give her precedence over all 
the world of mankind; and following the blotting out 
of her sins in the "First Resurrection," will begin the 
Restitution work for all Israel and through them for all 
mankind. 

THE NEW COVENANT ISRAELITISH 

It might be asked, would the two texts (Romans 11:27; 
Acts 3: 19,20) prove that the New Covenant will not be 
made until the completion of the sacrifice of all the 
members of the Body of Christ, until after the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice shall have been applied, at the end of the 
Gospel Age, on behalf of the world? 

It is most conclusively proved in these texts, as well 
as in many others, that the New Covenant cannot go 
into effect with the people of Israel until the end of 
this Gospel Age. We are to remember, however, that 
the Lord has made a distinct provision by which all 
the "called" ones of this Gospel Age may come into 
Covenant relationship with him through Christ, through 
faith in the precious blood and consecration unto death, 
through justification by the merit of the great Advocate. 
These, however, could not maintain their Covenant relationship 
with God were it not for their privilege of 
going to the Throne of heavenly grace and there receiving 
mercy through the intercession of their Advocate 
for those trespasses which are unwillingly theirs as New 
Creatures. 

This expression, New Covenant, is not used in connection 
with any others of mankind than the Jews, because 
it is not true that God will make a New Covenant 
with the remainder of mankind. As the Apostle suggests, 
the word "New" here implies a previous Covenant which 
was counted Old, and this Old Covenant was not made 
with other nations or peoples than the Jews, of whom 
God declared that he "took them by the hand to lead them 
out of Egypt, which my Covenant they brake." (Jer. 31:32.) 
Hence, we should understand that all references 
to the New Covenant are references to God's arrangement 
with the Jewish people to supplant the old arrangement 
under Moses, under the conditions of which they 
are still condemned and bound. By this New, substitutionary 
Covenant, God will shortly release the Jew from 



the condemnation of the Old Covenant. 

It will be in an incidental way that other nations will 
be granted the privilege of coming under the same laws 
and arrangements with natural Israel, and of sharing 
with Israel in the blotting out of sin and in being restored 
to the Divine image and thus to full harmony and fellowship 
and Covenant relationship with God, which relationship 
all may maintain, if they will, throughout eternity. 
But we see that some of these who will thus be brought 
into Covenant relationship and turned over to God at the 
end of the Millennial Age will fail to maintain that relationship; 
and that under the testing incidental to the 
release of Satan at the end of the thousand years, some 
will manifest disloyalty and lose this standing and again 
fall into the condemnation of death— the "Second Death." 

THE BLOTTING OUT OF SINS 

We are not necessarily to understand the blotting out 
of sin to signify the blotting out of the recognition of 
sin. We may rather assume that through all eternity this 
great insurrection or rebellion— the reign of sin and death 
for 6,000 years upon this earth— will be a standing lesson 
to all of God's creatures throughout his Universe. True, 
it is said of Israel, "Your sins and iniquities will I remember 
no more," but this should be understood as signifying 
that their sins will be remembered no more against 
them in a condemnatory sense. In that sense of the 
word, and in every evil and unsatisfactory sense, these 
sins will be remembered no more; but as lessons of the 
exceeding sinfulness of sin and of the Justice of God in 
punishing it, and of the love of God in providing redemption 
from it— in this sense sin will doubtless always be 
remembered. 

The sense, then, in which this text applies to the blotting 
out of sins would be this: Sin and imperfection are 
written in all our mortal bodies. Not only does sin put 
its heavy hand upon us through death— the destruction of 
our physical frame in general— but it specially leaves its 
mark upon the mind, and upon the face— the index of 
the character. The blotting out of sin, therefore, or the 
lifting of individuals out of sin, out of imperfection, out 
of their blemished condition, will signify their uplifting 
to all those glorious qualities of heart and mind and body 
which were Father Adam's portion in the beginning, when 
he was in the image and likeness of God. 

In the case of the Church and her change in the 
"First Resurrection" the blotting out will not be a slow 
and gradual process, but an instantaneous blotting out. 
Her change will be "in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye, at the last trump." The Apostle tells us that the 
change effected thus in the Church will be glorious; that 
we shall be made like him who is the "express image of 
the Father's person." We shall see him as he is and 
share his glory. 



R4659 : page 251 

"THE PARABLE OF THE TALENTS" 

IT IS supposable that some of the Lord's 

people may not be what is termed talented, 

in the sense of possessing large talents or 

many talents, but it is not supposable that 

any one in the Body of Christ would be 

without some talent, some opportunity for 

service. This parable of the Talents implies 

it. (Matthew 25:14-30.) Every one of 

these servants was called; every one of 

them received either one or more talents— 

and the parable did not apply merely to the beginning 

of the age, to the Apostles, etc., but evidently was intended 

to be applicable down to the end of the age, until 

the Lord should return from the "far country." As those 

who lived at that time did not remain until the Lord's 

coming, therefore the parable must include all who would 

become his disciples down to his second advent. Otherwise 

we could not be viewed as "co-workers together with 

God." 

We cannot be servants if we have nothing wherewith 
to serve; we could not bring forth fruitage, either in 
ourselves or others, without some ability and opportunity. 
It therefore becomes an important matter to each to 
recognize the fact that he must have had given him at 
least one talent, and that he will be held responsible for 
the use of what he has. 

page 252 

NOT MANY WISE, MIGHTY, NOBLE CALLED 

R4659 : page 252 

In the case of some of the Lord's people it would 
seem wise to call attention to the propriety of making 
sure what talent they have, and to make sure that they 
are not trying to use one that they have not. It seems 
to be a general weakness or failing amongst mankind 
to try to do something they cannot do, and to scorn that 
which they are able to do. The Apostle Paul (I Cor. 1:26) 
said, "Not many wise, not many mighty, not many 
noble are called"— not that God objects to those having 
many talents serving his cause, but not many of these 
accept his call. Those who have many talents find many 
ways of using them and many people in the world to 
desire them; and, ambitious for place and preferment, 
they have an abundance of opportunity to shine before 
men; but in the Lord's service they would not, perhaps, 
find so good an opportunity for the display of their 
talents and, therefore, they would not gain the renown 



that might be theirs in the earthly pursuits. They would 
be accounted foolish by the world should they be very 
energetic in serving the Lord and seeking to glorify his 
name. "Why do you not become rich? Why do you not 
live in style and hold up your head among men and get 
a great name, etc.?" are suggestions which attract those 
who have many talents; therefore few of that class are 
disposed to accept the Lord's call; while those who realize 
that they never could make a name for themselves in 
the world, appreciate more, perhaps, the great "High 
Calling." 

However, many of these of small talents increase them 
by use and become quite proficient in the Truth in various 
lines in proportion as they are faithful in the use of the 
talents they possess. The Truth seems to have a brightening 
and clarifying effect upon all minds, great and 
small. 

One of the important lessons, then, for the Lord's 
people to learn is to notice what talents the Lord has 

R4660 : page 252 

given them, whether time, or education, or special opportunities 

for service; and to keep them in use, that 

their brilliancy may increase and not become dimmed by 

neglect. 

We can readily see that there would be, as already 
expressed, more difficulty with one of five talents, in 
making a consecration, than in the case of a one-talent 
man, although the man of one talent might have much 
cause for discouragement in feeling that his gift is insignificant 
and poor in proportion to what many others 
have. The man of five talents would have the opposite 
experience and be in danger of being puffed up, "heady 
and high minded." We might well reason that the Lord 
in these varying conditions would make his grace sufficient; 
indeed, he has promised so to do for all those 
who put their trust in him. 

"GIVE ME NEITHER POVERTY NOR RICHES" 

The man with the one talent has in some respects a 
better opportunity for making his "calling and election 
sure." However, Solomon undoubtedly was wise in requesting 
of the Lord, "Give me neither poverty nor 
riches." (Prov. 30:8.) In other words, probably the 
two-talent man would have a natural advantage, in 
that he would be neither so likely to be discouraged nor 
to be puffed up. 

These conditions are not of the Lord's making. If 
the Lord made a man with one talent, and made another 
with two talents, and another with five talents, he would 
in some way doubtless have equalized the matter so that 
the talents of one would offset those of another. But 
he has not given our talents in such a way. These are 
merely what we have by nature and what we bring to 



the Lord in consecration and devote to him, though they 
are, in another sense, all his gifts. The Lord, therefore, 
is not responsible for a man's having but one talent, nor 
for his having five, but at his consecration the Lord 
makes him steward over his possessions to do the best he 
can with them. 

The force of the argument would be, then, that the 
man with the five talents would have more difficulty in 
keeping them fully employed, fully devoted and fully 
separated from worldly ambitions, etc., than would the 
man who had fewer. So if any of us were given a choice, 
it would, perhaps, be wise to choose the medium, because 
of the increase of responsibilities to those possessing 
more. 



R4660 : page 252 

KEEPING OURSELVES IN THE LOVE OF GOD 

THIS thought of the responsibility of each 
child of God to keep himself, is set forth in 
various terms throughout the Scriptures. 
Our Lord said, "Watch and pray, lest ye 
enter into temptation." Our part is to do 
the watching and praying; to do our very 
best, and then it is God's part to overrule 
and direct and supervise our affairs so that 
all things shall work together for good to 
us, because we have come into this proper 
relationship with the Father. 

We recognize that this Scripture and other Scriptures 
are not given to the world, but are addressed only to 
God's people, to "the sanctified in Christ Jesus." It is 
these sanctified ones who are to keep themselves. The 
unsanctified, unholy, have not made any start toward the 
Lord, and are not, therefore, in a place which they 
should wish to keep; they are rather in an undesirable 
place which they should seek to abandon. But those who 
have accepted God's terms, and have been begotten of 
the holy Spirit, and have experienced an entrance into 
this "grace wherein we stand, rejoicing in the hope of 
the glory of God," are admonished that they must keep 
this place, must preserve themselves in this position, must 
"keep themselves in the love of God." If they do not 
thus keep themselves, do not keep their hearts with all 
diligence, they are not of the kind that God designs to 
keep; they are the kind that he designs shall fall, and for 
whom he has provided special snares and difficulties that 
they may fall— not into eternal torment, as some of us 
formerly thought— but fall away from the promises of 
God and the particular favors provided for the Elect. 

The Lord has not predetermined what place we shall 
occupy in the future, but he is allowing our course to be 
influenced by conditions of the present life, so that all 



those who choose to be in harmony with God may follow 
in the footsteps of Jesus. There are outward manifestations 
by which the Lord's people may know their own 
standing, and to some extent may be able to know of 
their progress. In proportion as one realizes the Spirit 
of Christ developed in himself, in proportion as he 
sees the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit, he may 
know of his own progress in the love of God, and may 
know also that unless he keep himself in the love of God, 

R4660 : page 253 

he will not stand, will not maintain his place, but will 
fall; as the Apostle Peter says: "If ye do these things ye 
shall never fall." If we conform to the Divine arrangement, 
if we keep ourselves in the love of God, we shall, 
therefore, be preserved. 

All those who are thus in Divine favor have the Divine 
promise and all the Divine power behind the promise, 
necessary to keep them. So, then, our text is in full 
accord with other texts bearing upon this subject. Those 
who are begotten of the holy Spirit have the responsibility 
of keeping themselves in that holy condition of heart. 
They may not be responsible for some of the outward 
circumstances that beset them, nor for the condition of 
others, nor for the temptations that come to them. They 
may not in the fullest degree be responsible for all of their 
own course, because of the imperfections of the "earthen 
vessel"; but under the Lord's providential arrangement, 
if they keep their hearts, "that Wicked One toucheth 
them not," will not injure them, will not harm them. 
His besetments may serve to test, may be permitted of 
God to work out for them, if properly exercised thereby, 
"a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory"; but 
the Adversary can do them no harm, because they belong 
to God, and he is pledged to defend in the highest sense 
the best interests of all those who have given their hearts 
to him in full consecration. 



R4660 : page 253 

"LET NOT YOUR HEART BE TROUBLED" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Of course 

you know that you have enemies and warm 

enemies as well as warm friends; and that 

the former manifest an evil, slanderous and 

back-biting spirit is only what we might 

expect, for thus we were forewarned of the 

Lord. I write you respecting one of these 

malicious endeavors to injure you and discredit 

the Lord's work which you are doing. 

The slander is that you inveigled a large 

sum of money, in some fraudulent manner, from a brother 



named Hope Hay. Indistinctly I remember some years 
ago the statement published in THE WATCH TOWER that 
Brother Hay had donated to THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY $10,000, and I infer that this is the 
transaction they have in mind. 

I am sure, dear Brother Russell, that this is merely 
another endeavor of the Adversary to poison the minds 
of some against you and against the Truth, of which you 
are the prominent representative. I am not, therefore, 
asking on my own account, but merely seeking advice as to 
what reply I should make to those who thus slander you. 
I know very well that you never so much as solicit money 
of anybody; and hence, that nothing could be further from 
your course than to obtain money under false pretense of 
any kind. In strong bonds of Christian love, 

Your brother in the dear Redeemer, C. A. OWEN. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S REPLY TO THE SLANDER 

DEAR BROTHER:-I am glad to have your letter. How 
sorry we feel for those enemies of righteousness who in 
bitterness of spirit lend themselves as tools to the Adversary 
in an endeavor to oppose the harvest work! I 
presume that the Lord permits such things as tests of 
faith and loyalty to him, and tests to his people as to what 
spirit they are of. Anyway, dear Brother, you will be 
glad to know that the more my enemies assail and falsely 
charge me with evil, the more the Lord blesses me and his 
work under my care. I am reminded here of the words 
of St. Paul respecting the thorn in the flesh which the 
Lord permitted him to have, but which he assured him 
would do him no injury, saying, "My grace is sufficient 
for thee." I answer, therefore, with St. Paul, "Most 
gladly will I rather glory in my afflictions that the power 
of Christ may rest upon me."— 2 Cor. 12:9. 

Your recollection that the matter of Brother Hay's 
donation to the Tract Fund was published in THE WATCH 
TOWER years ago is quite correct. Dear Brother Hay 
called upon me personally, saying that he had received a 
legacy of $20,000 and that, as he had a pension from the 
Canadian Government, he thought he could not do better 
than donate the entire legacy to the Lord's cause— as a 
donation to the funds of THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY. 

I replied that I appreciated very highly his generous 
spirit and that as the President of the Society I would not 
feel at liberty to refuse any gifts voluntarily tendered to it. 
However, as he had not yet made the donation and had 
asked my opinion respecting it, I gave that opinion. I 
said that if I were in his stead I would prefer to give 
only one-half of the sum at the time, and to retain possession 

R4661 : page 253 

of the remainder, with a view to using it so as to 
permit greater personal activities in the harvest field. 



Brother Hay thanked me for the advice and said he 
thought it to be good and that he would follow it. 

The Society's books show that from time to time subsequently 
he sent to us in all $9,500. They also show that 
this donation was specially used in harmony with Brother 
Hay's knowledge and wishes for the relief of some of the 
hundreds of Colporteurs who had gotten into debt in their 
endeavor to serve the Truth. Credits were given to these 
harvest workers in Brother Hay's name and many of them, 
we know, acknowledged the matter directly to him. The 
entire matter was published in THE WATCH TOWER 
columns that all of the dear friends might know of 
Brother Hay's generous course. Since then we have 
abandoned everything akin to publicity in respect to those 
who make donations to the Society's funds, deeming this 
to be the wiser course— the Lord's will. 

Brother Hay has been an invalid for several years. 
And we understand that he lost in various ways nearly all 
of the remainder of his legacy. Since we have none of 
Brother Hay's money in our possession, having expended 
every dollar of it in harmony with his wishes, we 
have not felt it to be our duty to take money contributed 
by others for the promotion of Christian knowledge to 
reimburse Brother Hay's losses. The Society has felt 
content in assuming the full responsibility of Brother Hay 
at a Canadian Sanitarium— selected by himself and his 
wife— paying all the charges of the same. This we did, 
not on the score of his donation to the Tract Fund, but 
on account of his having served in the Pilgrim work. We 
have assumed that his government pension, the amount 
of which we do not know, has been sufficient for the 
maintenance of his family, and that possibly the amount 
of the pension has been increased on account of his more 
serious illness. 

We are glad to make these explanations, dear Brother, 
but you can readily see how useless it would be for us to 

R4661 : page 254 

attempt to chase after all the mean and contemptible 
slanders and misrepresentations which the Adversary 
could find people mean enough to scatter. To chase 
slanders would waste our time and hinder the Lord's work 
—the very thing the Adversary would like to accomplish. 
We have given ourself fully and unreservedly to 
the Lord. This includes not only all of our powers and 
talents, but also amongst these our reputation. 
Yours in the love and service of the Redeemer, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



R4661 : page 254 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 



MY DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

Father Time has tolled off another year for you— a 
year of living, loving, sacrificial service for our Father 
and the brethren. How we wish we could show forth 
our appreciation for that service! Our Father has certainly 
blessed us through you. And at this time— when 
many who once walked with us, no longer walk 
with us, but vilify and persecute and misrepresent your 
teachings— we are especially grateful to our Heavenly 
Father because we still have a hearing ear and can still 
see more wondrous beauty in the Divine Plan, as shown 
us through his own appointed channel. 

In closing I desire to mention the Vow. When first 
you suggested it I resented it. One clause (which one 
I will not say) stood out before me in all prominence. At 
that time it was all that I saw in it; and, frankly, I opposed 
it and told myself and others also that I did not 
need it. Some months later, while in another city, I was 
walking along the street with a brother from a distant 
city and our conversation turned toward the Vow. Well, 
that night I made the Vow my own, and since then I find 
that above all things I needed most that particular clause 
that I objected to so strenuously. I thank God for the 
Vow. I desire an interest in your prayers to the end that 
I may be better able to keep it. 

And now, dear Brother, as you have entered into 
another year of service, may the Lord bless your efforts; 
may he give you grace abundant for every time of need; 
may he give you much joy; may he strengthen you and 
keep you faithful unto the end, and finally may you be 
among those whom he is pleased to call "more than conquerors" 
in and through our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ. 

Your brother only by his grace, H. W. MCALLISTER. 

IN REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I find your letter of the 13th ultimo awaiting me on 
my return from the Convention trip, and take this opportunity 
to reply. 

Your kind words of love and fellowship in our dear 
Redeemer are very especially appreciated and reciprocated. 
The confidence and co-operation of all the fellow-members 
in the Body is a very valued aid to me. 

I rejoice with you that the Lord graciously delivered 
you from any entanglement of thought in opposing the 
Vow, and that having made it to the Lord and acknowledged 
it in the presence of all his people you have found 
especial blessing therein. With the Psalmist we can say, 
"For thou, O God, hast heard my Vow; thou hast given 
me the heritage of those that fear thy name." 

Very sincerely your brother and fellow-servant. 



GENTLEMEN:- 

I found a copy of your PEOPLES PULPIT on my porch 
and am much interested in it. Enclosed find twelve cents, 
for which please send me the publication for one year. 
Also will you kindly send me sample copies containing 
the sermons, "Thieves in Paradise," "The Rich Man in 
Hell," and "Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." These you 
say are free. 

Yours truly, FRED S. LACKEY--N.J. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am requested to inform you of the number who 
memorialized at this place the death of our dear Lord. 

I wish to tell you what a blessed time we had. I believe 
it was because we had all been praying for the 
presence of the Master. In the afternoon we had a 
prayer, praise and testimony meeting. The evening meeting 
commenced with a song service. As we looked at 
the faces of the dear friends we could see joy mingled 
with sorrow. We tried in our weak way to show the 
oneness of our Lord and his Church. Then Brother 
Durant addressed us on the Bread and Brother Jackson 
on the Cup. I think I can speak for all the friends when 
I say that we deem it an unspeakable privilege to be 
counted worthy to drink of his Cup, and by and by to 
share his glory. 

We all pray for you, dear Brother, that the richest 
blessing of God may continue with you unto the end. 

Yours in the One blessed Hope, 

GEORGE LEE.-Fla. 



DEAR SIR:- 

I found one of the copies of PEOPLES PULPIT on a car 
one night on my way home and was so much impressed 
that I thought it wise to subscribe for it. Enclosed find 
12 cents for one year, and send me the following sermons, 
"Gathering the Lord's Jewels," "The Most Precious 
Text," "Liberty, Liberty, Liberty," "Sin's Small Beginnings, 
"Sin Atonement," "The Value of Toil," "Foreordination, 
Predestination and Election," "The Rich Man 
in Hell," "Where Are the Dead?" "Thieves in Paradise." 

A Brother in Christ, ROBT. COOPER.-I11. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been thinking for some time that I would write 
to you and tell you how much I appreciate "Present 
Truth." I have been in the Truth two years, through 
the volunteer work of some of the brethren; chiefly 
Brother Seth Moore of this town. 

I had been a Baptist for twenty years and had been 



ordained to the ministry of that Church. I withdrew 
from that denomination eight years ago, and began a 
prayerful search for the Church of Christ. God answered 
my prayer, and now I love my God, my Saviour and my 
Bible better than I ever did before, and I have felt more 
real satisfaction and joy in two years than in all my past 
life put together. 

It was some time before I could get my own consent 
to send my name as one having taken the "Vow," but 
that "Vow" contains the sentiments of my heart, and 
may God help me to keep it! 

I am praying for the good work at Brooklyn and all 

R4661 : page 255 

over the world. Find enclosed 50 cts. for which please 
send me ten copies of "The Plan of the Ages," WATCH 
TOWER form. I want to do a little volunteer work myself. 
With much love, I am, 
Your Brother in Christ, J. W. WILSON.-Texas. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Realizing that I owe you many thanks, and out of a 
motive of love to you, I will give you a little of my testimony. 
I have been a peculiar fellow— first, a Lutheran, 

R4662 : page 255 

then an Infidel and the last thing an Evolutionist; but 
now, thanks to the Lord and you and Brother Senger, I 
am a Christian and am rejoicing in the Truth. 

Praying for you, dear Brother, that our heavenly 
Father will continue his care over you, I am 

Yours in Christ to the Glory of God, E. SNYDER. 



DEAR SIRS:- 

We were very much interested in the copy of the 
PEOPLES PULPIT, which was delivered at our door, and 
would like to have the issues which contained "Where 
Are the Dead?" and "The Rich Man in Hell," as these 
are subjects of great importance to us and our friends. 
Wishing you success in your undertaking, I remain 
Respectfully, J. A. SLOCUM,-N.Y. 



page 255 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI. Study II: The New Creation. 



SEPTEMBER 4 

(1) What terms are Scripturally applied to the Church 
of the Gospel Age and its ultimate members? P. 59. 

(2) Why have these terms not been appreciated by the 
majority of Christians? P. 59. 

(3) May we suppose the popular misconstructions of the 
Divine Word to be intentional? If not, how may we account 
for them? P. 60, par. 1, first half. 

(4) What were the "Dark Ages," and why so called? 
P. 60, par. 1. 

(5) What has been the difficulty amongst the followers 

of the Reformers during the past three centuries? P. 60, par. 2, 
first part. 

(6) What divinely appointed guides should the Church 
recognize and follow? P. 61. 

(7) What assistance should the Church now expect and 
accept from human instrumentalities? P. 61. 

(8) Give a resume of previous studies, leading up to our 
present topic, the New Creation. P. 61, par. 1. 

SEPTEMBER 1 1 

(9) Does the creation of various orders of beings signify 
a dissatisfaction on the part of the Creator? P. 62, 7th 
line to end of par. 

(10) Will there exist jealousies or covetousness among 
the creations on the several planes of being? P. 62, par. 1. 

(11) When Jehovah purposed the New Creation, what 
did he determine respecting those who should constitute its 
members? P. 63, par. 1, first part. 

(12) Why are these "New Creatures" not created on the 
Divine plane, and subsequently tried and tested? Why so 
separate and distinct from all others? P. 63. 

(13) Trace the philosophy of the Divine arrangement for 
the selection of the New Creation. P. 64. 

(14) What was the Divine pre-arranged privilege and 
test imposed upon the "Only Begotten"? P. 65, par. 1. 

(15) What was the exceeding great reward, "the joy that 
was set before" our Redeemer? P. 65, par. 2. 

(16) Why are the "brethren" of Christ selected from 
among the human creation, rather than from others? 
P. 66, par. 1. 

SEPTEMBER 18 

(17) What fact in the New Testament writings has 
caused many to infer, contrary to the Scriptures in general, 
that God's purposes are the same with respect to all mankind? 
P. 67, par. 1. 

(18) What are the "two salvations," and what confusion 
of thought results from failure to recognize the difference 
between these? P. 67, par. 2. 

(19) Aside from making their own calling and election 
sure, what two-fold work have the prospective New Creation 
to do in connection with the human family? P. 68, par. 1. 



(20) Explain why no other class of beings could be 
found so well adapted to ruling and blessing the world. 
P. 69, par. 1. 

(21) Is the work of uplifting, ruling, blessing and judging 
mankind the entire mission of the New Creation? P. 69, par. 2. 

(22) Although the Scriptures do not explicitly declare 
the future activities of the New Creation, what may we 
reasonably infer or anticipate regarding them? P. 70, par. 1,2. 

SEPTEMBER 25 

(23) What constitutes these New Creatures "priests"? 
P. 71, par. 1, first part. 

(24) What represents the new nature of these priests, 
and how is the victory of the New Creature attained? 
P. 71, par. 1. 

(25) Explain in detail how the Aaronic priesthood of 
Israel typified the present condition of the New Creation, 

and Melchizedek, their future priesthood. P. 72, top of page, par. 1. 

(26) Mention the apparent reason why the intimate relationship 
between the Only Begotten and the elect Church 

is so frequently referred to under various figures, and explain 
the significance of the "top-stone," as a figure. P. 72, par. 2. 

(27) Explain the "temple" figure. P. 73, par. 1. 

(28) Explain the beautiful illustration of the "human body 
with its various members." P. 73, par. 2. 

(29) Give numerous other figures showing this relationship 
of Christ and the Church. 

(30) What is perhaps the most perfect and complete figure 
of our Master's interest in and love for his brethren? 
Explain in detail. P. 74, par. 1. 



page 255 

ITEMS TO BE REMEMBERED 

EXCURSION-JAMESTOWN TO NIAGARA FALLS 

We have already advised that all who would like to visit 
Niagara Falls should wherever possible buy tickets via the 
same. However, in the interests of others who might like 
to visit the Falls, we have special arrangements for a Round 
Trip excursion for $1.50. Those desirous of making the 
excursion will please leave their addresses at Information 
Bureau, Celoron, on August 1. 



SEND FULL PAY OR NOTHING 

Conventioners are requested to send full payment for their 
accommodations or else send nothing. We cannot keep accounts 
with so many. 



R4662 : page 255 

AN IMPOSTOR NOTED 

A man considerably below average height, slightly built, 
small, dark mustache, and with a noticeably crooked left 
leg, and walking with limp, good talker and well posted doctrinally 
and knowing names of many brethren, has been imposing 
upon the friends in many places. He is skillful. He 
tells of needs, but refuses money at first. Later he accepts 
money with many thanks and promises, and proceeds to look 
for other victims. Letters, especially from Ohio and Pennsylvania, 
tell of his good success as an impostor. Usually he 
wants a railway ticket, then later sells it. We should not be 
suspicious of everybody in distress; but we should generally 
content ourselves with supplying food or raiment needed. 



R4658 : page 255 

BROTHER EDGAR'S BOOK 

Brother John Edgar, M.D., whose decease was mentioned 
in the July 1 issue and again referred to in the July 15 TOWER, 
a year ago, in company with his Brother Morton, visited the 
Great Pyramid and took measurements, photographs, etc. 
The result was the preparation of a book, of which we have 
seen a portion. It is gotten up in good style, good paper. 
Doubtless some of our readers will be interested in having it. 
We have placed orders for a quantity as soon as possible. 
The price will be $1.35, postage prepaid, and it can be ordered 
through either our Brooklyn or our London office. 



page 258 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 



edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The Atonement Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-1/2.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, five 
vol.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, four vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; in Hollandish, Spanish, 
Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform 
with English edition, prices the same. 

Vol. 6 German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 each. 



page 257 



SEMI-MONTHLY 