‘I Have Never Read Anything to Equal It’
THE book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? has helped many to understand more clearly how life got here on earth and where it is going. One person wrote: “I am 78 years old and have been reading since I was two. But I have never read anything to equal Life​—How Did It Get Here? It is truly amazing. The information it contains boggles the mind.”
From New Zealand a man wrote that the book “must be one of the most outstanding works in the history of modern publishing.” Another, in Italy, declared: “The book is simply superlative! I have read it without stopping and without getting tired, as suits exceptional books.”
A businessman in England obtained 25 copies for his business associates. He quickly ran out of copies and obtained 25 more. And a teacher of religion in the United States ordered 24 additional copies to use in his classes.
“Accurate Science”
A student in Canada said: “I call it my science textbook, and I can tell you truthfully that I’ve learned more accurate science from this book than from all my school days put together.”
In this regard, a man wrote: “While I was enrolled in a university degree-granting program, I paid many hundreds of dollars for various courses which contained no more information than the book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? These courses were in mathematics, biology, genetics, inorganic and organic chemistry, and anthropology. I now realize that I could have saved a considerable sum by buying your book for $2.50. At the same time, you have separated the ‘wheat from the chaff.’”
A college physiology instructor expressed her appreciation by stating: “It is exactly the type of reference material I have often wished I had. All the research I have often wished I had time for or an inclination to do has been done for me!” Similarly, another person wrote: “I really appreciate all the detailed research this book must have required. Why, it must have taken months to fully research each topic!”
Building Appreciation for the Creator
When a man wrote to express his “great admiration” for the book, he added: “The book not only convinces but also inspires!” And that is its purpose​—to inspire confidence in a loving Creator who has a marvelous purpose for mankind.
Thus, a family man wrote that it “enhanced our appreciation for our marvelous Father and makes clear, as no other man-made publication ever has, the intelligence of our Designer.” Similarly, a woman said that of all the books she has read, “this one has done the most for my friendship with Jehovah. What an awesome God!” And a Canadian woman wrote: “I cannot do justice to the emotions I feel. It is the closest I’ve ever been to understanding Jehovah’s immense love. My inward parts move me to tears to see the power this book has.”
For sincere persons who have had doubts about the existence of a Creator, the following letter well expresses the book’s effect: “Thank you! For years I found it hard to believe in a Creator because I believed in evolution. But then I bought your book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? I feel like a blind man who has been granted sight for the first time. I’ve searched for a sound basis, and sound reasoning, to explain the origin of life on earth and have finally found it in your book. It has provided me with all the answers I’ve been searching for all these years. I can’t thank you enough! Keep up the good work!”
This book has, indeed, proved to be an inspiration to many. No doubt it will continue to direct others to the Creator, Jehovah God, so that they can benefit now and eternally in his new system of things here on earth.​—2 Peter 3:13.

