How to Preach in Business Territory
 1. What are some advantages of witnessing in business territory?
1 Would you like to preach in territory where people generally welcome visitors and where not-at-homes are rare? You may be able to do so right in your congregation territory. How? By calling on the businesses found there. Publishers witnessing from store to store often enjoy good results.
 2. How can business witnessing be organized?
2 Some congregations have business districts as part of their assigned territory. The brother caring for the territory may prepare special map cards of these heavily concentrated business sections. Any residential territory map cards that overlap them should clearly indicate that the businesses are not to be worked as part of the territory. In other territories, businesses can be worked along with the residences. If you have never done business witnessing, start by trying a few smaller stores.
 3. What will help us to be effective when witnessing from store to store?
3 Use a Simple Approach: When witnessing from store to store, it is important to dress as you would for a meeting at the Kingdom Hall. It is also good to choose a time when the store is not busy. If possible, enter when there are no customers waiting to be served. Ask to speak to the manager or the person in charge. Be brief and to the point. What might you say?
4-6. What can we say when witnessing to a storekeeper or manager?
4 When speaking with a storekeeper or manager, you might say something like this: “Business people have such full schedules that we rarely find them at home, so we are visiting you at your workplace. Our magazines give a global perspective on current events.” Then feature one brief point from one magazine.
5 Or you might try this simple approach: “Many people would like to know more about the Bible but have very little time. This tract explains a free study program that is available to help you find answers to your Bible questions.” Then point out pages 4-5 of the tract Would You Like to Know More About the Bible?
6 If the person in charge seems to be busy, you might just offer a tract and say: “I will stop by again when you are not so busy. I would like to know what you think of this tract.”
 7. How can we cultivate the interest we find in business territory?
7 Cultivating Interest Shown: You may even be able to conduct a Bible study in business territory. A special pioneer regularly delivered the magazines to a businessman. When the man expressed appreciation for what he was reading, the pioneer demonstrated the Bible study arrangement, using the Require brochure. A study was established right there at the man’s place of work. Taking into account the circumstances, the pioneer limited it to 10 or 15 minutes each time. May we, likewise, continue to search for deserving ones by witnessing in business territory.

