Imitate Jehovah’s Justice
1 “Jehovah is a lover of justice.” (Ps. 37:28) Thus, although he has decreed that this unrighteous world be destroyed, he has arranged for a warning to be sounded first. (Mark 13:10) This affords people the opportunity to repent and be saved. (2 Pet. 3:9) Do we strive to imitate Jehovah’s justice? Does the misery and suffering of the human family move us to share the Kingdom hope with others? (Prov. 3:27) Love of justice will impel us to have an active share in preaching.
2 Preach With Impartiality: By declaring God’s purpose to everyone without partiality, we “exercise justice.” (Mic. 6:8) We must resist the imperfect inclination to prejudge others based on their outward appearance. (Jas. 2:1-4, 9) Jehovah’s “will is that all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) God’s word of truth can cause remarkable changes in the lives of people. (Heb. 4:12) Appreciating this fact can move us to approach individuals with confidence, even those who may have turned a deaf ear in the past.
3 One sister working in a store was somewhat frightened by the physical appearance of a regular customer. Nevertheless, when the appropriate occasion arose, she tried to witness to him about God’s promised Paradise. He brusquely replied that he did not believe in fairy tales and that he was a hippie and drug addict. But she did not give up. One day he asked her what she thought about his long hair, so she tactfully explained what the Bible says on the matter. (1 Cor. 11:14) To her pleasant surprise, the next day he was clean-shaven and had short hair! He asked for a Bible study, which a brother was happy to conduct, and progressed to dedication and baptism. Like this man, many who are serving Jehovah today are grateful for the impartial, persistent efforts of those who brought them the Kingdom message.
4 Jehovah will soon wipe unrighteousness from the face of the earth. (2 Pet. 3:10, 13) In the limited time remaining, may we imitate Jehovah’s justice by giving all an opportunity to escape the coming destruction of Satan’s unrighteous world.​—1 John 2:17.

