Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 30
 8 min: Song 18 and local announcements.
20 min: “Speak from Your Heart’s Abundance.” Discussion of material with audience. Give encouragement to use the Watchtower magazine extensively during the month and to take the initiative in offering subscriptions to interested ones.
20 min: Responding to Our Christian Commission. Discussion. All have been stimulated by attending the Memorial celebration. True meaning of that event was made clear. Events following Jesus’ death are of great interest to us as well. Have good readers handle the following: (Read Matthew 28:1-8.) What occurred even as Jesus had promised? (Read Matthew 28:16-20.) What commission did the disciples receive from Jesus? What position did Jesus now occupy in heaven and on earth? What obligation that Jesus there gave applies even to this day, and what comforting assurance did he give to us? (Read John 21:15-17.) How did Jesus emphasize to Peter the importance of a spiritual feeding program? What impression should this make upon our hearts and minds today?
 7 min: Giving Further Aid to Memorial Attenders. Service overseer goes over the need to make return visits on those who attended the Memorial to help them into further association with the congregation. Such ones who are not subscribers to the Watchtower magazine should be given the opportunity to subscribe. Encourage attendance at the special public talk during the coming week, which is on the subject, “Coping with Life’s Anxieties.”
 5 min: Song 22 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 6
20 min: Song 78, local announcements and “Presenting the Good News—With a Positive Attitude.” Discuss the experiences in the article and any local experiences. Also, some suggestions may be offered on what opportunities may come up locally to offer subscriptions in April. Highlight the idea of being positive in offering subscriptions.
15 min: “Are We ‘Fishers of Men’?” Question-and-answer discussion to be handled by an elder. Include practical presentations dealing with speaking to those who attended the Memorial celebration as well as how to apply the information in the article in the various features of the field service. Emphasize paragraph four if your territory is worked often or there is very little response, outlining our responsibility as “fishers.”
20 min: To be developed locally or have talk on Awake! article “How Some Have Been Helped to Believe” in November 8, 1979, issue pages 11-15.
 5 min: Song 23 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 13
10 min: Song 100 and local announcements. Pertinent items from Announcements and accounts report.
15 min: What Are Your Children Learning? Interview with young children in congregation on Stories 90 and 91 of my book. Tie in importance of telling others of our hope and sharing Kingdom good news.
18 min: Discussion of portion of Sermon on the Mount. (Matt. 5:13-16) Elder to handle this portion based on Watchtower of March 15, 1978, pages 10, 11. (1) (Have verse 13 read.) Salt not only enhanced the taste of food, but served to prevent decay or corruption. Thus how should one conduct himself? How could a Christian, by discontinuing his efforts to share the “good news” of God’s kingdom, lose his “saltness”? What could occur if the Christian failed to follow the Bible’s moral guide? (2) (Have verses 14, 15 read.) By public witnessing activities, disciples of Jesus enlighten people, help them know God’s purpose for mankind. How could a person put his light under a measuring basket? What would then result to the light he has? (3) (Have verse 16 read.) Others, by observing a Christian’s “fine works,” can perceive the excellence of his God. Therefore, what is the responsibility of the Christian at all times? What effect can this have on others seeking to find the light of truth? How does 1 Peter 2:12 counsel all who want to let their light shine?
10 min: Elder reports on how the congregation has done in the auxiliary pioneer service so far during the month. Also some encouraging experiences can be related, including some regarding return visits on those who attended the Memorial. Encourage all to share in the field service during the last two weeks of April and support the auxiliary pioneers.
 7 min: Song 28 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 20
15 min: Song 36 and discussion of article “Have You Tried It Yet?” Local announcements.
15 min: “Carry On as Men”! Talk by elder on article. In paragraph four consider experiences of parents who have encouraged their children to enter full-time service, even forgoing certain luxuries so children could pioneer, go to Bethel or even enter missionary work. (There may be some locally who could relate their personal experiences in this regard. If not, see 3/15/77 Watchtower, pages 168-171, and 4/15/77 Watchtower, pages 249-253.)
10 min: Making Good Use of the Watchtower and Awake! Magazines. Have four or more brothers and sisters prepared with information from the current magazines that can be used in the field service to start conversations and interest people in further Bible study as well as magazine subscriptions.
15 min: “Disco—Is There Reason to Beware?” Talk by elder on article in December 22, 1979, Awake! magazine. Use points that emphasize need to keep on complete suit of armor and not be influenced by fads and attitudes of the world.—Eph. 6:10-16.
 5 min: Song 31 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 27
 8 min: Song 50, local announcements and Theocratic News.
20 min: To be developed locally, or consider material in the December 15, 1979, Watchtower article, “How Powerful Is the Good News?”
12 min: Do Not Lose Your Joy. Elder gives talk, with audience participation, on Aid book material beginning on page 970 under the subheading “Joy in God’s Service.” Highlight points in second paragraph, showing that one should have the joy that comes from heart appreciation. (This does not mean that it is always easy to share in some features of Kingdom service, but when a person makes the effort, he receives the joy of Jehovah because Jehovah blesses effort even though there may be few visible results.)
15 min: What Are Your Children Learning? Handled by an elder interviewing young children on Stories 114 and 115 of my book. Quiz young ones and help them to see how they and their parents can use the book in field service during May. Elder may also give a talk for five minutes on the value of this publication to the public. Encouragement should be given to all to have a share in field service the first Sunday in May. (Perhaps a report can be given on the past month’s results in this activity.)
 5 min: Song 68 and prayer.

