Presenting the Good News—With a Positive Attitude
1 How do you feel about offering the Watchtower subscription this month? Are you enthused and looking for opportunities to share in this activity? To a large degree this depends upon your individual outlook. Realistically, we are not going to get a subscription at most doors. But we want to keep in mind that when a person accepts a subscription he is multiplying his exposure to the truth. Out of 24 issues, there may very well be at least one article that will catch his eye and reach his heart. Following are two extraordinary experiences that highlight the value of (1) having a positive attitude about the importance of the Watchtower magazine and (2) offering subscriptions at every opportunity.
2 One sister placed 90 subscriptions during the last subscription campaign. How did she do it? She took advantage of every opportunity. For example, she was going from door to door and saw a group of workmen digging up the street. She approached them and explained what she was doing. The result? She obtained 24 new subscriptions. Later she was going from door to door and met a lady who was having a luncheon for her friends. She discreetly presented the magazines and another 12 subscriptions were placed. One rainy morning several different persons called her on the telephone and she placed 10 subscriptions before she left the house. Obviously Jehovah was blessing her efforts.
3 Many of us have experienced the blessings of witnessing informally. One brother recently went on a business trip. On his return flight he started to converse with the man sitting next to him who turned out to be an army colonel. Their conversation led to the problem this man was having with his wife. After 20 years of marriage his wife was on drugs, had tried to commit suicide several times and was about to leave him for a younger man.
4 Our brother told this military man about the fine Scriptural help and encouragement given him each time he receives the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. The man asked how he could get these magazines for himself and also wanted them sent to his wife. Our brother inquired as to the address of his wife, but the colonel couldn’t find a pen. Before the brother could get his pen, the man sitting next to the window put one in the colonel’s hand. He had been listening even though our brother did not know it.
5 The plane landed and when the brother got up to get off, the couple seated in front of him turned and had tears in their eyes as did two students from a local Bible school seated across the aisle. The lady in front said she wanted the magazines also. The two students across the aisle said, “Don’t leave us out. We want them too.” Thus, by taking the initiative while on this business trip, a total of 22 subscriptions, 21 books and 45 magazines were placed.
6 Obviously experiences like these do not happen every day. But even if we try all month and get no results, we have still done the right thing. We appreciate the value of this journal and realize the influence for good it has in our lives. So endeavor to keep the magazines before the public during April. We pray that Jehovah will go with each one of us as we do.

