Speak from Your Heart’s Abundance
1 “A good man brings forth good out of the good treasure of his heart, . . . for out of the heart’s abundance his mouth speaks.” (Luke 6:45) These words of wisdom came from the lips of Jesus, and they should have a deep and long-lasting effect on all who wish to have the approval of our God and Creator, Jehovah. Day in and day out mankind is faced with problems of life that are not conducive to producing the good works that identify one as a close follower of the Lord Jesus. The hearts of people in general have been hardened by the environment around them, much like ancient Pharaoh whose heart “became obstinate” against God.
2 Many hardened hearts have been softened by the healing power of God’s Word and its abundant truths. The Bible account even tells of a vast mixed company that left Egypt with the Israelites at the time the tenth plague came upon the land. Their hearts were apparently softened by the demonstration of Jehovah’s power. (Ex. 12:38) But what about us? Out of the abundance of our hearts are we producing good things that are a blessing to us and to those with whom we associate? How do we know if we have good things in our hearts and are able to speak out and do good?
3 You may ask yourself the following questions: Do I rejoice as much today as when I first learned of the salvation by Jehovah through Jesus and began associating with Jehovah’s people? By the year 96 C.E., the congregation of Christians in Ephesus were said to have left the love they had at first, and that brought strong counsel to them.—Rev. 2:4.
4 Do I concern myself with a continued personal study of Jehovah’s Word as I did when I first learned of his grand promises through Christ? The apostle Paul admonished Timothy to pay constant attention to himself and to his teaching. (1 Tim. 4:16) This included continuing to give personal attention to the Word of God, even as Timothy had done from infancy.
5 Do I seize opportunities to tell others of my firm hope in God and his promises for mankind in the future? The Bible abounds with accounts of early Christians giving of themselves to pass along the truth to others. Jesus, Paul, Peter, Barnabas, Timothy, Silas and others stand out as splendid examples of those whose hearts were abundantly filled with good that they passed along to others.—Matt. 4:23; Acts 5:42; 13:1-5.
6 Do I daily conduct myself in such a way that others can observe that I practice what I speak about to others? Paul showed how ineffective one’s words would be if his conduct did not match his words. He wrote to the Roman Christians: “You, the one preaching ‘Do not steal,’ do you steal? You, the one saying ‘Do not commit adultery,’ do you commit adultery?” He went on to show that it is what a person is on the inside that counts with God and testifies to men that he is indeed a follower of Christ.—Rom. 2:21-29.
7 At the outset of this article mention was made that mankind is faced with problems today that are not conducive to producing good works. On every hand we see violence, crime, immorality and hatred filling the hearts of so many. Oftentimes the message we bear is rudely rejected and we may become disheartened. It is at these times in particular that we need to turn to Jehovah for his help through Christ. We do well to call to mind all the good things we have, fill our hearts to overflowing, and then make efforts to help others.
8 Jehovah, through his organization, has provided us with the instruments to assist any who have a listening ear. In the April 1, 1980, Watchtower there is the article “The Promise of a Bright Future.” How fitting to the needs of the people today! And in the April 15 issue there is the article entitled “Coming—A World Without Pain.” Should not our hearts move us to action when we come to know Jehovah and his grand promises?
9 There is no better way to give evidence of what is abundantly in our hearts than to share this good news with others. During this month of April we will be providing such information for those we meet in our daily contacts through the door-to-door work, on the streets, in stores and other informal conversations. How might we do this? By carrying a few copies of these magazines with us. When opportunity affords, speak from the abundance of the heart. May all of us together bring forth good out of the good treasure of our hearts, for out of our hearts’ abundance our mouths will speak.

