“Carry On as Men”!
1 When we speak to people in their homes or on other occasions, often the man of the house will say that his wife takes care of the religion in the family. It seems quite evident that the larger percentage of those in attendance at churches today are women rather than men. Among Jehovah’s Witnesses, however, the man plays an important role since the Bible assigns him the responsibility to care for the spiritual interests of his family and the congregation.—1 Cor. 16:13.
2 Thus, when a man does take interest in the spiritual welfare of his family and takes the lead in religious activity, it often causes others to take note. We rejoice when we see men coming into association with us through Bible studies and attendance at the meetings, and then advancing to baptism and further maturity. It is certainly a pleasure to have them among us, and we look forward to their further advancement to the point where they can assist in giving spiritual care to the sheeplike ones in the congregation.
3 Elders in the congregation do have a heavy responsibility. They not only have to care for themselves and their families, but must take an interest in the spiritual needs of others. Often they give of themselves far into the night handling problems of others, seeking to give them Scriptural counsel. Elders need to know where to go in the Scriptures for proper guidance and how to handle problems in a loving and kind way. These brothers are deeply appreciated by all in the congregation.
4 In caring for their own families, the brothers have a large and important assignment. Sometimes it may appear to be a thankless one, especially when children seem to be negative about their responsibilities in attending meetings and developing a good Christian conscience. We are reminded of one case of a father who had for some time allowed his children almost total freedom in coming and going, not requiring anything of them in building a spiritual personality. Then the day came when he saw that he must do something. As his two teen-age children said, “he put his foot down,” insisting on their undertaking a serious study of the Bible. It was not easy at first, but as the children reported: “We could see by his firm, loving tone that he was serious about Bible knowledge.” These children progressed in knowledge, and commented: “We dedicated our lives to Jehovah, were baptized and soon after started pioneering. Nine years have passed since then and we have never regretted that our Dad ‘put his foot down’ to us.” Can you imagine how thankful that father must be to see how applying Bible principles does have its rewards and builds appreciation in children.
5 It is fine to see that many younger brothers are making good progress spiritually, and some are reaching out for greater responsibilities. Some are rendering helpful service in the congregation, while others have received appointments as ministerial servants and elders. All, however, endeavor to work in the interests of their brothers and members of their families. Rather than being like the majority of mankind in today’s world, leaving religion to the women, these brothers of ours are a great help to the “faithful and discreet slave” class in caring for the Lord’s interests entrusted to them. May Jehovah continue to bless them and may he add to their ranks in the time yet remaining, that all of us may benefit from their labors of love.

