From Our Readers
Our Dying Forests
I was very pleased to see that you had reserved so much space for discussing the forest and the dangers it faces. (June 22, 1987) Our forests can be saved only if as many citizens as possible realize the danger and do their part in combating it. The purpose of our foundation is to instruct the population as to just how severely our forests are endangered and to tell them what each individual can do.​—Managing Director, Endangered Forests Foundation.
C. A., Federal Republic of Germany
Getting Along With Brothers and Sisters
I am very grateful for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Is It So Hard to Get Along With My Brother and Sister?” (July 22, 1987) I live in a family of nine, and naturally we share rooms. I’m 12, and the brother I share with is 5. I used to find it hard to put up with him dumping toys and clothes on my side of the room. Your article helped me to understand him better. We still argue, but we’ve talked and realize that it takes two to make a friendship. We are both untidy kids, and we tend to blame each other. But now I look for his advantage and have found that it’s easy to overcome frictions if you stick by Bible principles.
E. H., England
College Education
Very disappointed in your printing the letter on your “From Our Readers” page on college education. (August 22, 1987) Even you must admit that the article “College Education​—A Preparation for What?” (January 8, 1987) was unfair and biased, and that finally the decision to go to college or not must be made on a personal, responsible, individual basis. I am sure you received letters disagreeing with that article. I know of many who read it and thought it was a narrow and unfair viewpoint, but you never printed a word of differing opinion. Now, six months later, a letter equally narrow agrees with the article and is printed.
T. B., U.S.C., United States
Actually, until your letter arrived, no letters disagreeing with the item on college education were brought to our attention. We agree that the question of whether to get a college education or not is a personal and individual matter. Nevertheless, we felt that the half-page item, based on comments from a respected news columnist, presented some very discerning and sobering thoughts. As valuable as some knowledge acquired in college can be, it cannot be equated with wisdom gained through experience. The item questioned the practical value of some things that are learned in college and gave a realistic view of the possibility of college students’ realizing their hopes for the future. Also, caution was given against seeking materialistic goals. Obviously, the columnist quoted did not cover all aspects of the subject, but we think that in a few choice words, he made some very valid points that are worth serious consideration.​—ED.

