A Government That Accomplishes What Man Cannot
“Come, you people, and see the activities of God. His dealing with the sons of men is fear-inspiring.”​—PSALM 66:5.
 1, 2. (a) How does the visible universe display the awesome power of the Creator? (b) Why should we believe what Jehovah’s prophetic Word says about our time?
JEHOVAH has the power to do what man cannot. To illustrate: Men are in awe of the power of the nuclear bomb; but its power is dwarfed by the tremendous power that exists in our sun. Yet the sun is just one of about 200 billion stars in our Milky Way galaxy alone. Astronomers estimate that throughout the universe there may be about 100 billion galaxies, each with billions of stars. What stupendous power it took to create all of that! (Isaiah 40:26) This awesome power of the Creator makes the power of humans pale into insignificance.​—Isaiah 40:15.
2 Thus no one should doubt that Jehovah can accomplish what he says he will do. (Isaiah 46:9, 10; 55:11) We should believe it when his prophetic Word tells us that we are nearing the end of the time limit he has allowed for humans to go their independent way. History shows that what people have done to human life and to animal life, as well as to the earth itself, is a disgrace, a blot on God’s universe. Thus, Jehovah is fully justified in erasing this blot once and for all.​—Hosea 4:1-3; Jude 14, 15.
 3. What does Bible prophecy say about the near future?
3 What is taking place on the world scene today is clear evidence that this system of things is indeed in the final part of “the last days” foretold at 2 Timothy chapter 3. Soon Jehovah will crush this system out of existence and immobilize its head, Satan the Devil. That will be followed by an entirely new system of things on earth, controlled by the heavenly government for which Jesus taught his followers to pray when he said: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.”​—Matthew 6:10; Daniel 2:44; Romans 16:20.
The Principle of Repurchase
 4. How did Jehovah use the principle of repurchase in ancient Israel?
4 Human governments cannot eliminate sin, sickness, and death. Yet, God’s government will do what humans cannot. We get some insight as to how this will work by examining Jehovah’s dealings with his people of ancient Israel. Back then, God used the principle of repurchase, or ransom. For instance, if an Israelite became poor, he might have to sell himself as a slave to a non-Israelite. But a close relative could ransom him if he had the adequate purchase price.​—Leviticus 25:47-49.
 5, 6. (a) How does the repurchase principle work in relieving mankind of inherited sin? (b) Is everyone automatically freed from sin?
5 In a similar way, God has provided for the repurchasing of mankind out of slavery to sin. The price had to be the equivalent of what was lost. (Deuteronomy 19:21) Adam lost perfect, eternal human life. Since nothing that sinful humans possess equals that in value, they cannot “redeem even a brother.” (Psalm 49:7) However, the Bible foretold the coming of the one who could. That one proved to be Jesus Christ. It was revealed that Jesus had a prehuman existence in heaven. But his life was transferred to the womb of Mary by Jehovah’s power. In this way he was born as a human. But with God as his Father, he did not inherit the sinfulness that had crippled all the rest of mankind.​—Matthew 1:18-21; John 1:1, 14; 1 Peter 2:22.
6 Thus, Jesus possessed the only thing equal in value to a perfect human life​—another perfect human life. But unlike disobedient Adam, Jesus remained obedient to God. And when he offered up his life for the human family, Jehovah accepted it as the suitable repurchase price. (Galatians 1:4) But does this mean that everyone is automatically freed from sin and will gain perfection under Kingdom rule? No, for John 3:16 states: “God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.” Only if we accept the repurchase provision and do something about it will we experience the regeneration of our bodies and minds to perfection in Paradise.​—Revelation 21:4.
Education in the New Order
 7, 8. What potential for future learning lies within the human brain?
7 The mind has a huge potential for learning, even in man’s present imperfect condition. But this is only a fraction of what it will be able to learn in the New Order, where sin will not block its functioning. In The Brain Book the author states: “Within our own heads lies one of the most complex systems in the known universe. Its power and versatility far surpass that of any man-made computer.” He adds: “It is frequently stated that we use only 10 percent of our full mental potential. This, it now appears, is rather an overestimate. We probably do not use even 1 percent​—more likely 0.1 percent or less.”
8 Imagine what the brain will enable humans to accomplish when it reaches its full potential in the New Order. Think of all the fascinating things that Jehovah has put on this earth about which we can learn, such as its animal, marine, and plant life. Think, too, of learning about the amazing universe with its billions of galaxies. Consider all the skills we will be able to master in art, music, crafts, and a host of other things.
 9. What type of education will bring the greatest benefits in the New Order?
9 There is another type of education in the New Order that will bring the greatest benefit of all. Jesus said: “They will all be taught by Jehovah.” (John 6:45) This is the highest level of education. And it will be made available to all the subjects of God’s Kingdom, including those who survive the end of this system of things. (Revelation 7:9, 14) Other Kingdom subjects are noted at John 5:28 and 29, where Jesus said: “The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come out.” This resurrection of billions of dead persons​—utterly impossible for humans to accomplish—​means that a vast educational work will have to be done in their behalf.
10. How will education proceed in the New Order?
10 Today there are many conflicting systems of education. But in the New Order, God’s heavenly government will provide one worldwide system of education to teach people the truth about Jehovah in a unified way. Part of this will be to teach people about proper human relationships. There will be no teaching of pride of race, nationality, or social standing. Instead, earth’s inhabitants will learn to love one another, respecting one another’s dignity. Such education will also result in a wholesome remaking of personalities to mirror the superior qualities of Jehovah.​—Acts 10:34, 35; Colossians 3:9-12.
11, 12. How can we be certain that such education in the New Order will succeed in its purpose?
11 Can such education really work? We are certain that it can and will. One reason is that Jehovah, who cannot lie, says that it will. (Titus 1:2) Furthermore, this kind of education is working right now! Jehovah already has a worldwide teaching organization that is instructing millions of people about his Kingdom government and its requirements. This is happening because Kingdom rule has been in operation since “the last days” began in 1914.
12 Since that time, the prophecy of Matthew chapter 25 has been undergoing fulfillment. It shows that Jesus comes to Kingdom power while God’s enemies are still on earth. Mt 25 Verse 32 says: “All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.” These sheeplike ones are now being taught by Jehovah through his growing, visible organization. Appreciating what they learn, they work to remake their personalities in God’s image. And the fact that this education is affecting millions of persons for the good right now is a sure token that it will do so on a much grander scale in God’s New Order.
Building a Paradise
13. What grand construction work will take place under Kingdom rule?
13 Another kind of work under Kingdom rule will be that of turning this earth into a paradise. And Paradise could not include slums or poverty. People want decent homes and some land with trees, flowers, and gardens. Those who are willing to be taught by God will have just that. Isaiah 65:21 and 22 foretells: “And they will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating. . . . The work of their own hands my chosen ones will use to the full.”
14, 15. Why can we be confident that Jehovah’s servants will be able to construct a paradise?
14 Do not doubt what Jehovah will accomplish with the willing hearts and hands of his people in the New Order. Even today the construction world is amazed at what Jehovah’s Witnesses accomplish in putting up buildings, such as quickly built Kingdom Halls. After one of these was built in the United States, a newspaper editorial said: ‘Something more valuable than a building was created by those 2,000 volunteers. Civic leaders should look closer at what was accomplished last weekend. Enthusiasm, dedication and desire to meet a goal were harnessed with astounding results. If only local groups could bridle those same resources, any goal​—be it recycling, crime prevention, or community development—​could be within reach. An army of workers proved what potential lies within the soul when a community is unified. We hope the Kingdom Hall is the site for a fountain of inspiration to the congregation of Witnesses. Its existence is already an inspiration to us all.’
15 This willingness and growing skill of Jehovah’s servants will be employed with even greater benefits in God’s New Order. And how enjoyable it will be to replace all undesirable areas with beautiful homes and surroundings! How satisfying it will be to know that every day your efforts will bring the earth one day closer to being a global paradise!
A United Global Family
16. Why will inhabitants of the New Order never feel threatened by violence?
16 Nor will the inhabitants of the New Order ever have to feel threatened by crime, rioting, or war. Psalm 46:9 says: “[God] is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.” The “Prince of Peace,” Jesus Christ, will enforce enduring global peace, for “to the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end.” (Isaiah 9:6, 7) With true peace, and with the entire human family educated in the same high standards, all will be united in an unbreakable bond of love. Thus, there will no longer be any divisive national boundaries.
17. How far reaching are the peace and unity God’s servants have even now?
17 Are such promises too good to be true? No, because peace and unity are already a reality among those who loyally submit to Kingdom rule! Consider this: Over two and a half million witnesses of Jehovah are spread around the earth. Yet, they already are fulfilling Isaiah 2:4, which says: “And they will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.” Under no circumstances will Jehovah’s Witnesses intentionally take the lives of their brothers, or anyone else, in any land. As the Italian publication Il Corriere di Trieste observed: “They are ready to face death rather than violate the basic precept . . . THOU SHALT NOT KILL!” Because of adhering to God’s standards, Jehovah’s Witnesses have true peace and unity, which it is impossible for this world to attain. And the fact that millions of them enjoy this condition in the midst of this strife-torn world testifies to what will take place when God’s Kingdom controls all earth’s affairs.​—John 13:34, 35; 1 John 3:10-12.
18, 19. What are some other benefits that come to those who adhere to God’s high standards?
18 In addition to this international peace and unity, adherence to God’s superior standards produces people who care for their neighbor and their neighbor’s property. Thus they ‘conduct themselves honestly in all things.’ (Hebrews 13:18) Regarding this, a French-Canadian columnist, writing in Le Journal de Montreal, said of Jehovah’s Witnesses: “If they were the only people in the world, we would not at night have to bolt our doors shut and put on the burglar alarm.”
19 These loyal subjects of God’s government have no crime problem among themselves, while it is out of hand in the world. Too, since they adhere to the Bible’s high moral standards, they are not plagued by the sexually transmitted diseases or abortions that are epidemic in every nation. And Jehovah’s servants hold marriage in deep respect, in contrast with the world’s permissive view of the marital arrangement. Why can Jehovah’s Witnesses maintain such standards? Because Jehovah is guiding his loyal worshipers, and “with God all things are possible.”​—Matthew 19:26.
Gather to True Worship
20. What is the most significant movement of modern times?
20 Whether people realize it or not, the global gathering of sheeplike persons into Jehovah’s organization is the most significant movement of modern times. This is fulfilling the remarkable prophecy of Isaiah 2:2, 3: “And it must occur in the final part of the days that the mountain of the house of Jehovah [his exalted true worship] will become firmly established above the top of the mountains, and it will certainly be lifted up above the hills; and to it all the nations must stream. And many peoples will certainly go and say: ‘Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, . . . and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.’”
21. What are honest-hearted people encouraged to do?
21 We encourage all honest-hearted people to be part of this thrilling world movement toward true worship and righteous government. Enjoy blessings that right now come from associating with a people being educated in God’s laws and principles. Loyally submit to the Kingdom government that will soon begin to turn this earth into a paradise. Put your trust in that Kingdom and not in the schemes of this world, for as Psalm 127:1 says: “Unless Jehovah himself builds the house, it is to no avail that its builders have worked hard on it.” Respond to the invitation of Psalm 66:5: “Come, you people, and see the activities of God. His dealing with the sons of men is fear-inspiring.” So come to the God who guarantees the best government for mankind, the government that will accomplish what man cannot, the government that very soon will be the only one this earth will have.
How Would You Answer?
□ Why can we be certain that Jehovah will accomplish his purposes?
□ How does the principle of repurchase work for relieving one of sin?
□ What great education and construction works will there be in the New Order?
□ What evidence is there now that peace, unity, and love will exist earth wide in the New Order?
[Picture on page 17]
Under Kingdom rule, truth-loving people “will all be taught by Jehovah”
[Picture on page 19]
Peace and unity are already a reality among those who submit to the Kingdom government

