The Bible​—A Book to Be Read
THE Bible is by far the most widely circulated book in all history. It is the most translated, the most quoted, and the oldest book. Yes, and it is also the book that has survived the most violent opposition. Unhappily, though, it is unlikely that the Bible is the most widely read book in the world.
Yet the Bible should be read. Consider some facts about it.
Why Read It Regularly?
Our English word “Bible” comes from the Greek term bi·bliʹa, meaning “little books.” This reminds us that the Bible is made up of a number of books​—though some are not so “little”! These were written over a period of more than a thousand years. Although written by men, they were inspired by a higher Source. Even today, millions agree that “all Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial.” (2 Timothy 3:16) Yes, these “little books” are filled with the thoughts of Jehovah God himself. (Isaiah 55:9) No wonder they have endured so long!
The practice of reading the Scriptures regularly has certainly been beneficial in times past. Kings of Israel were to make personal handwritten copies of the Law, now an important part of the Bible. They were to read in it daily, as a constant reminder to serve humbly and adhere to God’s commandments. (Deuteronomy 17:18-20) Surely, we can derive similar benefits from regular Bible reading.
And how important to pay attention to Bible prophecy! Because of the prophet Daniel’s personal study of the Scriptures, he was able to discern that an important prophecy in the book of Jeremiah was about to be fulfilled.​—Daniel 9:1, 2; Jeremiah 29:10.
When John the Baptizer was preaching, “the people were in expectation” of the Messiah. (Luke 3:15) This suggests that many among them were familiar with the prophecies about the Christ that had been recorded in the Scriptures. This is very interesting, since books were not readily available in those days. Copies of Bible books had to be made painstakingly by hand. So how did people become familiar with them?
In many cases by public reading. The disciple James remarked: “From ancient times Moses has had in city after city those who preach him, because he is read aloud in the synagogues on every sabbath.”​—Acts 15:21.
Today it is easy for individuals to own a personal copy of the Bible, and at least some of the “little books” are available in the languages of 97 percent of the world’s population. Thus it is sad that many are not very interested in finding out what the Bible has to say to them.
Encouraged to Read It
Jehovah’s Witnesses have made it a prominent part of their work to encourage regular reading of the Bible. In bold letters on one of their printing plants at their world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, appears the statement “READ GOD’S WORD THE HOLY BIBLE DAILY.”
In the more than 46,000 congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses throughout the world, there is the weekly Theocratic Ministry School. Public reading of a selected portion of the Bible each week is a part of the course. All in attendance have a weekly assignment to read a few Bible chapters in the privacy of their own home, and those who keep up with this schedule eventually read the whole Bible.
This is in harmony with the Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook, one of the textbooks used in this course. It states: “Your personal schedule should include time for reading the Bible itself. There is great value in reading it right through from cover to cover. . . . However, your goal in reading should never be just to cover material, but to get the overall viewpoint of it with the intention of remembering. Take time to ponder on what it says.”​—Page 21.
Jehovah’s Witnesses feel that modern-day Christians should be knowledgeable about the Bible. With this in mind, they have promoted a 20th-century version of public Bible reading. They have recorded readings of many of the “little books” of the Bible on cassette tapes. Thus those who feel that they cannot take the time to sit down and read for long periods can now listen to recordings of Bible books while working around the house, while driving, or doing a number of other things. Of course, the tapes are also a fine help when we do sit down to read the Bible. It is a delightsome experience to listen to a reading of the Scriptures while following along in your own copy of the Bible.
By all means, avail yourself fully of the spiritual guidance provided in true Christian publications provided by God through “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matthew 24:45-47) But why not also make it your habit to read the Bible daily. The benefits will be great, as was noted in the command given long ago to the Israelite leader Joshua: “This book of the law should not depart from your mouth, and you must in an undertone read in it day and night, in order that you may take care to do according to all that is written in it; for then you will make your way successful and then you will act wisely.”​—Joshua 1:8.
[Picture on page 31]
For years, a sign on the Watchtower Society’s printing plant at 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn, New York, has urged passersby to read the Holy Scriptures

