A Man’s Job
“¡Ropa, zapato, casa, y comida!” These words are from an old Spanish song that lists the four basic things a man is expected to provide for his family: clothes, shoes, shelter, and food. And most responsible men proudly try to shoulder that burden.
However, if you are a family man, do you care for the more important spiritual needs of your family? Or do you, like many men, think that seeing to religious matters at home is not really a man’s job? In some cultures it is not even expected that men would take time to teach their children about God and the Bible.
The Word of God charges particularly the man of the house with the responsibility for instilling in his family a love for God and a deep appreciation for divine standards. For example, at Ephesians 6:4, the Scriptures exhort Christian men as follows: “You, fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.”
Some, although acquainted with these words, may not fully appreciate that the scripture is specifically directed to the father, the man of the house. For example, Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking individuals may understand the words of Ephesians 6:4 to be addressed both to the father and to the mother. In these languages the word for “fathers” and the word for “parents” is the same. However, in verse 1 of Ephesians chapter 6, the apostle Paul made reference both to the father and to the mother by using the Greek word go·neuʹsin, from go·neusʹ, meaning “parent.” But in verse 4, the Greek word used was pa·teʹres, meaning “fathers.” Yes, at Ephesians 6:4, Paul addressed his words directly to the man in the family.
Of course, if there is no man in the family to take the lead, then the woman must assume this responsibility. With Jehovah’s help many mothers have successfully reared their children in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah. However, when a Christian man is present, he should take the lead. If he neglects this responsibility, it is more difficult for the rest of the family to maintain a good program of spiritual nourishment. And such a man is accountable to Jehovah for his neglect.
God’s feelings on this matter are evident in the Scriptural qualifications set forth for overseers and ministerial servants in the Christian congregation. The Bible specifies that the one selected for such a position should be “a man presiding over his own household in a fine manner, having children in subjection with all seriousness; (if indeed any man does not know how to preside over his own household, how will he take care of God’s congregation?).”​—1 Timothy 3:4, 5, 12; Titus 1:6.
The family man must be willing to sacrifice pleasures and personal convenience for the sake of his children’s spiritual well-being. At times he may have to reduce the time devoted to other activities so as to have a reasonable amount of time to spend with his children on a regular basis. (Deuteronomy 6:6, 7) Nevertheless, he will not relinquish to others this God-given assignment. His love for and interest in his children will go far beyond providing clothes, shoes, shelter, and food.
It is quite a challenge to bring up children “in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.” That is why the primary responsibility is the man’s. When the Christian father does his job well, then he can view his God-fearing children as a blessing from Jehovah. He can say with the psalmist: “Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are the sons of youth. Happy is the able-bodied man that has filled his quiver with them.”​—Psalm 127:4, 5.

