Looking Beyond Man-Made “Peace and Security”
The truth is, humans can never bring real, lasting peace. Why not? Because humans are not the real peacebreakers, although they share the guilt for their bloodstained history. The real peacebreaker is more powerful than man. It is none other than Satan the Devil, who is described in the Bible as “misleading the entire inhabited earth.”​—Revelation 12:9.
THE Bible says: “The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one [Satan].” (1 John 5:19) Hence, attaining real peace and lasting security must involve removing Satan from the scene along with the world system that he has built up and that he so obviously controls. (Compare Isaiah 48:22; Romans 16:20.) Humans cannot do this.
How, then, can peace and security be achieved? By the power of the One who is infinitely stronger than Satan. Almighty God has set a time limit to Satan’s activity among mankind. When that time limit arrives, “sudden destruction” will come upon the world lying in Satan’s power. (1 Thessalonians 5:3-7) All the evidence leads to the conclusion that this will happen soon.
Peace and Security Now!
What about now, though? A measure of true peace and security is possible even today. How? Not as many religious leaders have tried, by getting involved in the politics of this world, but, rather, by following God’s commands and counsel.
Does such a course really produce peace? Yes, it does. For example, Jehovah’s Witnesses have put it to the test and found that it really is possible to enjoy genuine peace as well as a measure of security. Following God’s commands as revealed in the Bible has enabled them to come together as an international organization in true peace, whatever their race, nationality, or language.​—Psalm 133:1.
In obedience to divine law, they have symbolically ‘beaten swords into plowshares and they learn war no more.’ (Isaiah 2:2-4) They feel secure in God’s love and have confidence that their spiritual brothers care for them. (Romans 8:28, 35-39; Philippians 4:7) If you question whether this is true, we invite you to visit them in one of their Kingdom Halls and see for yourself.
Peace and Security Worldwide
This, however, is not the final fulfillment of the Bible’s promise of true peace and security. Far from it! It is merely a foregleam of what this world would be like if everyone followed God’s laws. Soon that foregleam will turn into reality.
The apostle Paul said: “Whenever it is that they [those not serving God] are saying: ‘Peace and security!’ [thinking they have finally brought peace and security in their own way] then sudden destruction is to be instantly upon them.” (1 Thessalonians 5:3) God will determine that Satan has misled mankind long enough. It will then be time to remove him from the scene, along with the corrupt world system that is in his power. Then will be the time for the fulfillment of Daniel’s prophecy: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”​—Daniel 2:44.
Will this be an unfair act on God’s part? In no way. Sudden destruction will come upon only those who deserve it according to God’s judgment, God’s standards. Do you trust the Creator to decide justly in this matter? Surely we can leave the matter safely in his hands! And what will be the result of his judgment work? The proverb says: “The upright are the ones that will reside in the earth, and the blameless are the ones that will be left over in it. As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth.” (Proverbs 2:21, 22) Will anyone grieve the loss of the wicked?
With the peacebreakers out of the way, genuine peace and security will be the lot of mankind earth wide under the beneficent rule of God’s Kingdom. “They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain; because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.” (Isaiah 11:9) Do you believe this promise of the Bible? Are you confident that these things will happen soon? If you have any doubts, we encourage you to examine the matter further. In truth, God’s way is the only way man will ever achieve the longed-for goal of real peace and genuine security.
[Pictures on page 8]
Jehovah’s people enjoy true peace and a good measure of security today

