Kingdom Proclaimers Report
They Became Convinced in Kathmandu
AN ARTIST began her search for the truth in Brittany, France, in 1980. She had discussions with the Pentecostals and studied Eastern religions​—without satisfaction. Then she had some conversations with one of Jehovah’s Witnesses but soon stopped. She met another artist and went to work and live with him.
Shortly after this the unmarried couple decided to visit Nepal. They were greatly impressed by the beauty and peace of that land but were disappointed by the caste system, which seemed unjust to their Western eyes.
Upon returning to France, the woman suggested to her companion that they study the Bible together, and to her surprise he agreed. They contacted the Witness with whom she had had discussions two years before. In the beginning they used only the Bible, but eventually they agreed to use the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life and later the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. Within a year they gave up taking drugs.
After visiting Nepal again for two months, the couple returned to France where they continued studying. They gave up smoking and going to bars and nightclubs and started to attend meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, when they finished the Live Forever book, they decided to stop studying.
They again went to Nepal, where they lived in a little house at the foot of the Himalaya Mountains. One day an elderly man, wearing a suit and tie, knocked on their door. The woman was alone in the house, and she thought he must be an art dealer calling to see their paintings. To her surprise he was a Witness calling on behalf of the person who had studied with them in France. Soon her companion returned home, and a two-hour discussion ensued.
A few days later, the couple attended a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Kathmandu and were very impressed by the clean appearance of those in attendance. They observed the same brotherly love and happiness they had seen at the meetings in France. They also noted the unity of the Nepalese people present, although these had come from different castes. Now they were convinced that this must be Jehovah’s organization.
A month later they returned to France and immediately resumed their Bible study and attendance at meetings. They married, began sharing in the witnessing work, and finally were baptized. The husband is now a ministerial servant, and his wife regularly shares in the auxiliary pioneer service. Truly, those who have the right heart condition will be helped by Jehovah’s spirit to advance and become his worshipers.​—Revelation 7:15-17.
[Box/​Map on page 9]
NEPAL
                Population -  17,712,221
      1990 Peak Publishers -  63
     Ratio, 1 Publisher to -  281,146
Average Pioneer Publishers -  10
   Number of Congregations -  1
     Average Bible Studies -  107
       Memorial Attendance -  220
[Map]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
NEPAL
INDIA
[Picture on page 9]
Market scene in Kathmandu, Nepal

