From Our Readers
Child Rearing  The series “Your Children​—Doing What’s Best for Them” (September 22, 1992) exposed my deficiencies as a parent. My attention has been focused on personal matters and congregation activities​—all to the neglect of my three-year-old son. He became a very restless child. I also tend to be short-tempered, irritable, and embarrassed about expressing affection. Rather than hugging my child, I have gone too far in trying to be strict. Since Jehovah freely showers all of us with love, I will now try to shower with love the inheritance I have received from Jehovah.
T. T., Japan
Although I am not a parent, I am a lover of children, and this issue touched my heart. I cried to learn of the sad problems children face today. Your article was also very informative in showing how to deal with these problems at the very early stages of life so as to avoid horrifying problems in later years.
L. B., United States
The articles made me examine myself as a father. When I got married, I was very young and more interested in being with my friends than in being with my family. Reading the articles made me realize that I did not give my daughter enough of my time. May these articles move parents to do what’s best for their children.
A. V., Italy
Animal Tales  Thank you for the article “The Capybara​—Mistake or Marvel of Creation?” (September 22, 1992) I often read articles about animals to my child. With Mr. Capybara himself doing the talking, the article delighted my child!
C. T., Japan
A refreshing alternative to the junk food served up by many magazines! My children and I read it together. Learning about new and different animals is fun!
C. H., United States
Thank you for the article “Those Amazing Marsupials From Down Under.” (July 22, 1992) The way these animals give birth and produce different kinds of milk I found to be particularly interesting. It made me think of how Jehovah’s power is so clearly seen from his creations!
N. S., Italy
I am 14 years old, and I enjoyed the article “The Arabian Camel​—Africa’s All-Purpose Vehicle.” (June 8, 1992) You put things in a way that made the information very, very entertaining.
G. C., Argentina
Public Speaking  The article “You Can Speak Before an Audience!” (July 22, 1992) was helpful to me in gaining employment. I first read it with a view to applying it to the Christian ministry. But upon being notified of a job interview, I reread the article and put into practice many of the points it mentioned, such as the nerve-calming exercise. I then said a prayer and went to the interview. I got the job, and I am grateful to you for providing this article at the right time.
K. B., United States
Space Exploration  As an avid reader of science fiction, I was simply enthralled by the series on space exploration (September 8, 1992) It gave me a balanced view of this most exciting subject. It was also uplifting to see that God has a wonderful purpose not just for this planet but for the entire universe.
A. C., United States

