Are You Using the Reasoning Book?
 1. How did the apostle Paul and Jesus teach others?
1 The apostle Paul endeavored to ‘reason from the Scriptures.’ (Acts 17:2, 3; 18:19) In so doing, he imitated Jesus, who frequently quoted the Scriptures and used illustrations to help his listeners understand God’s will. (Matt. 12:1-12) The book Reasoning From the Scriptures has been designed to help us do the same.
 2. How may we use the Reasoning book to prepare effective introductions?
2 Preparing Effective Introductions: Reasoning From the Scriptures contains interest-arousing introductions on pages 9-15. Learning and using different introductions, especially if you cover the territory frequently, will add variety to your ministry and help you become more versatile and effective in starting conversations. Introductions may be read directly from the book when engaging in telephone witnessing or when speaking over the intercom in high-security buildings.
 3. What is found on pages 16-24 of the Reasoning book that will help us in the ministry?
3 Overcoming Conversation Stoppers: Why not anticipate the conversation stoppers that may arise in your territory and take a few minutes before preaching to review pages 16-21 for a potential reply? Will some householders likely be Buddhists, Hindus, Jews, or Muslims? If so, the information on pages 21-24 will be helpful.
 4. How may we use the Reasoning book when a question or a controversial subject is raised?
4 Answering Questions: The Reasoning book can also assist us when a question or a controversial subject is raised. You may simply tell the person that you would like to show him something interesting that you have on the subject and take out your Reasoning book. Since the subjects are listed in alphabetical order, turn to the main heading that you think will have the information you need. Then scan the questions in boldface type. If you do not quickly see what you are looking for, turn to the index at the back. Once you find the appropriate information, read it directly from the publication. If you are discussing a specific scripture, you may find what you need on page 445 under “Scriptures Often Misapplied.”
 5. What are some other beneficial uses of the Reasoning book?
5 Other Uses: Some keep a copy of the Reasoning book at their job or at school to help them answer questions such as, ‘Why don’t you celebrate holidays?’ Youths have found the information under the headings “Creation” and “Evolution” helpful in preparing school reports. Are you going to visit someone who is sick or who has lost a loved one in death? The material under “Encouragement” may help you to provide Scriptural comfort. The Reasoning book also has helpful information for those preparing talks and conducting meetings for field service.
 6. What is our goal when preaching?
6 When preaching, our goal is not to win arguments; neither is it simply to convey information. We want to reason skillfully from the Scriptures. As we make good use of the Reasoning book, we show that we are paying constant attention to our teaching.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

