Preaching Requires Endurance
1 For more than 30 years, the apostle Paul enjoyed a satisfying career as an evangelizer. As with any worthwhile endeavor, his preaching activity was not without its challenges. (2 Cor. 11:23-29) Yet, Paul did not give up. (2 Cor. 4:1) He understood that the strength to endure while fulfilling his ministry would come from Jehovah. (Phil. 4:13) In view of his example of faithful endurance, Paul could say: “Become imitators of me, even as I am of Christ.”​—1 Cor. 11:1.
2 Enduring Trials Today: Each day, many of our brothers face ridicule, opposition, or indifference from family members, workmates, or schoolmates. (Matt. 10:35; John 15:20) Perhaps that is true in your case. On the other hand, you may be contending with a health problem, or you may have a daily struggle to block out distractions and temptations that test your faith and endurance. We can gain strength by considering the examples of faithful servants of old as well as those of fellow Christians today who have faced and overcome challenges.​—1 Pet. 5:9.
3 We can gain power for remaining firm in our ministry by making sure that we have “put on the complete suit of armor from God.” (Eph. 6:10-13, 15) Prayer for endurance is also essential. God grants his holy spirit so that we can endure trials. (2 Cor. 6:4-7) To succeed in our spiritual warfare, we must heed God’s reminders to renew our spirit. (Ps. 119:24, 85-88) Just as a child might read a personal letter from a loving father over and over, our daily Bible reading reinforces our bond with Jehovah. We gain wisdom to cope with trials through regular personal study, thus allowing God’s thinking to influence our decisions and strengthen our integrity.​—Prov. 2:10, 11.
4 Endurance Brings Blessings: As was true in Paul’s case, our faithful endurance while fulfilling our ministry results in making Jehovah’s heart rejoice and in bringing blessings to us and to others. (Prov. 27:11) May we be determined to persevere in the ministry, thereby proving that our faith is durable and “of much greater value than gold that perishes despite its being proved by fire.”​—1 Pet. 1:6, 7.

