Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting December 8
Song 19
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly review the sample presentations for the December 1 Watchtower and the December Awake! found on page 8. Invite those in the audience who have had success placing these issues to relate how they presented them. What article, question, and scripture have they used?
15 min: The Theocratic Ministry School for 2009. Talk by the school overseer. Discuss points needing emphasis locally from the October 2008 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Review the role of the auxiliary counselor. Encourage all to be diligent in fulfilling their assignments, in participating in Bible highlights, and in applying the suggestions given weekly from Benefit From Theocratic Ministry School Education.
20 min: “Are You Using the Reasoning Book?”a When considering paragraph 4, have a pioneer or other qualified publisher briefly demonstrate how to use the Reasoning book in the door-to-door ministry to answer the question, ‘Why don’t Jehovah’s Witnesses celebrate Christmas?’
Song 6
Week Starting December 15
Song 178
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
10 min: Use Repetition in the Ministry. Talk and audience discussion based on the Ministry School book, page 207. Briefly demonstrate one or two suggestions from the material.
25 min: “‘Bear Thorough Witness’​—By Apartment Witnessing.”b To be handled by the service overseer or other elder. Make local application of the material.
Song 157
Week Starting December 22
Song 75
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Mention the literature offer for January, and have an elder demonstrate how this may be presented.
15 min: Prepare to Offer the January 1 Watchtower and the January Awake! Audience discussion. After giving a brief overview of the magazines, ask the audience which articles may appeal to people in the territory and why. Using some of these articles, invite the audience to relate a question that they would use to start a conversation, then a scripture from the article that they would read before offering the magazines. Conclude by demonstrating how each magazine might be offered using the sample presentations on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory.
20 min: “A Special Day for Offering Bible Studies.”c Announce which weekend in January the congregation will focus on starting Bible studies. Review the suggestions found in paragraph 3 and have one or two approaches demonstrated.
Song 133
Week Starting December 29
Song 60
Congregation Bible Study:
jd chap. 12 ¶1-10
Theocratic Ministry School:
Bible reading: Revelation 15-22
Theocratic Ministry School Review
Service Meeting:
Song 153
 5 min: Local announcements.
10 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Preaching Requires Endurance.”d As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
Song 155
Week Starting January 5
Song 35
Congregation Bible Study:
jd chap. 12 ¶11-22
Theocratic Ministry School:
Bible reading: Genesis 1-5
No. 1: Genesis 3:1-15
No. 2: Why Jesus Was a Great Teacher (lr chap. 1)
No. 3: What Is Not Vanity? (1 Cor. 15:58)
Service Meeting:
Song 98
Note: Information regarding the district convention should not be considered before the week of January 5. Congregations are not to move their meeting ahead that week unless the circuit overseer is visiting.
 5 min: Local announcements.
10 min: Imitate Jesus’ Attitude Toward the Ministry. Talk and audience discussion based on “Come Be My Follower,” pages 84-86, paragraphs 16-21.
20 min: “2009 District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.”e To be handled by the congregation secretary. Before considering the article, read the December 15, 2008, convention assignment letter. Stress the importance of displaying the fruitage of the spirit at all times.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.
Song 114
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

