“Bear Thorough Witness”​—By Apartment Witnessing
 1. What does ‘bearing thorough witness to the good news’ involve?
1 Like the apostle Paul, our desire is to “bear thorough witness to the good news.” (Acts 20:24) We therefore endeavor to reach as many in our territory as possible with the Kingdom message. This includes the large number of people who live in apartment buildings. At times, it can be a challenge to gain access to those living in such facilities. However, since apartments have a high concentration of people, they present many opportunities for us to spread the good news.
 2. Why are discretion and good judgment necessary in apartment witnessing?
2 In the face of the threat of crime and violence, a growing number of apartment buildings are locked and have doormen or surveillance cameras. (2 Tim. 3:1, 2) The management may have a policy that uninvited individuals are not allowed to enter. A superintendent or manager may be inclined to ask us to leave the premises, especially if one of the tenants complains. Therefore, being discreet and demonstrating good judgment are important.
 3. When is it best to work apartments, and why?
3 When to Work: As in other types of territory, it is best to preach in apartments when the residents are likely to be at home. Suspicion may arise if we are present when most tenants are away. Many publishers have been successful in finding people at home in the early evening as well as during Saturday and Sunday afternoons. Working apartments too early, especially on weekends, may result in complaints to the management.
4, 5. How may we gain access to some apartments that have a locked entrance?
4 Gaining Entrance: Publishers should not contact the superintendent or any other apartment personnel prior to engaging in the ministry. If the locked building has an intercom outside the entrance, we can use it to find someone who agrees to let us in to speak with him. Depending upon the type of apartments, we may be able to make other door-to-door calls in the building after speaking with the person who permitted us to enter. In other cases, however, it would be wise to exit the building and use the intercom for contacting the next resident. We should use good judgment in deciding how many tenants we will contact in this way on the same occasion.
5 Some tenants may prefer that you tell them the purpose of your visit over the intercom. If so, introduce yourself in a friendly manner. Use the householder’s name if it is shown on the directory. In a concise way, mention your subject. Some have been successful by reading an introduction directly from the Reasoning book.
 6. What should we do when working buildings that have a doorman?
6 If the building has a doorman who does not permit us to work the apartments, we can endeavor to witness to him. Many doormen enjoy reading our literature. We may even be able to start a Bible study and conduct it in the lobby. If the doorman permits us to visit a specific tenant who has demonstrated interest, it is usually best not to take the liberty of knocking on other doors in the building.
 7. What should we keep in mind regarding our witnessing case?
7 Appearance and Decorum: Carrying large, bulky briefcases can make us conspicuous. Therefore, we may consider using a more discreet case or none at all. Some publishers put the featured literature in a slim portfolio and carry their Bible in their hand or pocket.
 8. How should the group be organized for apartment witnessing?
8 It is best not to congregate in large groups, especially in lobbies or parking lots, as this will draw unnecessary attention. Appropriate precautions should be taken when preaching in apartments that are in high-crime areas. (Prov. 22:3) For example, two or three pairs of publishers might work on the same floor within earshot of each other, perhaps taking turns knocking at the door while the others wait.
 9. How may we demonstrate courtesy, and why is this important?
9 When entering an apartment building, wipe your shoes and close the door securely behind you. By showing such courtesy, we alleviate the tenants’ reasons for complaint. Once inside, proceed purposefully to the elevator or to the floor that is to be worked rather than loitering at the entrance. This will dispel the suspicion of onlookers.
10. How may we avoid making unnecessary noise in the hallways?
10 In many apartment buildings, noise carries in the hallways. Therefore, do not speak louder than is necessary to be comfortably heard by the householder. When talking to other publishers, keep your voice low, but speak in a calm, moderate tone so as to avoid arousing suspicion. So that tenants will not be unduly disturbed, some publishers alternate from one end of the hallway to the other end until the floor is worked, instead of knocking on one door after another down a corridor. In addition, knocking on the door in a loud or authoritative manner may frighten those inside.
11. What suggestions may help when we knock on a door with a peephole?
11 If the door has a peephole, stand so that anyone looking out can see you and your companion. Look directly at the peephole, and when you detect that someone is looking out, say a warm greeting and begin your presentation. If the person asks, ‘Who is it?’ you may find it best to give your name and that of the person with you. The householder may then feel better about opening the door. If not, you may still give your presentation through the door.
12. How may we avoid problems when leaving literature at not-at-homes?
12 Not-at-Homes: A frequent complaint of superintendents is that they have to pick up literature from the hallway or the grounds. Literature left outside the door can easily fall to the floor and become litter. Therefore, any literature left at not-at-homes should be placed completely out of sight.
13. What should we do if we meet an irate householder?
13 Irate Householders: If we meet an irate householder who may be inclined to call the superintendent, it is best to leave that particular floor and return at another time. In other cases, it would be wise to leave the building entirely in order to avoid a possible confrontation with the superintendent. Even if the householder does not specifically request that future calls not be made on him, it would be better to make note of the apartment number as a do-not-call and place this with the territory card. As with other do-not-calls, these addresses should be contacted periodically to determine the householder’s wishes.
14, 15. What should we do if we are asked to leave by an apartment representative?
14 If You Are Asked to Leave: If while working the building you are asked to leave by the superintendent, security personnel, maintenance personnel, or any other apartment representative, it is wise to comply immediately. Whenever possible, we want to avoid confrontation with resulting threats of legal action and appeals to police. In most cases, apartment personnel are not prejudiced against Jehovah’s Witnesses but are simply doing their job.
15 At times, when a building representative asks you to leave, you may be able to explain in a kindly and tactful manner the reason for your visit. (1 Pet. 3:15) We recognize his responsibility in keeping the residents happy and in maintaining the security of the building. Perhaps he will allow you to remain in the building. But if not, take your leave graciously. If circumstances allow, you may ask for permission to leave literature at regular intervals in the lobby or laundry room. (Col. 4:6) The service overseer should be kept up-to-date regarding such incidents.
16. What should we do if problems persist when trying to work an apartment building or complex?
16 Perhaps, after a reasonable period of time, publishers can discreetly attempt to work in the building. However, if problems persist, the elders should contact the branch office for assistance rather than publishers attempting to resolve matters on their own. If publishers are not able to work the apartments, efforts can be made to contact the tenants in other ways, such as by telephone witnessing or writing letters. Some publishers engage in street witnessing in front of or in the immediate vicinity of the apartment building during the morning and evening hours when people generally go to work and return home.
17. Why is apartment witnessing important?
17 The end of this wicked system is coming soon. Only those who call on the name of Jehovah will be saved. “However, how will they call on him in whom they have not put faith? How, in turn, will they put faith in him of whom they have not heard?” (Rom. 10:13, 14) Many who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life” live in apartments. (Acts 13:48) By being discreet and demonstrating good judgment, we can reach them with the good news.

