God’s Word Is Alive
Can Images Help You Serve God?
IT HAS been the custom of many persons to use images in their worship of God. They may say that they do not worship the image, but that seeing and touching it aids them in worshiping God. Yet, does God want us to worship him with the aid of images? Let us see.
God directed his ancient people of Israel: “Do not follow the ways of other nations . . . The religion of these people is worthless. A tree is cut down in the forest; it is carved by the tools of the woodworker and decorated with silver and gold.” The people believed that such an image or idol was a help in worshiping God. Yet the Bible goes on to say: “Such idols are like scarecrows in a field of melons; they cannot speak; they have to be carried because they cannot walk. . . . they can do you no good.”​—Jer. 10:2-5, Today’s English Version; Isa. 46:6, 7.
Often an image or idol is made in the form of a person. The image may be made from a tree, the wood from which can also be used to make a fire. The Bible says of a man who uses wood for both of such purposes: “With some of the wood he makes a fire; he roasts meat, eats it, and is satisfied. . . . The rest of the wood he makes into an idol, and then he bows down and worships it. He prays to it and says, ‘You are my god​—save me!’”​—Isa. 44:13-17, TEV.
Does it really make sense to honor an image? The Bible answers: “Such people [who do] are too stupid to know what they are doing. They close their eyes and their minds to the truth. The maker of idols hasn’t the wit or the sense to say, ‘Some of the wood I burned up. I baked some bread on the coals, and I roasted meat and ate it. And the rest of the wood I made into an idol. Here I am bowing down to a block of wood!’ It makes as much sense as eating ashes.”​—Isa. 44:18-20, TEV; Ps. 115:4-8.
So, as we might have expected, Jesus Christ never used images in worship. “God is a Spirit,” he explained, “and those worshiping him must worship with spirit and truth.” (John 4:24) Acting in harmony with this counsel, none of Jesus’ early followers used images as aids in worship. In fact, his apostle Paul wrote: “We are walking by faith, not by sight.” (2 Cor. 5:7) And Jesus’ apostle John warned: “Guard yourselves from idols.” (1 John 5:21) Why not look around your home and ask yourself whether you are following this advice?​—Deut. 7:25.
[Pictures on page 8]
They are “carved by the tools of the woodworker . . .”
“Such idols are like scarecrows in a field of melons . . .”
“They have to be carried because they cannot walk . . .”
[Picture on page 9]
“With some of the wood he makes a fire . . . The rest of the wood he makes into an idol, and then he bows down and worships it.”

