Insight on the News
Nun Advises Gamblers
● A speech on “How to Gamble​—If You Must” is periodically given by a Catholic nun to social clubs in the San Francisco Bay area of California. The nun holds a doctor’s degree in mathematics and is an expert on probability. According to the newspaper “The Oregonian,” she gives advice and tips to groups planning gambling trips to Nevada. Typically, her suggestions are said to run this way: “Know the game. Know the odds.” She also gives advice on what games to bet on and what games to avoid.
When asked if it is a sin to gamble, the nun’s reply is: “No, I don’t believe so.” “Life is a gamble,” she adds. “I think gambling is neutral in the sinning category.” Her comments merely reflect the view of her church. “Catholic teaching considers gambling as morally indifferent in itself,” says the “Catholic Encyclopedia for School and Home.”​—Vol. 4, p. 506.
Experience shows, however, that when money is wagered or bet, greed is close at hand. Many who have become compulsive gamblers began by making petty bets ‘for entertainment.’ So, rather than trying to ‘know the game and the odds,’ getting involved in activities that are known to promote the “works of the flesh,” is it not wiser for Christians to involve themselves in activities that produce the “fruitage of the spirit”?​—Gal. 5:19-23.
‘Christianize’ Pagan Festivals?
● Bonfires are lit along the eastern coast of Spain and in many countries of Europe on the eve of June 24, termed “Saint John the Baptist’s” day on the Catholic calendar. What do bonfires have to do with John the Baptist? Barcelona’s morning daily “La Vanguardia” admits that the entire festivity actually “represents the Christianization of the summer solstice.” This astronomical event, when the sun appears to stand still in its heavenly northward or southward motion, motivated festivities and licentious merrymaking among the ancient pagans.
Another big solstice festival that has been ‘Christianized’ is December 25. At about that time the days begin to lengthen again, and the sun-worshiping Romans celebrated the birthday of the unconquered sun. In the fourth century C.E. this was changed into the celebration of the birth of God’s Son. Even the fir tree used by the pagan Germanic tribes in their winter solstice celebrations was later adopted as the “Christmas” tree.
Rather than ‘Christianize’ such pagan events, the apostle Paul sets the right course for true Christians by asking: “What sharing does light have with darkness?” Then he admonishes: “‘Get out from among them, and separate yourselves,’ says Jehovah, ‘and quit touching the unclean thing’; ‘and I will take you in.’”​—2 Cor. 6:14-17.
Unsatisfying Materialism
● Commuters in the Tokyo, Japan, area spend an average of one and a half hours getting to and from work. Since many work overtime for several hours each day, it is not uncommon for them to be away from their home for 13 hours or more. Leaving the house before seven in the morning, it is usual to return after eight in the evening.
Many of these workers live in small houses on small lots, as space is at a premium. If a 50-foot (15-m) by 100-foot (30-m) lot is used for comparison, their average housing lot is about half of that. In Tokyo itself, it is even less. And with all their hard work, very few see any way of improving their situation.
Nevertheless, over 64,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses in Japan are conducting more than 90,000 Bible studies in the homes of people, showing them from the Bible the real hope of a much more satisfying life in a paradise “new earth.” (2 Pet. 3:13) In that new order of God’s making, people will live in peace, contentment and genuine material prosperity, freed from today’s frustrations, as the prophet Isaiah foretold: “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating. For like the days of a tree will the days of my people be.”​—Isa. 65:21, 22; Ps. 37:11.

