VOL. XIII. SEPTEMBER 1, 1892. NO. 17. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



"Behold, I stand at the door and knock!" 
says the Master, addressing himself to the present 
or Laodicean stage of the Church nominal. 
Yet she is "rich and increased in goods" (in 
supposed world-converting machinery, as well 
as temporally prosperous), self-complacent and 
feeling no need for the second coming of 
the Lord and the establishment of his Kingdom 
to put down all enemies of righteousness, 
and to cause the knowledge of the Lord to fill 
the whole earth. She is so satisfied with the 
present machinery that she believes that she 
can do all this of herself, and would rather dislike 
to have the second advent occur now, to 
spoil her plans and her "many wonderful 
works." (Rev. 3:14-20; Matt. 7:22.) Hence 
she hears not the knockings which from time 
to time declare that he has already come— that 
he is even now present, doing his work, his 
great work [overthrowing the nations], and 
bringing to pass his act, his [to them] strange 
act [of spewing "Laodicea" out of his mouth], 
rejecting the nominal Church systems and casting 
all but the faithful into the outer darkness 
of the world, relative to his plans and doings, 
letting them have a full share in the vexatious 
time of trouble already begun.— Isa. 28:21,22. 

Several loud raps have recently been given, 
so loud that even the worldly begin to inquire 
what they mean. Within the past two months, 
one loud, long knock came at Homestead and 
generally in the vicinity of Pittsburg. Another 
was heard in the Rocky Mountain mines. 



Another was heard in the coal-mining towns of 
Tennessee; another along the railroad lines in 
New York state; another in labor circles in 
France; another in the cholera plague visiting 
Europe. 

Not that the Lord directly caused or approves 
of the rioting or bloodshed; but that these 
things are related to the day of his presence, 
the "day of trouble," with which the Gospel 
age will close and the Millennial age be ushered 
in— a day of distress and perplexity upon men, 
upon nations, and upon the Laodicean church— 
a day of vengeance and righteous retribution. 

But whilst men's hearts are "failing them 
for fear and for looking after [forward to] those 
things coming upon the earth," of which present 
rumblings are but premonitions, an excellent 
opportunity is afforded, for those who 
understand the situation, to preach the Gospel 
of the Kingdom to all who have an ear for 
the message. These rumblings mean the breaking 
in pieces of the powers that be, the Gentile 
governments, which for now nearly 2500 years 
have, under Satan's blinding and by God's 
permit, ruled the world under the law of selfishness. 
The Scriptures have foretold the utter 
dissolution of society as at present organized, 
and the reconstruction of it upon principles of 
righteousness and love, under the great Prince 
Immanuel— upon whose reign all the gracious 
prophecies of peace and blessing and good 
will toward men depend; and for whose kingdom 
to come the whole creation (although 
ignorantly) is "groaning and travailing in pain 
together, waiting for the manifestation of the 

R1439 : page 260 

sons of God" [the Church— the Christ, head 

and body], in the power and glory of the Kingdom 

promised. 

Let each of us who is informed through the 
Lord's Word be on the alert to invent and to 
wisely use the many opportunities now, thus 
afforded for preaching the good tidings of great 
joy which shall be unto all people. But great 
prudence is needed, and wisdom from on high 
should be sought, else the results may be injurious 
rather than beneficial. The right words 
at the right time will surely do good; while 
ill-chosen words or an inopportune time may 
prejudice the mind so as to hinder some from 
seeing the beauty of the Lord's plan for years 
to come. Our Lord's words, "Be ye wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves," should never 
be forgotten. 



Sometimes, and with some people, the loan 
of a "Dawn" or of an Old Theology Tract, 

R1440 : page 260 

with very few words, is the wise course. At 
other times the words introducing the reading 
matter are all-important. And the true, earnest 
minister (servant) of the truth will lose 
sight of self, and all disposition to vaunt his 
knowledge of the Lord's word and plan, and 
will seek merely the glory of God and the 
blessing of his hearers. 

Tell the story as simply, as kindly and as 
truthfully as possible. Overstatements harm the 
cause they would advance. Do justice to all 
concerned. "Let your moderation be known 
unto all men"— whichever side of the question 
they may take and however partisan they 
may be. Let your counsel and influence always 
stand for peace and right and order, however 
you may seek to make apology for blinded law-breakers 
on either side of any question. A 
poor law is better than no law. Lawlessness 
has no sanction in God's book, nor in the example 
of any held up to us by it as worthy of 
emulation; but the reverse: God is a God of 
order and of law, and all who have his spirit 
will be friends of order. True, all law and 
order will be overthrown in this day of trouble, 
and that by divine permission; but so long as 
there is any law, all who are God's people 
should respect it. When the Apostle said that 
we should "be subject to the powers that be," 
he did not add so long as the laws are perfectly 
just and equal. No: he knew, as we know, 
that laws made by imperfect men cannot be 
perfect laws. Our only question about obeying 
the laws must be if they conflict with our duty 
toward the divine law of love to God and to 
our fellow men. And very few, if any, human 
laws demand of us a violation of this, our supreme 
law. 

While using present labor-troubles, etc., as 
a starting point for conversation, always remember 
that it is to be but an introduction to 
the Gospel of the Kingdom. We are not commissioned 
to teach other matters than the one 
Gospel; but we may and shall use every other 
subject to introduce the good plan of God to 
the attention of all "the meek" (Isa. 61:1) 
—especially to those who confess to be God's 
people. Remember that this is your one work, 
if you are of the consecrated body of Christ, 
the Church. To this end you eat and drink 
and sleep and labor at your earthly tasks— that 



you may have time and strength and opportunity 
to make known the gracious plan of our 
God, the foundation of which was laid in the 
ransom-sacrifice for all given eighteen centuries 
ago by the man Christ Jesus, and which is 
about to have a glorious consummation at his 
hands and at the hands of the Church, in the 
setting up of the Kingdom for which so long 
we have prayed, "Thy Kingdom Come!" 



R1440 : page 260 

"THEY SHALL BE MINE." 



"Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another: 
and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book 
of remembrance was written before him for them that 
feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. And 
they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day 
when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them as a 
man spareth his own son that serveth him."— Mai. 3:16,17. 

The Prophet Malachi, in connection with 
the above words, was foretelling, not only the 
coming of John the Baptist, the forerunner of 
Christ at his first advent, but also the coming 
of a greater, and in a fuller sense an antitype 

R1440 : page 261 

of Elias, before the great and notable day of 
the Lord's second advent. (See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter viii.) What, therefore, 
we find here addressed to nominal fleshly 
Israel, in view of the Lord's first advent and 
of the harvest work of sifting and separating 
and the final disposition of the wheat and chaff 
of that people in the close of the Jewish age, 
we find applicable now, in the harvest of this 
Gospel age, to nominal spiritual Israel— to the 
great sifting and separating work now progressing 
under the direction of the Lord of the 
harvest, who is now present. 

While, therefore, we see the fitness of this 
prophecy in its application to fleshly Israel in 
the close of the Jewish age, and while we recognize 
its rebukes, its warnings and its promises 
to that people in the past, the important 
feature for our present consideration is its application 
now, in the closing days of this 
dispensation. 

We see that the promised Elias has indeed 
come, and that the great "Messenger of the 



Covenant" in whom we delight— Jesus, our 
Lord and Savior— is now actually present. 
And truly his presence is like the refiner's fire 
and like fuller's soap. (Verse 2.) All of those 
who profess to be his people are now under 
rigid inspection. The tests are being constantly 
applied to all professions of godliness, and 
are separating, with unerring precision, the 
pure gold of actual loyalty to God from the 
dross of mere profession and outward forms of 
godliness. 

The condition of the nominal spiritual Israel 
was wonderfully mirrored in that of fleshly Israel. 
When the Lord says, "Return unto me, and I 
will return unto you" (verse 7), now, as then, 
the reply is, "Wherein shall we return." They 
will not own that they have departed from the 
right ways of the Lord: in their own estimation 
they are rich and increased in goods, 
spiritual as well as temporal, and have need of 
nothing, though actually they are poor and 
miserable and blind and naked. (Rev. 3:17.) 
In their own estimation they are whole and need 
no physician, though actually they are sick and 
full of wounds and bruises and putrefying sores. 
The Lord says to them, Ye have robbed me in 
tithes and offerings; your words have been 
stout against me; and ye have declared it a 
vain, unprofitable thing to serve the Lord and 
to keep his ordinances. But they answer, 

R1441 : page 261 

"Wherein have we robbed thee?" and "What 
have we spoken against thee?" and "What 
profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and 
that we have walked contritely before the Lord 
of hosts? And now we call the proud happy; 
yea, they that work wickedness are set up; 
yea, they that tempt God are even delivered." 
-Verses 8,13-15. 

In making profession of consecration to the 
Lord and yet living in pleasure and luxury with 
the world, conforming to worldly ideas, etc., 
the great nominal church has robbed God of 
that which they covenanted to give him— the 
loyalty and devotion of their hearts. Their 
words, too, have truly been stout against the 
Lord— their teachings have been in direct opposition 
to his Word, though they will not own 
it; and seeing no present profit in following 
the Lord closely, and observing the temporal 
prosperity of the wicked, they are content to 
follow the Lord afar off and to make whatever 
compromises with the world may be necessary 
to secure their present advantage. 



Such is the attitude of the great mass of nominal 
Christians to-day: they have a form of godliness, 
but the power has long since departed. 
They build magnificent temples of fashion, 
run in debt to the world for them, and tax even 
the poorest to pay the interest on the mortgage 
and to secure a grand organ, a paid choir and 
a pulpit orator. These they dedicate to God, 
and then open them for the festival, the fair, 
the grab game and church theatricals; and while 
all effort is made to court the favor and secure 
the patronage of the rich, the humble poor are 
shunned and slighted and elbowed first into corners 
and back seats and finally outside the gates. 

Thus increased in worldly goods and flushed 
with pride and apparent prosperity, the masses 
of the nominal church of all denominations are 
at ease. They are satisfied with their position 
and attainments, unwilling to acknowledge their 
shortcomings and backslidings, and are enjoying 
their feastings and revelry with the world. 
And their words are stout against the Lord's 

R1441 : page 262 

truth, because the truth would expose their errors 
and sins and destroy their friendly relationship 
and alliance with the world. 

But in the midst of all this confusion and 
error God's people have been developing. 
They are the mourners in nominal Zion whom 
the Lord promised in due time to comfort. 
(Matt. 5:4; Isa. 61:3.) They are the wheat 
in the midst of the tares or mere imitation 
Christians. They do not love the spirit of the 
world and cannot assimilate with it; they are 
not satisfied with the distorted creeds of human 
manufacture and deplore the fact that others 
are; they love the Word of God and make it 
their study; and they love the spirit of God 
wherever they see it exemplified. And while 
the multitudes come together in the great 
temples of fashion, ostensibly to worship God, 
but really to worship Mammon, these prefer to 
meet one with another, and on every such occasion 
rejoice in the verification of that blessed 
promise of the Master— "Wherever two or three 
are met together in my name, there am I in the 
midst of them." 

These reverence the Lord's words above the 
teachings and traditions of men, and it is their 
delight to withdraw from the great multitude 
and commune together concerning the Lord 
and concerning his promises. So these that 
reverence the Lord speak often one to another; 
they love to encourage and build one another 



up; they love to tell of the Lord's goodness 
and of his truth wherever they can find a listening 
ear; and when through them a neighbor 
or friend finds the truth they rejoice together, 
and together widen the circle for proclaiming 
the good tidings and for communing one with 
another with reference to their heaven-inspired 
hopes. Their hearts are full of love and loyalty 
to God, and though their opportunities to 
serve him and to spread abroad the honor of 
his name may be few, yet their loving zeal is not 
passed by unnoticed by the Lord; for, says the 
Prophet, "The Lord hearkened, and heard it, 
and a book of remembrance was written before 
him for them that reverenced the Lord [not 
systems and creeds and traditions of men] and 
that thought upon his name [that were zealous 
for the honor of his name, not the names of 
Wesley, or Calvin, or Knox, or Luther]. And 
they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in 
that day when I make up my jewels. And I 
will spare them, as a man spareth his own son 
that serveth him." 

Yes, the Lord is looking for loyal, loving, 
generous and noble hearts, for those who prefer 
the joy of his approval and of his promises 
to every earthly joy, and whose actions prove 
their zeal and devotion. Such, wherever we 
find them, are the Lord's jewels; and these will 
all be spared when the overwhelming trouble 
shall shortly be visited upon the wide fields of 
Christendom. These ere long will all be 
gathered out from amongst the tares and exalted 
to glory and honor and dominion with Christ 
as his Bride and joint-heir. 

"Then shall ye return, and discern between 
the righteous and the wicked, between him that 
serveth God and him that serveth him not." 
Then, after the gathering and exaltation of the 
Church, and after the great time of trouble has 
accomplished its purpose of leveling all the 
proud and all the great systems— civil, social 
and religious— which have so long blinded and 
misled the world, then the new order of things 
will be established, wherein the order of the 
present time will be reversed. Instead of the 
proud being set up then, the meek shall inherit 
the earth, and life and prosperity and happiness 
and every blessing shall be the rewards of 
righteousness; and evil doers shall be cut off 
when the discipline of that time shall fail to 
effect a transformation, though none, we are 
informed, shall be thus cut off without at least 
a hundred years' trial under the favorable conditions 
of that time. 

While we thus view our Heavenly Father's 



glorious plan and rejoice to declare it to others, 
what a comfort it is to know that he reads the 
loyalty of our hearts with reference to it; and 
though our talents may be few and weak, and 
really insignificant in our own sight, yet in the 
Lord's estimation the use of an opportunity 
even to speak to a neighbor about his truth and 
the honor of his name is not overlooked. 
"And the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a 
book of remembrance was written." Did you 
ever think of this when, perhaps with faltering 

R1441 : page 263 

speech, you tried to tell the good tidings of 
great joy to your next neighbor, or your shopmate, 
or your Christian brother or sister? or 
possibly to a larger company?— "The Lord 
hearkened, and heard it." Aye! and has not 
your heart burned within you as the heavenly 
benediction fell upon you, and sweet peace and 
joy filled your soul and fired your zeal with an 
intense yearning to herald the good news to 
earth's remotest bounds? Yes, every loyal and 
faithful child of God has had some of this 
blessed experience and may have more of it, 
and will, to the extent that he is energetic in 
serving the truth. 

And if our names be not blotted out of that 
book of remembrance through unfaithfulness, 
we shall surely be gathered among the jewels, 
though no mighty deeds have made us great in 
the eyes of our fellow-men. The tests of love 
and loyalty are not always great deeds, though, 
if we love with all our hearts, they will be as 
great and as far reaching in their influence as 
our talents and opportunities will permit; but 
the prompt and ready use of even the smallest 
talent is carefully noted by our loving Lord in his 
book of remembrance. And not the imperfect 
rendering of service, but the perfect intention 
with which it is rendered, is faithfully recorded. 



R1441 : page 263 
GOD'S BURDENS. 



I long had borne a heavy load 
Along life's rough and thorny road, 
And often-times had wondered why 
My friend walked burdenless, while I 
Was forced to carry, day by day, 



The cross which on my shoulders lay: 
When, lo, one day the Master laid 
Another cross on me. Dismayed, 
And faint, and trembling, and distressed, 
I cried, "Oh! I have longed for rest 
These many days. I cannot bear 
This other heavy load of care. 
I pray thee, Lord, behold this one- 
Shall I bear both while he has none?" 
No answer came. The cross was laid 
On my poor back, and I was weighed 
Down to the earth. And as I went 
Toiling along and almost spent, 
Again I cried, "Lord have I been 
Untrue to thee? Is it for sin 
That I have done, that I must still 
Carry this cross against my will?" 
"My child," the Master's voice returned, 
"Hast thou not yet the lesson learned? 
The burden thou hast borne so long 
Hath only made thee grow more strong, 
And fitted thee to bear for me 
This other load I lay on thee. 
Thy brother is too weak as yet 
To have a cross upon him set. 
God's burdens rest upon the strong. 
They stronger grow who bear them long, 
And each new burden is a sign 
That greater power to bear is thine." 
So now no longer I repine, 
Because a heavy cross is mine, 
But struggle onward with the prayer, 
"Make me more worthy, Lord, to bear." 
-Mrs. B. M. Bailey. 



R1442 : page 263 
UNIVERSAL SALVATION. 
(NO. II.) 



There is another sense in which some are 
said to be in Christ. While, as we have just 
shown, all believers are represented in Christ 
for justification, just as they were formerly represented 
in Adam for condemnation, some come 
into Christ as members of the Christ body, of 
which Christ Jesus is the head. The term 
"Christ" signifies the Anointed, and the ceremony 
of anointing in olden times, from which 
this term is borrowed, signified the consecrating 
or setting apart of some one for the office of 



king, etc. So the Son of God, our Lord Jesus, 
was anointed, consecrated or set apart by God 
for the offices of prophet, priest and king. He 
is, therefore, the Anointed, the Christ; and since 
it is the purpose of God to select from among 

R1442 : page 264 

men some to be joint-heirs with him in this inheritance 
—"a royal priesthood," of which 
Christ Jesus shall be the head or high priest- 
all who are of this anointed company are said 
to be in Christ. Such are said to be baptized 
into Christ: they come into this anointed company, 
into the body of Christ, by baptism; 
not by baptism in water merely, but by baptism 
into the spirit, the disposition, the mind and 
will of the head, Christ Jesus, which proves 
eventually to be a baptism even unto death. 
"Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized 
into Jesus Christ were baptized into his 
death." But those who are thus planted in 
the likeness of his death shall be also in the 
likeness of his resurrection— the first order of 
resurrection, which is to the spiritual, divine 
nature. -Rom. 6:5; Rev. 20:6; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

But this high calling is not the special salvation 
referred to in the above text. (1 Tim. 4:10.) 
True, that special salvation of justification 
must be obtained (reckonedly, by faith) by 
every one of this class, before he is even 
called with this high calling to come into Christ 
as a member of his body and a fellow-heir with 
him of the coming kingdom. This high calling 
is not salvation at all, but a gracious favor 
of God beyond the favor of salvation; or, as 
John expresses it (John 1:16.— See Emphatic 
Diaglott), it is grace upon grace, favor upon 
favor. The special salvation referred to by the 
Apostle is one which will be bestowed upon all 
who believe: not only of this age and of past 
ages, but also of the Millennial age; while the 
favor of the high calling is proffered only to 
believers during the Gospel age. 

Thus we have seen that the Lord clearly 
points out the conditions upon which his special 
or actual salvation, which is provided for 
all men, may be realized by all men. And 
none can realize it in any other way; for our 
"God is a consuming fire" to any who claim 
or demand his salvation on any other terms 
than through the redemption that is in Christ 
Jesus. (Rom. 3:24.) Any who seek to climb 
up to life in any other way he declares to be 
thieves and robbers (John 10:1,8,9); and to 
such the Apostle gives fair warning, saying, 



"It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of 

the living God" (Heb. 10:31)— a fearful thing 

to stand trial before God in our own righteousness, 

which is but "filthy rags," and without 

the covering of the robe of imputed righteousness 

secured for us by our Redeemer, who 

according to our Father's gracious plan becomes 

the representative and Mediator for all 

who accept his grace. It is the folly of some, 

nevertheless, to claim that none can lose or 

miss this salvation— notwithstanding all that 

the Scriptures say about the conditions of salvation, 

and their warning against the possible 

loss of it. In the face of the testimony of the 

Scriptures to the contrary, such a suggestion is 

a forcible reminder of the subtle tempter's 

language to our mother Eve in Eden. Said 

he, "Yea, hath God said, ye shall not eat of 

every tree of the garden? And the woman said, 

We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the 

garden; but of the fruit of the tree which is in 

the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye 

shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest 

ye die. And the serpent said unto the woman, 

Ye shall not surely die." God says to all 

men, "You may have salvation upon these 

terms," while some men say, "There are no 

conditions, there are no terms, but the everlasting 

salvation all will have." But, beloved, we 

are persuaded better things of you: let God be 

true, though it prove every man a liar. 

The theory of a universal, eternal salvation 
is not a new one: it has had some adherents 
for many centuries. Indeed, it is older than the 
doctrine of redemption; for it was announced 
by His Satanic Majesty to our mother Eve in 
Eden, when, tempting her to despise the word 
of the Lord, he boldly said, "Ye shall not 
surely die." For those who have never been 
enlightened with a clear knowledge of the plan 
of God, and who have been confronted all their 
lives with the horrible nightmare of eternal 
torment for a large majority of the race, there 
is some excuse for swinging to the extreme of 
liberalism. In such cases, it may be regarded 
more in the light of a benevolent and hopeful 
reaction from old superstitions. But the case 
is very different when one turns away from a 
clear knowledge of the divine plan of redemption 
and restitution through faith in Christ and 

R1442 : page 265 

repentance and submission of heart and life to 
God, to embrace a theory which is antagonistic 
in its nature to the whole scheme of redemption 



and restitution as set forth in the Scriptures. 
Let those who have been once enlightened 
take heed, "lest as the serpent beguiled 
Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should 
be corrupted from the simplicity that is in 
Christ"— the simplicity of Christ's doctrine. 
-2 Cor. 11:3. 

It is true that God has provided salvation for 
all men, and that the fullest opportunity for 
realizing it will be granted to each and all; but 
the terms upon which the favor may be realized 
are also distinctly stated, and that together with 
the fact that there will be no compromise as to 
terms; and, further, that those who reject the 
terms reject the proffered salvation, and hence 
die the second death, from which there will be 
no redemption and no deliverance. (Heb. 10:26-31.) 
The Scriptures also abound in warnings 
as to the danger of coming under the penalty 
of death the second time, after having been 
released from the first death, either reckonedly 
or actually. -Heb. 6:4-8. 

But some, still anxious to maintain this delusive 
hope, are willing to press every lame argument 
into its service; and they do so until 
by logical deduction, based upon this false 
premise— that the eternal salvation of every 
man is so secure that it cannot be forfeited— 
they are driven to the denial of the whole plan 
of God from its foundation in the vicarious sacrifice 
of Christ to its glorious finish at the end 
of his Millennial reign in the restitution of all 
things to the perfect condition and happy estate 
from which man fell through sin. 

Those who determine to make this theory of 
a universal, eternal salvation the rallying point 
in their theology begin by asserting that it 
must be so, because God is love; then they go 
farther and say, it must be so, because God is 
just. Thus they presume upon the love of God 
and claim his salvation upon the score of justice; 
and upon this hypothesis they do all 
manner of turning and twisting to force the 
Scriptures into harmony with their theory. 
They make light of all the Bible warnings of a 
second death, by claiming that they do not mean 
actual physical death, but that the term is figurative 
and signifies a death to sin; that it is 
the opposite of the first death, which was a 
death to righteousness; and that it was this figurative 
death to which God referred when he 
said, "In the day thou eatest thereof, dying 
thou shalt die." Thus the actual death loses 
its sting as a penalty for sin, and it is generally 
regarded by them as a necessary step in a 
process of evolution by which man is evolved 



to a higher condition or nature— the spiritual. 

To attain this spiritual nature it is therefore 
necessary, in their estimation, for every man to 
die the second death, which they regard as a 
blessing and not a curse. And since physical 
death is, presumably, merely a step in a process 
of evolution to a higher condition, and not a penalty 
for sin, therefore there is no necessity for a 
ransom from it. Hence the death of Christ is 
regarded only as an extreme measure of self-sacrifice, 
as an exhibition of the martyr spirit, 
in his zeal to show men how to live; and the idea 
of a vicarious or substitutionary sacrifice being 
required for the satisfaction of divine justice, so 
that God could still be just and yet be the justifier, 
or savior, of him that believeth in Jesus 
(Rom. 3:26), is indignantly scouted as a barbarous 
view, and the "precious blood of Christ 
wherewith we are sanctified is counted a common 
thing" and of no more value to us than 
the blood of any other martyr. 

But while these would-be philosophers make 
this preposterous claim, that the second death, 
against which the Scriptures so faithfully warn 
us, is only a death to sin and the dawn of a 
new life to righteousness, and that it is therefore 
nothing to be feared, but rather to be desired, 
they seem at times to forget this hypothesis, 
and, inconsistently enough with their own theory, 
they tell us that if a man actually experiences 
a second physical death, or even a third 
or fourth, these like the first could only be regarded 
as further necessary steps in the process 
of evolution, and out of each the persistent 
sinner will be recovered without a redemption, 
as he was presumably out of the first death. 
So they claim that the process of physical death 
and resurrection may be repeated over and over 
until the sinner is prevailed upon to submit to the 

R1442 : page 266 

will of God. And since the Scriptures declare 
that some will die at the end of Christ's Millennial 
reign, they claim that the work of reform will 
continue into the ages to follow— ignoring entirely 
the positive statement of the Apostle to 
the contrary. -1 Cor. 15:24,25; Rev. 20:6. 

This theory would be served by changing 
several passages in God's Word. Thus— 

R1443 : page 266 

THE WORD OF GOD 
READS: 



"As by one man's disobedience 
sin entered 
into the world, and 
death by sin, ...even 
so, by the righteousness 
of one, justification to 
life has passed upon 
all." 



"As all in Adam die, 
even so all in Christ 
shall be made alive." 



"As by a man [Adam] 
came death, by a man 
also [the man Christ 
Jesus, by his sacrifice 
for sin] came the resurrection 
of the dead." 



"He that hath the 
Son hath life: he that 
hath not the Son shall 
not see life." 



"He hath opened up 
for us a new way of 
life." 



"To those who seek 
for glory, honor and 
immortality, he will 
render eternal life." 



"I have set before 
you life and death: 
...Choose life that 
ye may live." 



THIS THEORY WOULD 



HAVE IT: 



As by one man's disobedience 
sin entered 
into the world, and 
death by sin, ...even 
so, by the righteousness 
of one, justification to 
the second death has 
passed upon all. 



As in Adam all die, 
even so in Christ shall 
all die the second death. 



As by man came 
death, by a man also 
came the certainty of 
the second death. 



All shall share the 
second death, and thus 
all shall see life. 



He hath pointed out 
to us the advantages 
of the second death. 



To all, whether they 
seek it or not, he will 
render the second death, 
which means a death 
to sin that will never 
end. 



You have no choice 
in this matter. I will 
cast you all into the 
second death, which 
will be eternal death 
to sin. 



The revolutionary tendency of the doctrine 
is thus very apparent; and when the mind is 
fully set on establishing this theory and perverting 
every scripture to its support, the false 
doctrines that grow out of it are legion, and the 
entire Word of God is made of no effect. 

The Bible teaching is plain and simple to 
those of simple mind, and admits of no such 
fanciful and absurd interpretation. There, 
death is declared to be "the wages of sin," and 
not merely a departure from righteousness. 
(Rom. 6:23.) Sin is the departure from righteousness; 
and death, destruction of being, is 
its just penalty. And since death was the just 
penalty of sin, and was pronounced by God, who 
cannot err, and who is unchangeable— the same 
yesterday, to-day and forever— it could not be 
revoked or set aside: no power in heaven or 
earth could set aside the immutable claims of 
justice until, by the grace of God, the man 
Christ Jesus, our Lord, paid our penalty, died 
for our sins, legally set us free, and thus made 
provision for our recovery out of death in due 
time by the process of resurrection. Thanks 
be unto God and our Lord Jesus Christ for this 
great salvation, purchased on our heavenly Father's 
part by the sacrifice of his only begotten 
and well beloved Son, and on our Lord's part 
by the sacrifice of himself, and made efficacious 
to us through faith on our part in his precious 
blood shed for many for the remission of sins. 
-Matt. 26:28. 

And as the original difficulty was not death, 
but sin, so the remedy is not second death, 
but righteousness. The two principles are Sin 
and Righteousness, and under God's arrangement 
they each have certain results. Sin results 
in DEATH, while righteousness results in LIFE. 
The entire race became sinners by heredity in 
Adam, weak and unable to fulfil all righteousness, 
and hence all shared the penalty, death— 
"death passed upon all men," because all are 
imperfect, sinners. 

But God, foreseeing that some would, after 
experience, be willing to obey all righteousness 
if provided the ability through Christ— through 
the New Covenant sealed and ratified by his 
death as our representative and substitute, bearing 
our penalty— compensated for all sins past 
and for present and future sins resulting from 
the fall, to all who accept him as their Redeemer 

R1443 : page 267 



and who become followers of his commands. 
Thus such are made the righteousness 
of God in him (Christ) and shall obtain the reward 
of righteousness— everlasting life. 

While we trust in the living God, who is the 
Savior of all men, especially of them that believe, 
let all "thieves and robbers," who are 
attempting to teach men how to climb up to 
life by some other than God's appointed way, 
take warning; for while "God is love," let 
them know that he loves that which is lovely, 
that he has decreed that all that is unworthy 
of love in his universe shall be destroyed, 
and that when the Millennial reign of his 
Anointed is complete not one blot shall remain 
to reproach his fair creation; for Christ "must 
reign till he hath put all enemies under his 
FEET." Then he will have brought forth judgment 
unto victory. (Matt. 12:20.) And his 
victory will be complete when all evil and all 
wilful evil-doers— Satan and all those who follow 
his leading (Heb. 2:14; Rev. 20:10,14,15), 
shall have been cut off. His victory will 
consist in the establishment of righteousness 
and peace, no matter how many or how few 
fall in the conflict. 

Let all the faithful— the elect— take heed 
that they be not deceived by those vain philosophers 
who, "desiring to be teachers, understand 
neither what they say, nor whereof they 
affirm" (1 Tim. 1:7); for God hath declared 
that wilful evil-doers "shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction from the presence of the 
Lord, and from the glory of his power, when 
he shall come to be glorified in his saints and 
to be admired in all those that believe in that 
day." And from the mention of the character 
of the class that shall be destroyed it is very 
manifest that the second death into which they 
are cast is not a death to sin, as Universalists 
claim. Hear the Word of the Lord— "The 
fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, 
and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, 
and idolaters, and all liars, shall have 
their part in the lake which burneth with fire 
and brimstone, which is THE SECOND DEATH. 
And the devil that deceived them was cast into 
the lake of fire:. ..this is the second 
death." (Rev. 21:8; 20:10.) That is a bad 
lot: we do not want to be in such company. 
Before their destruction comes they will have 
had fullest opportunity to repent; and the fact 
that Satan will have had the opportunities of 
seven thousand years and yet remain incorrigible 
will be ample proof to every intelligent mind 
that there is such a thing as becoming established 



—fixed and immovable— in sin as well as 
in righteousness. Let us remember the word 
of the Lord— "For evil-doers shall be cut off; 
but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall 
inherit the earth. For yet a little while and 
the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shalt diligently 
consider his place, and he shall not be 
there. But the meek shall inherit the earth, 
and shall delight themselves in the abundance 
of peace."— Psa. 37:9-11. 



R1443 : page 267 
FAITH AND FEELING. 



Feeling should never be mistaken for faith, 
yet there is as much connection between faith 
and hallowed feeling as there is between the 
root and the flower. Faith is permanent, just 
as the root is ever in the ground. Feeling is 
casual and has its season. Just as the root or 
bulb does not always shoot up the green stem 
and beautiful flowers, so faith does not always 
produce ecstasy of feeling. Our faith may be just 
as strong when we are despondent as when we 
are filled with joy. As we feel the calamities of 
war, the pangs of disease and the hardness of 
poverty, our feeling sinks down to zero, while 
our faith may be as firm as the granite that 
underlies the cloud-kissing hills. Measure not 
God's love and power by your own feeling. 
The sun shines as clearly in the darkest day as it 
does in the brightest: the difference is not in the 
sun, but in some clouds that are between you 
and the sun. So God loves as well when we 
see not the brightness of his countenance as 
when we do. 

One of the things we learn by a Christian 
experience is that low measures of feeling are 

R1443 : page 268 

better than ecstasies for ordinary life. God 

sends us his rain in gentle drops, else tender 

plants and delicate flowers would be beaten to 

pieces. If our faith is founded on the immutability 

of God, our Christian life and love will 

flow steadily on like a deep river, not easily 

affected by a cold blast nor obstructed by despondencies. 

Moses was not governed by feeling 

when he stood on the margin of the Red 

Sea, neither was Abraham when he offered up 



Isaac, nor Israel when they compassed Jericho 
seven days. Have faith in God, move forward 
all along the line, and we shall have the 
victory.— Sel. 



page 268 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULLNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 
PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1444 : page 268 

LESSON XIII., SEPT. 25, ISA. 5:11,22; 28:7; 
PROV. 20:1; 23:19-21,29-35; GAL. 5:19,21; 
HAB. 2:15; HOS. 14:9. 

Golden Text— "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is 
raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise." 
-Prov. 20:1. 

The lesson chosen by the International Committee 
as a temperance lesson for this quarter 
was 1 Cor. 11:20-24. But some, seeing no 
reference to temperance in these Scriptures, 
have made the above selection, which we will 
here treat briefly, referring the reader to our 
issue of March 1891 for an exposition of the 
lesson in 1 Cor. 11:20-34. We still have a 
few on hand which can be supplied to any requesting 
it. 

While some of the above Scriptures are well 
chosen for a temperance lesson, there is much 
more in some of them, as will be observed by 
those who will study them in connection with 
their various contexts. Let us here pursue 
such a study of them, though we must necessarily 
be brief. 

ISAIAH 5:11,22. The reference here is not 
to literal wine, but to the intoxicating spirit of 
the world, so freely imbibed by nominal Israel, 
both fleshly and spiritual. It was through 
such intoxication that fleshly Israel rejected 
the Lord at his first advent, and that nominal 
spiritual Israel is now stumbling over that same 
stumbling-stone. (Isa. 8:14.) The whole chapter, 



like chapter 28 of the same prophecy, was 
given as a warning to both fleshly and spiritual 
Israel against imbibing the intoxicating spirit 
of the world. Woe indeed came upon fleshly 
Israel in the end of their age of favor, because 
of their intoxicated and miserable condition 
of heart and mind. It came in the dreadful 
overthrow of Jerusalem and their complete 
destruction as a nation. And a similar woe 
upon nominal spiritual Israel— "Christendom" 
so-called— will, according to the sure word of 
prophecy, be visited upon them in the closing 
days of this harvest, because nominal spiritual 
Israel has partaken also of the same intoxicating 
wine. 

And while all who constitute a part of that 
great system, which because of its intoxication 
is now cast off and disowned of the Lord, and 
out of which he is now calling those who are 
still his people (Rev. 18:2,4), will share in 
the woe that is coming upon it, the prophet 
(verse 22), makes very special mention of woe 
that is to come upon those who are mighty to 
drink this wine, and men of strength to prepare 
the cup for others. In other words, the 
prophet seems here to indicate special condemnation 
to those who are the public leaders and 
promulgators of false doctrine. 

ISAIAH 28:7. This scripture refers to the 
same class as that last mentioned— the priests 
and the prophets, the leaders and teachers in 
nominal spiritual Israel now, and in nominal 
fleshly Israel at the close of the Jewish age. 
Because of their intoxication with the wine of 
this world's pleasures, etc., they are all out of 
the way: they err in vision, they stumble in 
judgment, and are unable to discern and follow 
the truth, and much less to teach the truth, 
though they occupy the position of teachers. 
For further notes on this chapter, see treatment 
of Lesson III., in our issue of January 15th. 

PROVERBS 20:1. This proverb of Solomon 
evidently has reference to literal wine and 
strong drink, and its truthfulness is so manifest 
as to require no comment here. Well would it 
be if all men would ponder and heed this wise 
warning against a foe so subtle and so destructive 
to peace and righteousness. 

PROVERBS 23:19-21 classes drunkenness and 
gluttony together. Both are unworthy of true 
manhood and bring their sure reward of poverty 
and disgrace. 

PROVERBS 23:29-35 extends the wholesome 
counsel further, picturing the miserable results 
of intemperance; for the momentary pleasure 



R1444 : page 269 

at last "biteth like a serpent and stingeth like 
an adder." 

GALATIANS 5:19-21 classes drunkenness 
among the miserable works of the flesh, which 
Paul here contrasts with the beautiful fruits of 
the spirit of God among those who have become 
the children of God. And thus the Apostle 
arrays himself, and all the saints who seek an 
inheritance in the Kingdom of God, on the 
side not only of temperance, but also of every 
good work and disposition. 

HABAKKUK 2:15 seems, from the context, to 
have special reference again to the spirit of the 
world, and declares woe unto such as endeavor 
to lead others to imbibe of this intoxicating 
wine. But the condemnation would apply 
equally to those who tempt others to the use of 
intoxicating drinks. 

HOSEA 14:9. This scripture has no reference 
whatever to the subject of temperance, 
but closes an exhortation to fallen Israel to 
return unto the Lord. 

R1444 : page 269 

SAUL OF TARSUS CONVERTED. 



FOURTH QUAR., LESSON I., OCT. 2, ACTS 9:1-20. 

Golden Text— "Except a man be born again he cannot 
see the Kingdom of God."— John 3:3. 

In this lesson we have a forcible illustration 
of the importance of a correct knowledge of 
the truth as well as a zeal for God. Paul had 
the latter, but, lacking the former, he went to 
the extreme of persecuting the Church of Christ. 
Nevertheless, God, who reads the heart, discerned 
its loyalty and zeal, and, without blaming 
him for doing that which he thought was 
right and acceptable to God, he simply pointed 
out to him the better way. Light, says the 
Prophet (Psa. 97:1 1), is sown for the righteous; 
and Saul was righteous at heart and hence the 
truth was due to him in God's appointed time. 

Before that time arrived, however, the beloved 
and faithful Stephen had sealed his testimony 
with his blood, while Saul was consenting 
unto his death. Was God negligent, then, 
of the interests of his faithful martyr? Ah! no; 
but his ways are not our ways. Stephen's life 
was fully consecrated to the Master's service, 



and evidently the only question with him as to 

when or how it might end was, which time or 

way would be most to the glory of God. It 

has been truly said that the blood of the martyrs 

has been the seed of the Church. Stephen 

thus became an example to the whole Church 

of faithfulness even unto death; and having 

thus gloriously finished his course, there was 

thenceforth laid up for him a crown of righteousness 

to be received at the Lord's second 

appearing. 

Little did Stephen think that one who stood 
by, consenting unto his death, would soon go 
forth as a zealous advocate of the very cause 
he was persecuting. That Paul's heart was 
right in the matter, even when his head and 
his hands were in the wrong, is very clear from 
his statement of the matter in Chapter 26:9-1 1, 
where he says, "I verily thought within myself 
that I ought to do many things contrary to the 
name of Jesus of Nazareth, which thing I also 
did in Jerusalem: and many of the saints did 
I shut up in prison, having received authority 
from the chief priests; and when they were put 
to death I gave my voice against them. And 
I punished them oft in every synagogue, and 
compelled them to blaspheme; and, being exceedingly 
mad against them, I persecuted them, 
even unto strange cities." 

Again, we find the Apostle referring to the 
matter in his letter to Timothy (1 Tim. 1:12-14,16), 
saying, "I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who 
hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful 
[at heart, though wrong in action], putting 
me into the ministry who was before a blasphemer 
and a persecutor and injurious: but I obtained 
mercy because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. 
And the grace of our Lord was exceedingly 
abundant with faith and love which is in 
Christ Jesus. ...Howbeit, for this cause I 
obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ 
might show forth all longsuffering for a pattern 
to them which should hereafter believe on him 
to life everlasting." 

In view of these statements, therefore, we 
are not to consider Paul's conversion as a conversion 
of the heart from a disposition of opposition 
to one of harmony with God, but as 
a conversion or turning about, through a better 
understanding of the truth, from an erroneous 
course to one in harmony with God and 
his plan of salvation. 

The Lord's mercy and love to this deluded 
though sincere servant were beautifully manifested 
in the words addressed to Saul: In the 
midst of the overwhelming glory of the heavenly 



presence a tender voice fell on his ear, 
saying, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? 
it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks." 
And Saul answered, "Who art thou, Lord?" 
And he said, "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. 
But rise, and stand upon thy feet: for I have 
appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make 
thee a minister and a witness, both of these 
things which thou hast seen, and of those 
things in the which I will appear unto thee; 
delivering thee from the people and from the 
Gentiles unto whom now I send thee, to open 
their eyes and to turn them from darkness to 
light, and from the power of Satan unto God, 

R1444 : page 270 

that they may receive forgiveness of sins and 
inheritance among them which are sanctified 
by faith that is in me." And Saul, trembling 
and astonished, said, "Lord, what wilt thou 
have me to do?" And the Lord said unto him, 
"Arise and go into the city, and it shall be 
told thee what thou must do."— Compare Acts 9:3-6 
and 26:13-17. 

Saul's prompt obedience and instantaneous 
change of conduct were indicative of a noble 
character; and his question, "What wilt thou 
have me do?" showed an earnest desire to be 
active in the service of God to the extent of 
his ability and knowledge. And no sooner had 
he learned the will of God than he was off 
about his Master's business— preaching Christ 
at Damascus and Jerusalem, and throughout all 
the coasts of Judea, to Jews and Gentiles, calling 
upon all to repent and turn to God and do 
works meet for repentance. (Acts 9:19,20; 
26: 19,20.) Nor did the zeal of this faithful 
soldier of the cross abate in the least until he 
had finished his course. After years of unmitigated 
toil and care and persecution and trouble 
on every hand, he rejoiced at the close of life 
to say— "I have fought a good fight; I have 
finished my course; I have kept the faith: 
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown, 
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give 
me at that day; and not to me only, but unto 
all them also that love his appearing." 

The instance of this lesson affords also a 
striking illustration of the Lord's personal oversight 
and supervision of the interests of his 
Church, both as a company and as individuals. 
By the loss of Judas a vacancy had occurred 
in the company of the apostles, which 
vacancy the apostles themselves endeavored to 
fill by their election of Matthias. (Acts 1:26.) 



This they had no authority to do, but, presuming 

such to be the Lord's will, they chose two 

and asked the Lord to indicate which of the 

two whom they had selected would be his 

choice; and when the lot fell upon Matthias— 

for it must of course fall on one of the two— 

the eleven accepted him as the Lord's choice 

for the place of Judas. But the sequel showed 

that the Lord merely ignored their presumption 

in the matter, and in his own time and 

way chose Saul of Tarsus, a man at heart devoted 

to the service of God and needing only 

to be enlightened by the truth when all his consecrated 

powers would be fully enlisted in the 

blessed work of bearing the name of Christ to 

the Gentiles as well as to the Jews. And this 

Saul, afterward called Paul, was the most noted, 

self-sacrificing and efficient of all the apostles. 

Then, too, in the selection and special favor 
shown to Saul, we see the Lord's appreciation 
of loyal and zealous hearts. What a comfort 
is this to all the saints in the midst of a realizing 
sense of our own infirmities and short-comings, 
that if our hearts are loyal, the Lord can 
read it there. If we lack knowledge he will 
grant it in his own good time and way; and his 
wisdom will correct our mistakes, and his love 
and mercy and grace will abound toward us 
more and more as we continue to walk in his 
ways. 

The part which Ananias was privileged to 
take in the healing of Paul's eyes and in enlightening 
his mind with the truth was one 
which must have brought great joy and blessing 
to his own heart— not only because of being 
specially chosen of the Lord for this purpose, 
but also in seeing such a one as Saul of 
Tarsus so fully convinced of the truth and enlisted 
in its service. How wonderfully wise are 
the ways of the Lord; how blessed is his truth; 
how tender are his providences; how consoling 
is his mercy; and how rich are his abounding 
love and grace! And how glorious is the hope 
set before us in the gospel of ere long seeing 
him face to face and of being transformed into 
his glorious likeness, when, being like him, we 
shall not be overpowered with the glory or 
stricken with blindness. 

The golden text of this lesson was evidently 
chosen with the idea that Saul of Tarsus was 
born again when he was converted to the service 
of the cause of Christ. But such was not 
the case. Saul was only begotten of the spirit 
when through the teaching of Ananias he was 
brought to a knowledge of the truth and to a 
full consecration of his life to its service. But 



his birth as a new spiritual being was not due 
until the resurrection. Birth presupposes both 
a begetting and a course of development ending 
at a particular time in the completeness of the 
new being. The Greek word (gennao) rendered 
born has the significance of both begetting and 
birth. Hence, except a man be both begotten 
and born again he cannot see the Kingdom of 
God. Paul's birth was not due until the dawn 
of the Millennium, at the second advent of the 
Lord. The Lord was the first born from the 
dead (Col. 1:18), and this second birth in his 
case surely did not mean conversion to God; 
nor does it ever have such significance. 



page 270 

A WORD TO COLPORTEURS. 



All Colporteurs who are giving their entire 
time to the sale of DAWN will, hereafter, please 
write at least a Postal Card at the close of each 
week, so that it will reach us each Monday. 

Let us know of your spiritual and physical 
health, the results of the week's labor, etc. 



R1445 : page 271 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



page 271 



Georgia. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write to express 
my sincere gratitude to you, as an instrument 
in the dear Lord's hands, for unfolding the 
good and precious truths that his Word teaches. 
I have read three of your books titled MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. They have been a great deal of 
help to me. They have inspired my soul with 
zeal and more love to my dear Savior. The 
truths they draw from the Word of God seem 
as refreshing and uplifting to the believers who 
are bowed down by the teachings of the nominal 
church as did the dear Savior's teachings 
to the poor, lost sheep of Israel at his first advent. 
The restoration and plan of redemption 
for all is the only thing that can be harmonized 



with the Word of God. Oh! how the nominal 
church is lacking in knowledge. Light, more 
light! Some might think this true doctrine 
has a tendency to lead one away from God. 
But thanks be to him, it is the reverse. It fills 
us with love beyond what words can express. 
It draws us up on to a plane where we can behold 
the beauty and holiness of our God more 
clearly, where we can drink of his waters more 
freely and can look up into his tender face and 
read his countenance of love in a measure as 
never before. 

May the Lord help us all to look to him 
through clearer eyes, and may our earnest prayer 
be, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on 
earth as it is done in heaven. Amen." 

Yours in Christ, C. W. BLAND. 



R1445 : page 271 

Utah. 

MY DEAR SIRS:-I enclose a check for $10. 
Please send me Young's Concordance, twenty 
copies DAWN, Vol. I., ten copies Vol. II. and 
eight Vol. III. I assume you will allow me 
the wholesale price on the above as I wish to 
circulate them, either selling or giving them 
away. 

I enclose a postal card received from a friend 
which indicates how he appreciates the truth. 
I see that others send you words of thanks and 
encouragement, so I thought perhaps you could 
find time to read this. It may be of some little 
interest to you to know how the light came to 
me. We have a union Bible class once a week; 
and, some three months ago, every time we 
met it so happened that before the lesson was 
finished we would drift into the subject of the 
Millennium. One evening one of the friends 
said, I have a book called the "Plan of the Ages," 
which a lady gave me, that may give some light 
on the subject. Have not read it, but will 
loan to you. Since then there has been a well 
of rejoicing springing up in my soul which I 
pray will be unto life everlasting. 1 Cor. 2:9,10 
comes to me very forcibly in the light of 
the Plan of the Ages. Please return the postal. 

In the interest of the truth, truly yours, 
J. T. HURST. 

The card referred to is as follows: 

Dear Friend:— Not for ten years of life 
would I have missed reading Vol. I., MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. I shall read the others as soon as 
I can spare moments. How truly wonderful is 



God's plan! Human mind cannot grasp its 
fulness. Your friend, J. A. B 



Virginia. 

DEAR SIR: -I am a constant reader of "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN," Vols. I., II. and III. My eyes 
were opened to the light of God's truth in my 
"Jubilee" year. (I turned fifty years on the 4th 
inst.) I feel that I am emancipated from the 
bondage of creed and tradition. 

I have been connected with the Baptist denomination 
for over thirty-five years. In 1874 
I was a theological student at Rochester, N.Y., 
but my health failed me and I never became a 
minister. For this I have been thankful, since 
my enlightenment, knowing that I would have 
been a messenger of error rather than truth, 
and less liable to have received "the truth now 
due." Yours in fellowship, 

DANIEL RHODES. 



Kentucky. 
TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY:-I have just 
finished reading the first volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Am delighted: it settles difficulties, 
answers questions and illuminates the way 
wonderfully. I am deeply indebted to you. 
Am seeking for light; have you more of such 
publications? If so send me circulars. 
Yours Fraternally, 

PASTOR M.E. CHURCH. 



Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Oh, 

if you could only know the joy that the DAWNS 
have brought to this poor heart of mine! I belonged 
to the Missionary Baptist sect; but in 
studying my Bible I saw there was confusion, 
and I sent to different places and got Disciplines 
and Articles of Faith, but found none in harmony 
with the Scriptures. Last fall a dear 
Brother sold me DAWNS I. and II., and after 
carefully reading them I found them in perfect 
accord. Praise the dear Lord that he has raised 
up expounders of his precious Word, after the 
counsel of his own heart. Oh, the joy there is 

R1445 : page 272 

now in studying the precious Word of God from 



his standpoint! 

I will not intrude more on your valuable time. 
God bless you abundantly in your labor of love. 
JOSEPH HUBBARD. 



page 272 



New Hampshire. 

DEAR FRIENDS:-I have just finished reading 
Vol. III. of MILLENNIAL DAWN; and the 
language of my heart is, How wonderful are 
thy works, O Lord God of Hosts: just and 
right are all thy ways. I have been greatly 
blessed in reading the books, and want to confess 
that I believe they are truth, notwithstanding 
I have had to give up my former views that 
I held dear; but with the bright light shining 
on the Word, I can hold them no longer. I do 
feel to thank the dear Lord and his servants for 
the light. How wise and beautiful are all his 
plans, and how well they correspond with the 
declaration that "God is Love." O, who 
would not love and serve him! The "Time 
of Trouble" is now just in the future, but the 
true child of God feels that he has a shelter 
under his mighty arm. 

Enclosed find $2.00 for the WATCH TOWER, 
and copies of PLAN OF THE AGES in paper covers. 
I want all to read them that will, for truly "we 
are living in a grand and awful time," and I 
want to do what little I can to help spread the 
truth. Yours truly, R.S.LEEDS. 



New York. 
TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY: -Enclosed 
please find pay for the TOWER and THE PLAN 
OF THE AGES. Permit me to add, this volume, 
which was loaned to me and which I have read, 
is wonderful in its clearness— logical throughout 
—and a most wonderful Key to the Holy 
Scriptures. Truly the author must have been 
divinely directed in his researches of the Bible. 
Be pleased to hand these lines of thanks to him 
and his helper, for their patient and loving 
work. It has drawn me nearer to God than 
ever before, and I have professed to be near 
him for fifty-two years. Please also send me a 
price list of your books. I must have more 
of them. Yours, MRS. S. J. BROWN. 



Florida. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Ever since reading 
Vol. I. of MILLENNIAL DAWN, last winter, 
I have been wanting to write to you, but feared 
your time was too much occupied to answer 
me. My whole life has been changed by the 
reading of the DAWN series, the first volume of 
which I came across accidentally, or providentially, 
and read only because I had nothing 
else to read. There are some questions, however, 
that are not yet clearly settled in my 
mind, and on which I wish to receive light. 

I have tried to do something towards giving 
light to others since I found it myself, and I 
hope that my efforts have not been in vain; for 
it is my greatest desire to do the work of my 
Father acceptably. I would like to go into the 
colporteur work, but, being in debt, I think it 
my first duty to pay up. Any advice you can 
give me will be gratefully received, for I have 
no one to consult when in doubt, and all is not 
yet clear. Thank God for the light that has 
come, and may it shine brighter and brighter. 
Truly yours in Christ, J. A. AUSTIN. 



Wisconsin. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Since reading the 
MILLENNIAL DAWNS, the Tracts and the WATCH 
TOWER, I cannot do less than write and tell 
you that my heart is so full of the love of God 
through the better knowledge of the truth advocated 
in the above expositions, that I desire to 
thank you, and wish you many a "God bless 
you." I am growing in grace and the knowledge 
of the truth daily, and verily I have songs 
in the night. Truly, "The secret of the Lord 
is with them that fear him," and he will show 
them his covenant. I see nothing in the DAWNS 
to take exceptions to: they are all built upon 
a "Thus saith the Lord," and a rightly dividing 
the Word of truth— a harmonious whole. 
The prophetic periods are very convincing to 
me, and I am glad that the thousand years are 
made so plain to be yet future; for some of the 
leading Adventists are trying to put them in 
the past. 

I thank God that I have kept aloof from man-made 
creeds, and I can accept truths, hitherto 
not made known, but now in the due time revealed 
to the little flock. May the dear Lord 
still bless us, and keep us humble at the cross, 
"trusting in the precious blood," is the prayer 
of your brother in the faith, 

T.W.RICHARDS. 



Kansas. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have learned 
that you have another volume of DAWN now 
out, and I would like to read it. 

It would now be impossible for me to preach 
my old sermons over again. Even the ordinary 
language of "Orthodox" prayer is distasteful 
to me, and some of the usual forms of expression 
absolutely shocking to my new feelings. 
God is blessing your work and many are 
coming out of the darkness. Yours in the bonds 
of the "Glad Tidings," J. D. GEHRING. 

[God is blessing us, dear Brother, and we rejoice 
in every evidence of the spread of his 
truth. No; DAWN Vol. IV. is not out, and will 
not be ready for some time.— EDITOR.] 



page 274 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You expressed a 
desire to be informed of the progress of my 
work in the Hudson river towns. It is quite 
encouraging to me and the friends of the truth, 
though as yet not very far advanced. At W 



where nearly every one knew of the DAWN, 
and many had the first volume, I sold 200 in 

about five days. At P , in a week and a 

half, I sold 330 books, besides spending one 
day delivering— 98 degrees in the shade. All praise 
to the Lord for this measure of success. I am 
not feeling very strong physically, but his 
spirit is sufficient to quicken my body. 

Brother B and others are quite anxious 

that I should hold some meetings, and while I 
may consent to it, it will be with some questioning 
as to whether it is wise to use much of 
my strength and time in that direction— especially 
in towns like this where I expect to remain 
only a few weeks. I am quite satisfied 
that those who will not read and understand 
the DAWN are not very near ripe— if they have 
any of the wheat quality at all. And I believe 
the "winds" are being held that the saints 
may be sealed, not that the world is to become 
greatly interested now. Hence it seems necessary 
that we should hasten over the field— 
"flying in the midst of heaven." 

With kind greetings to the Church at Allegheny, 
Yours in our Redeemer, 

S. D. ROGERS. 



R1445 : page 274 

Massachusetts. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write to let you 
know that my interest and zeal in the Lord's 
service are not abated. Perhaps, dear Brother, 
you have wondered why I, unlike others of the 
dear workers, do not turn in any money to the 
Society, but I would say that all I get is not 
spent selfishly upon myself. I find abundant 
opportunity to help some of the dear saints 
around here. There is one sister who at times 
is very destitute, and who has become very much 
interested in the truth. She is a widow with 
two children. 



If you could only see how some of the dear ones 

(this sister included) in S are feasting upon 

the glorious truth, it would cheer your heart 
very greatly; and as for myself, I could not express 
upon paper, nor in language, the joy that 
fills my heart in perusing the precious things 
brought out in the TOWER of late. Often my 
thoughts revert to yourself and dear sister R., 
and prayers on your behalf, as well as for all 
saints, ascend to the throne of grace. It often 
comforts me to think that the Lord knoweth 
the heart of each one of his children, and 
whether they are fully in harmony with him 
and his wonderful plan; and though we may 
sometimes misunderstand each other, yet the 
Lord understands us at all times. 

With warm Christian love, Your brother in 
Christ, W. J. THORN. 



R1446 : page 274 

Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The TOWER came 
to hand to-day, and your article on "Enoch, Elijah 
and the Sentence" has lifted from my mind a 
load that has been troubling me for some time and 
I want to thank you. Words fail to express my 
gratitude to such a kind, loving Heavenly Father, 
and to you who have been serving him and us so 
faithfully. God's justice, love and power are 
made clearer than ever, and I can exclaim with 
the apostle, "Oh, the depth of the riches, both 
of the wisdom and knowledge, of God! How 
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways 
past finding out." Praying that he will guide 
and direct you into all truth, and with love to 
all the saints, I remain, 

Yours in the service, C. C. WRIGHT. 



R1446 : page 275 
