Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 4
Song 4
 5 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Outline field service arrangements for this weekend.
25 min: “Our Simplified Literature Distribution Arrangement.” Qualified elder considers material in article with audience. Elder may also incorporate points from Society’s letter of April 21, 1990. Then have a well-prepared, experienced publisher demonstrate how information from talk can be applied in the field service. Using one of the current magazines that will be offered in field service this weekend, publisher engages householder in conversation on subject of one of the articles. As publisher calls attention to specific point in the magazine, householder says: “That looks interesting.” Publisher says: “I would be happy to leave the magazine with you so that you could enjoy reading this article as well as all the others in the magazine.” Householder asks: “How much is it?” Publisher replies: “If you will read it, there is no charge. You can see here on the publishers’ page that this magazine is part of a worldwide Bible educational work and is supported by voluntary donations. [Refer to statement on page 4 of Awake! and in lower right-hand column of page 2 of The Watchtower.] I am just one of more than four million Jehovah’s Witnesses who have volunteered their time and resources to accomplish this vital work in over two hundred lands. If others wish to make a small donation toward the work, they are welcome to do so.” Householder donates and publisher puts money in envelope he carries for that purpose. He expresses appreciation for donation offered and says he will stop by with next issues of the magazines. In a second brief demonstration, illustrate how publisher does not leave a publication because householder, although willing to talk, is not really interested in the Kingdom message. In third brief demonstration, show how a tract may be left with someone who displays genuine interest but is quite busy at the moment and it does not appear to be appropriate at that particular time to explain how our worldwide work is supported. Publisher promises to return at a more convenient time. When he calls again, he will endeavor to determine if the householder is really interested in our work and, if so, explain the nature of our ministry and how the work is supported.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With the Revelation Climax Book.” Question-and-answer discussion. After discussing paragraph 4, present well-prepared demonstration showing how publisher offers book to householder who has manifested genuine interest in the Bible discussion. Publisher might say: “Jehovah’s Witnesses are volunteer workers who feel that it is vital for God-fearing people to have access to this good news that is expressed so interestingly in the Bible book of Revelation. The voluntary donations of Jehovah’s Witnesses and other people who see the value of Bible education today help to support this work and make it possible for us to offer this book without charge to individuals who genuinely are interested in learning what God has in store for mankind today.” Householder asks: “Do you mean I can have this book?” Publisher replies: “Yes, you can if you really are interested in the Bible’s message it contains. And I will be pleased to call again and discuss some of this information further with you. If you wish to make a small donation toward the advancement of this Bible educational work, you may do so. Your donation will be appreciated and used entirely for the advancement of the Kingdom good news.” Householder offers a donation and says he would welcome a return visit. In a second demonstration, start with final part of publisher’s explanation of literature distribution arrangement, and then have householder say: “I would very much like to read the book.” Publisher says: “I know you will find it exciting and perhaps even be surprised at some of the things that were written long ago about our times. I would like to discuss some of this information further with you at another time. Would it be convenient for you if I stop by at about this same time next week when we will be making other calls in this neighborhood?” Householder agrees and publisher leaves. Point out that some of the younger publishers may need to work more closely with their parents in the house-to-house ministry until they become adept at conversing with householders. New and less experienced publishers will want to work with publishers who can teach them how to use the Topic for Conversation and then explain effectively the simplified literature distribution arrangement. By carrying on the ministry in this way, more emphasis is being put on the actual preaching work and we are able to discern more clearly where genuine interest is being manifested. Our principal concern is to locate and feed the Lord’s sheep and help equip them for survival into Jehovah’s new world.
Song 6 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 11
Song 87
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Include donation acknowledgments. Remind all that Memorial will be Saturday evening, March 30. Give exact time and place. Ask the congregation how they plan to invite new ones to the Memorial, and demonstrate how this can be done. Remind congregation that printed invitations are available.
15 min: Local needs or talk based on article “Continue to Be Readjusted” in The Watchtower of November 1, 1990.
20 min: “The Most Important Day in 1991.” Questions and answers. Warm and enthusiastic presentation encouraging the congregation to get the spirit of the most important day of the year. Highlight the importance of making good arrangements to follow up the interest shown by persons who attend the Memorial for the first time.
Song 129 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 18
Song 135
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Mention service arrangements, and discuss highlights of current magazines that might be used in magazine service. Experiences in presenting current offer could be related. Encourage auxiliary pioneer activity for April.
20 min: Prepare Effective Introductions. Elder who is effective in field ministry helps publishers prepare introductions that would be appropriate for local territory. Base suggestions on pages 9-15 of the Reasoning book. Discuss two or three introductions that may be used with current Topic for Conversation or other timely subject. Have experienced publishers demonstrate two house-to-house presentations, using suggestions given on Service Meeting for week starting March 4. As time allows, briefly relate local experiences that illustrate value of introductions that capture interest of householder.
15 min: Talk on value of reading scriptures regarding the Memorial that are listed on the 1991 Calendar for March 25-30. Families may wish to read them together and discuss the significance of the occasion. May be helpful to read material under “Lord’s Evening Meal” in Insight, Volume 2, pages 268-71. Such preparation can heighten appreciation for the Memorial and draw families closer in the bond of true worship.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 25
Song 168
10 min: Local announcements. Outline arrangements for Memorial. Remind audience to bring their families and interested persons to Kingdom Hall as early as possible so they may be seated. Where two or more congregations are having the Memorial in the same hall, the elders will provide direction as to the time each congregation should arrive. Introduce new ones to brothers and acquaint them with the Kingdom Hall if it is their first time there. Announce arrangements for field activity on Saturday and Sunday, encouraging all to have a full spiritual weekend.
15 min: “Do You Hate to Receive Criticism?” Talk based on Awake! of February 8, 1991. Speaker should outline clearly the six ways in which criticism can be made more palatable.
20 min: “Making Progress in the Ministry.” Discussion between experienced elder and a brother taking the role of one who has been in the truth for some time but has not made progress. Have them briefly demonstrate practice session referred to in paragraph 3. In discussing paragraph 4, have a pioneer or other effective publisher show a less experienced publisher how to meet and deal with a situation that is encountered from time to time in local territory. Include in the discussion suggestions found in the August 1, 1985, Watchtower, pages 15-20, on reaching hearts. Conclude part by encouraging all to make definite plans to improve in conversing with people and following up interest.
Song 123 and concluding prayer.

