Presenting the Good News​—With the Revelation Climax Book
1 The sons of Korah wrote of Jehovah: “For this God is our God to time indefinite, even forever. He himself will guide us until we die.” (Ps. 48:14) Those faithful men confidently put their trust in Jehovah, living their entire life in accord with divine instructions. What fine examples they set for us! Those guided by Jehovah today experience refreshment and enlightenment. (Isa. 58:11) They avoid the fate of those following the “blind guides” of this wicked system, who lead their followers into a “pit” of misery and confusion.​—Matt. 15:14.
2 Divine direction is especially important today as the world around us becomes increasingly confused and dangerous. Many people are perplexed and long for satisfying answers. How appropriate it is, then, that we encourage them to read the Revelation Climax book! This publication offers divine guidance by explaining the earthshaking events of our day in the light of the Revelation prophecies. Such information brings relief and gives sound direction on how people today can live a life pleasing to God.
FEATURING THE REVELATION CLIMAX BOOK
3 A striking feature of the Revelation Climax book is its illustrations, which are great teaching aids. Use these illustrations effectively when presenting the book in the field service. For example, on page 302 there is a vivid illustration of Kingdom blessings. This is an artist’s concept of what is spoken of at 2 Peter 3:13 and Revelation 21:4, the two scriptures in our Topic for Conversation.
4 After introducing ourselves, we could begin a conversation this way: “We are calling to discuss the meaning of what is happening around us in the world today. Some world leaders feel we are on the verge of a new age of peace. Do you feel that is so? [Allow householder to answer.] While governments may seem to resolve some political differences, the attitudes of people toward one another and the incidence of violence so often seem to work against man’s efforts to bring peace. However, at 2 Peter 3:13 the Bible assures us of a new earthly society that will operate under a heavenly government. [Read scripture and open book to page 302.] This is an artist’s portrayal of what this scripture is speaking about. What appeals to you in this picture? [Allow for response.] Concerning the conditions that will exist on earth, the Bible also says at Revelation 21:4 [read scripture from page 303, paragraph 6]. Not even death will mar the peace God will establish.” You may find a variety of introductions appropriate for your territory on pages 9-15 of the Reasoning book.
5 Although we want to feature the Kingdom blessings in presenting the good news, we also need to help interested people appreciate the urgent message Jesus Christ pronounced in the book of Revelation. Therefore, we would want to conclude our discussion with an urgent appeal and an offer to help sincere ones appreciate that judgment against this system and those who support it will come soon.
6 The prophecies of Revelation are a great source of refreshment and joy. Jehovah is extending an invitation to all honesthearted ones to follow his lead and benefit themselves. Let us zealously offer the Revelation Climax book so that all may be guided by Jehovah’s wise direction.

