The Most Important Day in 1991
1 The most important date on our calendar this year is Saturday, March 30. After sundown on that day, we will celebrate the Memorial of Jesus’ death. (1 Cor. 11:20, 24) Why was the date of Jesus’ death made a day for special remembrance?
THE MEMORIAL​—ITS SIGNIFICANCE
2 Jesus’ death was an event of universal importance. When writing to members of the spirit-begotten Christian congregation, the apostle Paul said: “As often as you eat this loaf and drink this cup, you keep proclaiming the death of the Lord, until he arrives.” (1 Cor. 11:26) So the Memorial calls special attention to the significance of the death of Jesus Christ in the outworking of Jehovah’s purpose. It highlights the meaning of Jesus’ sacrificial death, particularly in relation to the new covenant and to the way his death affects those who will be his joint heirs in the heavenly Kingdom.​—John 14:2, 3; Heb. 9:15.
3 By maintaining integrity down till his death, Jesus sanctified his Father’s name and demonstrated that a perfect man could prove faithful to God under every kind of trial that Satan might bring against him. His death also provided the perfect human sacrifice needed to ransom Adam’s offspring and made it possible for as many as would exercise faith to live forever in a paradise earth. Because of all that would be accomplished by means of Jesus’ death, it was most fitting for him to instruct his disciples to memorialize his death.​—rs pp. 266-7.
HOW WE CAN SHOW APPRECIATION
4 The world has many celebrations during the year, and much is done to promote them. On the other hand, the Lord’s Evening Meal is the only celebration that Jesus’ devoted footstep followers were commanded to observe. Without question, it is the year’s greatest celebration for all true Christians. Should not the profound significance of the commemorative Lord’s Evening Meal move us to focus attention on it during March?
5 Perhaps we could take a few minutes each week during March to discuss with our Bible students the scriptures that highlight the significance of Christ’s death and show them the basis for the Memorial. We could also encourage them to follow closely the Memorial Bible reading for March 25-30, as noted on the 1991 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses. This can help deepen their appreciation for the Lord’s Evening Meal.
6 Since the Memorial celebration falls on a Saturday, it will be easier for many to schedule their affairs to attend. Many publishers are taking advantage of the fact that there are five weekends in March to serve as auxiliary pioneers. This allows them to have a greater share in laying stress on the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal. It gives additional opportunities to help new ones to prepare mentally for this special occasion.
7 In view of the significance of the Memorial celebration, let us do everything we can to help others to attend. Helpful reminders on details to be cared for by the elders can be found in Our Kingdom Ministry for March 1989 and April 1990.
8 May we approach this most important day in 1991 with clear discernment and deep appreciation for all that Jesus’ death means for mankind. Yes, may all of us be present on the evening of March 30 as once again Jehovah’s true worshipers faithfully obey Jesus’ command to “keep proclaiming the death of the Lord, until he arrives.”

