Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
God’s truth, as set forth in the Bible, cannot be compromised, even though it may be unpopular, plaguing those who try to ignore God. Moved by love for God and for those who seek righteousness, Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to speak the truth boldly during September. As they do so they will offer to conduct a free home Bible study, on a regular basis, with any persons showing interest and they will leave helpful Bible literature, on a small contribution, with those who desire it.
REMINDER OF ANNUAL MEETING OF MEMBERS
The corporate publisher of this magazine, Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, formed and used by Jehovah’s witnesses for the advancement of the Kingdom interests, has a yearly corporation business meeting. In 1966 this meeting will be held on Saturday, October 1, at the office of the Society located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, at 10 a.m.
Letters of notice will be sent to the members of the corporation. The members can ensure their receiving the notice and accompanying proxy by making certain that the secretary’s office has the present mail address of the member to which the notice is to be sent.
While the purpose of here making mention of the annual meeting is to remind those who are members to provide the Society’s secretary with their present mailing address, mention is also made of the fact that any reader of The Watchtower is welcome to attend the annual meeting.
DO YOU BELIEVE THAT GOD CARES?
With increasing disrespect for the Bible and growing disbelief in God seen in all lands, it is encouraging to see, at the same time, the tremendous acceptance of the internationally popular Bible-study aid “Things in Which It Is Impossible for God to Lie.” Within a year of its publication circulation had soared into the millions of copies in many languages, with the printing facilities of the publisher unable to keep up with the growing demand—proof that there are millions of people who still realize that God is alive and interested in the affairs of mankind. Are you one of such? Send for your copy of this fascinating book today and receive free the booklet Healing of the Nations Has Drawn Near. It is only 50c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 18: Championing Jehovah’s Godship in Spite of Babylonish Hostility, ¶1-18. Page 521. Songs to Be Used: 88, 96.
September 25: Championing Jehovah’s Godship in Spite of Babylonish Hostility, ¶19-25, and Jesus, the “Object of Hostility,” Upholds Jehovah’s Godship, ¶1-11. Page 527. Songs to Be Used: 71, 76.
October 2: Jesus, the “Object of Hostility,” Upholds Jehovah’s Godship, ¶12-32. Page 532. Songs to Be Used: 8, 28.

