Announcements
● Literature offer for July: Survival Into a New Earth or Happiness​—How to Find It for a contribution of $1.00 each. August: One of the following 32-page magazine-size brochures may be offered for a contribution of 30¢: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, or The Government That Will Bring Paradise. As an alternate offer, congregations having a supply of any of the following publications may offer two for $1.00: “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules!, God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached, Life Everlasting​—In Freedom of the Sons of God, Paradise Restored to Mankind—​By Theocracy!, “The Nations Shall Know That I Am Jehovah”​—How?, and “Then Is Finished the Mystery of God.” Credit will be issued for any of these publications used in the campaign. There is a small stock in Brooklyn of God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached. No other books listed above should be ordered from Brooklyn for use in the field service. For this offer, publishers may obtain copies for 50¢ each, pioneers for 25¢. A letter is being sent with your June literature and magazine statement explaining how to request credit. Congregations will be granted credit only on those mentioned books that are printed on groundwood paper. Some older books are being reprinted on a better grade of paper, and these should not be offered at a reduced rate. (See Announcements in June Our Kingdom Ministry.) September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $3.00 for the large size and $1.50 for the small size. October: One-year subscription for either Awake! or The Watchtower or both.
● An adequate supply of forms for use during the 1989 service year is being sent to each congregation. These forms should not be wasted. They should be used only for their intended purpose.
● Beginning in September, circuit overseers will give the public talk “Multitudes Being Taught by Jehovah.” This will be a slide presentation.
● Congregation Book Studies will begin considering the book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? during the week of August 15, 1988. Book study conductors should prepare questions on material for which there are no questions, such as that found on pages 13-14, 35-6, 52, 55, 68-9, 112-13, 148-50, 164-5, 171, and 228.
● A supply of the Medical Document and Identity Card is being shipped to the congregations along with the yearly supply of congregation forms. These cards are not to be given out immediately upon their receipt but should be held until further direction is given on issuing them to the brothers at the end of the calendar year.
● The Watchtower in Polish will be a semimonthly publication beginning with the July 1, 1988, issue. The subscription rate will be $5.00 for one year and $2.50 for a six-month subscription.

