Do You Have the Pioneer Spirit?
1 What is the “pioneer spirit”? It might be defined as having a positive attitude toward the command to preach and make disciples, being fully committed to showing love and concern for people, being self-sacrificing, finding joy in following the Master closely, and taking pleasure in spiritual, not material, things.
2 Jehovah’s people as a whole are certainly manifesting this spirit today. Even in the face of bitter persecution and other adversities, they joyfully forge ahead in proclaiming the good news of God’s Kingdom.
3 However, living as we are deep within the time of the end, the anxiety and stress of everyday living can take its toll, perhaps diminishing our zeal and enthusiasm for spiritual matters. Each person might ask himself, ‘Do I have the pioneer spirit? Am I allowing this system of things to rob me of it? Am I zealous for the truth, eager to tell others about God’s Kingdom? Do I promote the pioneer spirit in the congregation and encourage others to become more fully involved in doing God’s will? What can I do to overcome a negative or indifferent attitude?’
HOW TO CULTIVATE THE PIONEER SPIRIT
4 The pioneer spirit is essentially a heart condition, and we must cultivate it. Since we feed the heart on the things we read and listen to, personal Bible study plays an important role in our cultivating the pioneer spirit. Paul admonished Timothy: “Ponder over these things . . . that your advancement may be manifest to all persons. . . . Stay by these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.” (1 Tim. 4:15, 16) It is necessary, therefore, for us to meditate on spiritual matters so as to sound them down into our heart, the seat of motivation. By so doing we will develop a longing to do God’s will. Our appreciation for spiritual matters will deepen, and we will look for ways to expand our ministry.
5 The things we talk about can either tear our brothers down or build them up. (Eph. 4:29) By sharing field experiences and points we enjoyed at the meetings or in personal study, we impart thoughts that are positive and encouraging. In addition, when we have occasion to talk with people in our daily routine of life, do we look for opportunities to give an informal witness? If we do, we are following in the footsteps of our Exemplar, Jesus.​—John 4:7-10.
6 Developing love for neighbor helps us to cultivate the pioneer spirit. (Matt. 22:39) Jesus demonstrated this kind of love when he was on earth. He felt pity for the people and wanted to do all he could to help them, though it meant great personal sacrifice. (Matt. 9:36; Rom. 5:6) If we demonstrate a Christlike attitude, we will be moved with pity and do all we can to help our neighbors spiritually, even if some reject us.​—Compare Matthew 23:37.
POSITIVE EFFECT
7 There are many blessings and benefits that come from manifesting the pioneer spirit in our lives. As we increase our activity in the ministry, we become more effective teachers, and this can bring us much joy. As the pioneer spirit grows in the congregation, so will the warmth and spirituality of the brothers. Concerning the wholesome effect pioneer service has had on his congregation, one elder remarked: “What a difference it made! The congregation’s pace changed. The tendency is to increase our participation in Jehovah’s service more and more.”​—See the September 15, 1985, Watchtower, page 26, paragraph 1.
8 As the 1989 service year approaches, make it your resolve to help cultivate the pioneer spirit in the congregation. Look for ways to expand your ministry. Plan ahead to auxiliary pioneer whenever possible, or perhaps reach out for the regular pioneer service. Whether pioneers or publishers, all in the congregation can have the pioneer spirit.

