Help New Ones to Comment at Meetings
1 How thrilling it is to hear a Bible student make his first comment at the Kingdom Hall! It surely gives us a feeling of satisfaction, a confirmation, as it were, that the new one is really taking hold of the truth. New ones need to realize that making public expression is necessary. It is a proof of faith that leads to salvation.​—Rom. 10:10.
2 Jesus said: “Everyone that is perfectly instructed will be like his teacher.” (Luke 6:40) That should impress upon us the fact that we can teach new ones to comment at meetings by doing so ourselves. We can help them appreciate that a prerequisite for commenting is knowledge. Teach them that study should be done with the purpose of putting knowledge to use in the meetings and in the field as well as in directing one’s personal life.
3 Some new ones may hold back, feeling that they are incapable of commenting as well as others do. However, we can help new ones to appreciate that simplicity is important in making good expressions. If our own comments are appropriate, brief, and to the point, new ones will not feel obligated to make lengthy expressions. They can be helped to analyze the question, find the thought in the paragraph that gives the answer, and then put that thought in their own words. It is also important for them to see how the cited or quoted scriptures relate to the point being made. Help them to see how they can use the scriptures in the paragraph to support their comments. Teach them to underline key words and perhaps make brief notes in the margin. Encourage them to use sufficient volume and to speak distinctly so that all in attendance can benefit from their prepared comments. Being well prepared will keep them from being too fearful to comment.
4 What else can we do to encourage new ones to comment? Of course, sitting with them can be reassuring and comforting. You may want to suggest that they sit toward the front where there are fewer distractions. Point out the questions that can be answered in very few words.
5 When the Congregation Book Study conductor has become acquainted with a new one in his group, he might ask him to read a scripture. Afterward, a genuine expression of appreciation for his efforts may encourage the new one to continue making comments at the book study and later start participating regularly at other meetings.
6 It is a privilege to share in commenting at meetings. (Heb. 10:24, 25) We want to help new ones to appreciate this. It can provide an added encouragement and blessing to all concerned. Whether in the field service or at our congregation meetings, we have opportunities to do as Hebrews 13:15 reminds us: “Through him let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips which make public declaration to his name.”

