Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JULY 4
Song 63
 8 min: Local announcements, Theocratic News, “Jehovah’s Blessing Evident in April Report,” and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage sharing in weekend field service.
10 min: “Make Effective Use of Special-Purpose Articles.” Discuss information with audience. Publishers and pioneers should watch for such announcements and promptly order magazines as needed.
12 min: “Speaking God’s Word With Boldness.” Talk and audience discussion. Include demonstration of presenting the July offer when discussing paragraph 7.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In Group Witnessing.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Stress the benefits of group arrangements for service and the need to make best use of time through well-planned arrangements for field service.
Song 43 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 11
Song 76
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Suggest talking points for presenting current issues of magazines.
15 min: “Help New Ones to Comment at Meetings.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Include brief demonstration showing how to apply what is stated in paragraph 3 at conclusion of a home Bible study.
20 min: “Do You Have the Pioneer Spirit?” Question-and-answer coverage. Interview some who are pioneering or who have pioneered, learning from them what prompted them to become pioneers.
Song 19 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 18
No Service Meeting is outlined for this week to allow an open week for attending the “Divine Justice” District Convention.​—See note under “Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples” in June Our Kingdom Ministry.
WEEK STARTING JULY 25
Song 86
10 min: Local announcements. Also, highlight information in “Rendering Sacred Service With Godly Fear.” Stress the importance of attending the circuit assembly program that will begin in September.
35 min: Review of “Divine Justice” District Convention program highlights.​—See note under “Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples” in June Our Kingdom Ministry.
Song 208 and concluding prayer.

