Presenting the Good News​—In Group Witnessing
1 Meeting with others in preparation for field service is both practical and upbuilding. Such a provision encourages our brothers to work shoulder to shoulder in proclaiming the good news.
2 Some congregations may schedule a meeting for field service to follow one of the regular meetings at the Kingdom Hall. While the number supporting this arrangement may be quite large, book study conductors still give attention to the needs of the publishers in their respective groups. This arrangement may be convenient for the majority of the publishers who will be going out in field service that day. Depending on their situation, other congregations hold their weekend meetings for field service at each Congregation Book Study. There are obvious advantages in this arrangement. It is recognized that circumstances vary from one congregation to another. The combining of some very small groups may be appropriate at times. So the body of elders needs to consider the local circumstances and determine what arrangements will accomplish the most good.​—See Our Ministry, pages 96-7.
SUPPORT MEETINGS FOR FIELD SERVICE
3 Group witnessing arranged on the book study level provides a fine opportunity for the conductor to give personalized assistance. New publishers as well as those who are more experienced can benefit from working with the elders and the ministerial servants.
4 Midweek meetings for field service may be held at the Kingdom Hall or at various locations convenient to the publishers. Whether two or more meetings are held depends on local circumstances and the availability of elders, ministerial servants, or other competent individuals assigned to care for the meeting and take the lead in the field ministry.
5 In view of the urgency of the times, we want to reach as many people as possible with the Kingdom message. What can the book study conductors or those assigned to care for the group do to ensure that all make the best use of the time they have scheduled for group witnessing? Conductors can bear in mind that the meeting for field service should last no more than 10 to 15 minutes. (See Our Ministry, page 77.) Much time can be saved when territory is assigned before going into the field, thereby avoiding large groups meeting on the street corner and appearing to be disorganized. Some have found it helpful to assign portions of the territory to qualified publishers for a period of time. Thus, once groups are arranged, they can leave immediately for their territory. The service overseer should be alert to resolve problems with organizing groups so that more time can be spent in the field.
6 Many longtime publishers fondly recall experiences shared through the years while working with others in group activity. Such experiences serve to strengthen the unity of the congregation and the bonds of Christian love. While at times there may be good reasons for two publishers to work together, in many territories more can be accomplished by working alone while others are witnessing nearby. Working alone in field service, where conditions permit, allows us to reach more people, and it can be good training for the future in the event that unexpected restrictions are imposed on our preaching work. (See the November 15, 1985, Watchtower, page 13, paragraph 11.) Good judgment, as well as a desire to accomplish as much as possible, should govern the arrangements that we make.
7 The apostle Paul encouraged fellow Christians of his day to “hold fast the public declaration of our hope.” Also, his inspired words tell us to “consider one another to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together . . . but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.” (Heb. 10:23-25) Through support of the local arrangements for group witnessing, may we succeed in inciting our fellow Kingdom proclaimers “to love and fine works.” As we do, we will reap many fine rewards in Jehovah’s service.

