Speaking God’s Word With Boldness
1 How are you affected when faced with opposition or when you are persecuted by enemies of the good news? Are you determined to keep on witnessing despite what opposers may say or do? Although only a few may let their heart grow faint or be tempted to stop preaching, all of us can benefit from the example of Paul and Silas. They did not let persecution discourage or silence them. (1 Thess. 2:2) With Jehovah’s help, we too can demonstrate the boldness needed in order to come off victorious in the face of opposition.​—Ps. 138:3.
2 Jehovah is our refuge in time of trouble. It is to him that we humbly appeal for help. (Ps. 18:2, 3) Our brothers in the first century asked Jehovah to help them ‘keep on speaking his word with all boldness.’ (Acts 4:29) Jehovah responded to this prayer by filling the disciples with holy spirit. He will do the same for us.​—Acts 4:31.
SEIZING OPPORTUNITIES TO SPEAK
3 In each congregation, meetings for field service are arranged to provide encouraging discussions of spiritual matters before going into the territory. Do you support these meetings whenever possible? The pioneers and those who are able to spend more time in the ministry may especially be able to give other publishers the benefit of their experience as they go from door to door. Also, by applying suggestions from the Reasoning book, all can be better equipped to speak with conviction.
4 In some areas, the brothers are finding that many people are not at home during the day. Various methods may be used to reach these people. Some publishers do street work near bus stops and train stations or in front of apartment houses at hours when people are leaving for work or coming home.
5 It requires courage and boldness to approach strangers and initiate conversations with them, but the results can be most rewarding. Like the apostles, it is necessary to speak “with boldness by the authority of Jehovah.”​—Acts 14:3.
6 Some arrange to work in unassigned territory, and this also requires boldness. During the summer months this year, over 3,400 brothers and sisters will engage in this work. Some will travel thousands of miles. It is a pleasure to see the brothers willingly engage in this activity even at great personal sacrifice.
PRESENT THE OFFER WITH BOLDNESS
7 During July the literature offer is Survival Into a New Earth or Happiness​—How to Find It on a contribution of $1.00. Both these publications contain information vital to those who are hungering and thirsting for the truth. Present these books with confidence, using the current Topic for Conversation. Refer to the Reasoning book for an introduction that will work well in your territory.
8 When Paul was first invited by Jesus to be his follower, he responded with zeal and preached with boldness. (Acts 9:5, 15, 16, 20, 27, 28) He continued faithfully in the same course right down to his death. We need to imitate his example and continue sharing in the work of speaking God’s Word with boldness.

