Will They Live Again?
WHEN faced with the death of a beloved relative or close friend, humans are helpless. The best available medical knowledge in the world is of no use in releasing even one person from the grip of death. Many people are at a loss for words in their attempts to comfort the bereaved. Death seems to be so final, so irreversible. But is this really so?
A book that claims to have been inspired by the Maker of man provides an answer to this question. Abundant evidence confirms its claim to have been inspired of God. Regarding his investigation of this book, a former chief justice of the United States Supreme Court stated: “It was a long, serious, and profound study: and using the same principles of evidence in this religious matter as I always do in secular matters, I have come to the decision that . . . it has come from God.” On the basis of the evidence at hand, millions of other persons have reached the same conclusion. The book involved is the Holy Bible.
The Bible reveals that man was created from the elements of the ground. We read: “Jehovah God proceeded to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man came to be a living soul.” (Gen. 2:7) That first man, Adam, had set before him the prospect of endless life. However, when he disobeyed God’s law, the following sentence was pronounced upon him: “In the sweat of your face you will eat bread until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken. For dust you are and to dust you will return.” (Gen. 3:19) In the many centuries that have passed since Adam’s death, billions of his descendants have likewise returned to the lifeless dust.
Since Almighty God created the first man from the elements of the ground, is it not reasonable to conclude that he must also possess the ability to resurrect the dead? Such a bringing back of dead persons to life would not require the restoration of identical molecules making up the body of the deceased. Even during one’s lifetime the molecules are replaced about every seven years. So they are not the factor that determines just who one is. It is our physical appearance, voice, personality, mental growth, experiences and memory that identify us. Hence, not the identical molecules, but individuals, or souls, must be brought back to life.
The Most High has promised that this is exactly what will take place. We read in Scripture: “There will be many of those asleep in the ground of dust who will wake up.” (Dan. 12:2) “Your dead ones will live. A corpse of mine​—they will rise up. Awake and cry out joyfully, you residents in the dust! For your dew is as the dew of mallows, and the earth itself will let even those impotent in death drop in birth.”​—Isa. 26:19.
What a thrilling prospect to contemplate! Just as the dew revives vegetation, so the operation of God’s active force, or spirit, will awaken the dead from their sleep. The earth, like a womb, will give birth to those who once were “impotent in death.”
If you want more information about God’s restoring the dead to life, we urge you to speak with Jehovah’s Witnesses the next time they call on you. A well-founded faith in God’s resurrection promise can encourage you now and enable you to give real comfort to others in their time of loss.

