R414 : page 1 

VOL. IV. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER, 1882. 

NO. 5. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars 
by mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money 
Order or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers 
will be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or 
postage stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances 
may be made by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



page 1 

-THOSE who must send postage stamps for subscription, 
please send one or two cent ones. 

—WE have been so delayed by the extra issue of October that 
we have omitted the November issue. Subscriptions will last one 
month longer. 



R414 : page 1 



TO NEW READERS. 



The TOWER comes to you as unpretentiously as the ministers 
of the early church. We present no list of titled and world 
renowned contributors —none whose fame would command your 
attention to the subjects we present. But we come to you with 
the Bible as God's Word, and seek to enlist your attention to its 
statements and your obedience to its requirements, and thus to 
lead the hearts and minds of some of God's children away from 
the jarring confusion of precept and doctrine, prevalent among 
the various divisions (sects) of Christians, into the harmony, 
beauty, simplicity, and confidence, which come from the study 
of God's Word and its acceptance as a harmonious whole and a 
self interpreter. 

In our last number you saw some scriptures applied more 
pointedly than you have been accustomed to apply them, and 
other scriptures quoted for which you never before could find a 
place of application without distortion. It would be but natural 
that you should wonder how these things could be true, yet not 
recognized long ago by earnest Christians; and why so many of 
those in the churches manifest a bitter opposition to things so 
full of harmony with God's Word, and so fully vindicating the 
Justice, Wisdom and Love of our Heavenly Father. 

In answer to your supposed queries, we suggest that if a broad 
view of God's dealings be taken, it shows that He has a plan 
with reference to men. While he was pleased in past times to 
reveal an outline of that plan, it was nothing more; no details 
were given. The details of the plan began to be recognized since 
Pentecost. The light of revelation shines with special brightness 
on the ends of the ages. Upon the ending of the Jewish age 
which was the beginning of the Gospel Age, glorious light shone 
out relative to the blessed privileges about to be enjoyed in the 
Gospel Age. Remember, too, that it came from the Scriptures, 
written long before, but which were never before appreciated 
and understood. Matthew Mark, Luke, John, Peter and Paul, all 
quoted the prophecies and applied them to the events taking 
place and due to take place in their day -the opening of the 
Gospel Age. The prophecies had been there for centuries, but 
the revelation or understanding of them, was reserved for those 



in the ends of the ages. (See 1 Cor. 10:11.) So now in the closing 
of the Gospel Age and dawning of the grand Millennial Age, we 
should expect the light to shine out brightly relative to God's 
plans for this incoming age. And so it does. Search and see. 
Gem after gem of precious truth now glows with unparalleled 
luster to the diligent searcher because God's due time has come 
for such to understand it. Soon the blessed bow of promise shall 
span the whole heavens, and weeping earth shall dry her tears 
and shout for joy. 

It is no more surprising that these truths relative to God's plan 
for the blessing of all mankind should have been but dimly seen 
heretofore, than that the call of the Gentiles to be heirs of the 
Abrahamic promise, (Acts 11:18. Eph 3:5,6. Gal. 3:29.) should 
have been but dimly seen until the Gospel Age began to dawn. 
We can understand prophetic Scriptural statements only as they 
become due. Thus— "Light, (knowledge, was long ago) sown for 
the righteous." When due, the light springs up and gradually 
unfolds. Thus our Father has made abundant provision for the 
household-that the servants shall bring forth things both new 
and old, and the household have meat in due season. 

The cause of the opposition on the part of many to the truth now 
due, is the failure to recognize this progressive and unfolding 
character of God's revelation of his plans. Most Christians take 
for granted that good men of the past who walked in the light 
then due, had all the truth worth knowing. Knox, Calvin, Luther, 
Wesley and others were, we believe, followers in our Lord's 
footsteps of self-sacrifice and devotedness to God; but more 
truth is due in our day than in theirs. According to God's plan, 
the light should shine more and more until 'tis perfect day. 
Therefore many Christians of to-day make a great mistake, and 
sit in comparative darkness, when they might be walking in 
glorious light, because they search the theology of these men 
instead of the Word of God. 

O, that all would turn away from musty church creeds of times 
past and give more earnest heed to the ever living, ever fresh, 
ever unfolding, ever new Word of God. Again, others take the 
Bible and search it only for the purpose of seeing how nearly 
they can make it to fit either their mental or written creed. If 
your habit has been such, we hope you will at once resolve to 
lay aside all human teachings as authoritative and hereafter 
judge all you hear or read by the statements of Scripture. If you 
believe anything, make sure that you have Scriptural statements 
warranting it. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good and 
cast away all else. 

The action of the nominal church to-day relative to the light now 
shining clearly resembles that of the Jewish church relative to 
light in the end of their age. They reject every new ray of light 
because it would conflict with some cherished theory or 
statement of their creed. They are so enwrapped with their own 



plans and arrangements for converting the world, that they are 
unwilling to hear that God has a better, grander, and infinitely 
more comprehensive way of dealing with evil, and blessing and 
teaching the world. Their ears are so stopped by the din and 
confusion of their own religious efforts that they cannot discern 
the plan of Jehovah. 

Satan indeed is doubtless interested in the promotion of the 
Babel confusion of sects, and stimulates and encourages that 
zeal which is not according to knowledge, and thus he hinders 
their hearing Jehovah's voice, saying, "Be still and know that I 
am God, (the mighty one); I will be exalted among the heathen; 
I will be exalted in the earth." (Psa. 46:10.) The power to do this 
is with our Father and not with us. When he gives the saints with 
Christ their Lord, the heathen for an inheritance- when He gives 
the kingdom under the whole heavens to the people of the saints, 
THEN, and not by poor human effort, will God's kingdom come 
and His will be done on earth as it is in heaven. (Dan. 2:35,44 
and 7:18,27.) 



R414 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Notwithstanding many discouraging circumstances and the 
severe trial of faith which has been, and is still testing the 
household of faith, we rejoice in the assurance of our Father's 
Word that "The Lord knoweth them that are His," and we know 
that all things shall work together for good to them. " His Word 
repeatedly assures us that in the days of the Son of Man-during 
the presence of Christ— we must expect that He will sit as a 
refiner and purifier of silver to purify and purge of all dross. We 
have before seen that this purifying relates to all things-to 
questions of governments and subjects, capitalists and laborers, 
masters and servants; in a word it is the purifying of all things, 
political, social, scientific and religious. Scripture affirms that 
this testing and purging commences with the Church— God's 
Temple." (Read carefully Malachi 3:1-4.) 

If then, we are living in the transition period which closes the 
Gospel Age and introduces the Millennial Age, called "The day 
of the Lord," should WE be surprised at these tests of the 
Refiner, whom we recognize as being now present? "Beloved 
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, 
as though some strange thing happened unto you: But rejoice 
inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his 
glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. 
If ye be reproached for the name of Christ (not as evil doers) 
happy are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God resteth on 
you... The time is come that judgement must begin at the house 
of God." 1 Peter, 4:12-17. (The word judgment sometimes refers 



to the process of trial, and sometimes to the result of trial-the 
sentence. In the first sense the judgment of the church began 
with the beginning of the Gospel Age; in the latter sense it 
belongs to the end or harvest of the age. This testing now going 
on separates the true and the false, the wheat and the tares in the 
nominal church, and already the welcome "well done" begins to 
be realized by the faithful, who even here begin to enter into the 
joy of their Lord as the light of His Word reveals the glorious 
future.) 

We should be arming ourselves with the whole armor of God's 
Word, and bracing ourselves for our own final testing, by 
girding up the loins of our minds with the girdle of truth, that we 
may be able to withstand in this evil day, For "a thousand shall 
fall at thy side and ten thousand at thy right hand." (Eph. 6:13; 
Psa. 91:7.) 

And some of them of understanding shall fall to try and to purge 
and to make white. (Dan. 1 1:35) This will shake loose from all 
earthly supports and confidence in man's wisdom. It will have 
the effect of binding some still closer to the Master's teachings, 
and to a more close inspection of every thought advanced or 
received to see whether it be God's teaching they are building 
with, and whether they are firmly built upon the foundation-rock 
that Christ died for our sins. 

R415 : page 2 

In the midst of this testing time however, the Lord sends many 
encouragements for which we praise Him. Among others are 
many encouraging words from the faithful in Christ Jesus, 
telling us how they continue to grow up into Christ; how they 
daily become stronger and better able to overcome the 
allurements of Anti-christ and the spirit of the world. 

A brother writes from London, Eng., of his visit to Spurgeon's 
Tabernacle, as follows: 

"It was on an occasion in which his audience was supposed to be 
entirely of strangers, and we were very gently led to suppose 
that possibly if we were not brought to the light in this age, there 
might be a chance in another, but that after all it is better to be 
converted at once so as to make sure of it. This man has vastly 
changed in regard to what he preaches since I have known him. 
He has evidently read the book "Food" and is breaking it gently. 
It may be bias, though I think not, but I fancy that the "Food" 
must have been read in many thinking quarters, because I very 
distinctly recognize in many of the leaders of pulpit thought, the 
spirit of the work. I believe that the fruit is ripening. 

Another from Titusville, says- he thinks the influence of this 
truth now permeates to a greater or less extent, every pulpit in 
that region. We mention these things that you may be 
encouraged, for often we might feel like Elijah that we are 



measurably alone; but like him should know that there are others 
who do not bow either to Baal or Babylon. 

Many letters must go unanswered, and many must wait a long 
time. If the letter does not seem to need an answer, or if some 
printed matter will answer its queries, we simply read, fill its 
orders, and omit special answering. You will not be surprised at 
this when we inform you that of this present edition we print 
20,000 copies, and that the letters received have for some time 
past, averaged from 500 to 600 per week. To answer every one 
would be impossible. There are at present four persons engaged 
in answering letters, besides what the Editor answers personally, 
and even then we can only attend to the most important ones. 

However, we are always glad to hear from you, if you will take 
the public letters of the Editor in the TOWER as your answers, 
except on special matters. But know that every letter receives 
attention. 

We published 200,000 copies of the last number of the TOWER, 
and issued them from New York City for the sake of economy 
and dispatch. On our return to Pittsburgh we met much to 
encourage us— kind words and donations, etc.,— some small 
sums, and some larger. The Master knows, not we, which were 
the largest, for sometimes he reckons a widow's mite as more 
than the larger offerings of those who have more abundantly. 

One German brother who sent $100 did not sign his name; we 
hope he will send his address that he may receive the paper 
regularly. These things gave encouragement, which doubtless 
the Lord saw we needed, and we at once made arrangements for 
an issue of another 100,000 edition of the same October number, 
which will hereafter be without date, as a missionary number. 
When these have gone out upon their mission, carrying to God's 
children "Glad tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all 
people," which will be in about a month, we hope to be ready to 
send forth still another 100,000. 

We wish that those especially who have contributed to the 
"Tract Fund," could read some of the letters which come from 
children of God in whose hearts there has for a long time been 
pent up the flame of ardent love to God— almost smothered by 
false ideas of his justice as viewed from an unscriptural 
standpoint. 

There are thousands of saints preaching the glad tidings by 
loaning the TOWER, and reading and explaining it to others. 
We have plenty of the October number, and you may order all 
you can use judiciously, without charge. 

Below are extracts from a few of the many good letters:— 

STANWOOD, MICH. 



DEAR BRO.-The "Foods" you sent me have been distributed 
and are doing good work for the blessed Master. A number have 
been brought to the light through reading them. The truth is 
setting us free in this section, and we feel in our hearts that it has 
been instrumental in God's hands in doing much for us. 

The question with me has been how to present this truth to 
others in the most effectual manner. I am trying to speak to the 
people every week two or three times, but I feel my incapacity 
to such an extent that the cross is heavy at times. I have often 
thought I would not speak any more in public until I was better 
qualified if I could have my own way about it. What shall I do, 
who is sufficient for these things?... Praise the Lord for his mercy 
endureth forever. 

Yours in hope of being one of the Bride company. 



["My God shall supply all your need." "Study to show thyself a 
workman approved unto God, rightly dividing the word of 
truth." Phil. 4:19; 2 Tim. 2:15. EDITOR.] 



BERNE, PA. 

DEAR BRO.:-Please try and publish a German tract, setting 
forth the "glad tiding of great joy;" thousands are waiting for 
such a tract. I could distribute thousands of copies with 
advantage. Yours, 

(We would be very glad if some German brother with necessary 
ability, would volunteer to translate Oct. Z.W.T. into German. A 
Swedish translation is also much called for. Would be glad to 
hear a similar report from some capable Swedish brother. Here 
is a place in the harvest field for some one. -ED.) 



R415 : page 2 



LOVE DEFINED. 



"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have 
love one to another. " 

Love is that tender solicitude and affection with which 
anything commanding admiration and respect, is regarded. That 
which is not lovely never can be loved in the true sense of the 
word. A degenerate nature may desire and find a morbid 
satisfaction in that which is unlovely, but that is not love. Love 
wherever found is a gleam of the divine likeness, and is 
spontaneously awakened by the presence of that which is noble 
and pure and good. This wonderful principle binds in holiest and 
most delightful union and harmony all intelligent beings 
controlled by it. God is the most glorious exhibition of its 



nobility and grandeur. It is the law of his being, and shall 
ultimately be the controlling law of all his universe. 

But one inquires, if only that which commands admiration and 
respect can be truly loved, how could God love sinners and tell 
us to do the same? We reply that God never loved sinners as 
such; he loved the jewel he had brought into perfect being 
because it was truly lovely; and when, under temptation it lost 
its excellence and glory, his love for its perfection pitied it in its 
fall, while his justice condemned it; and that love devised the 
wondrous scheme for its recovery. 

Let us here note the attitude of Jehovah towards those whom he 
so loved as to give his only begotten Son to redeem them. For 
six thousand years he has permitted their adversary to have 
dominion over them: Famine and pestilence have stalked 
abroad; hatred and strife, and war and bloodshed, have filled the 
earth with untold agony and woe, until the grave closed over 
generation after generation. Six thousand years, but no 
deliverance yet; God still stands off, and still the king of terror 
reigns. When the long promised Deliverer comes, it is to rule 
with a rod of iron —to dash in pieces as a potters vessel the 
kingdoms of earth, which from human standpoint seem 
necessary for protection against greater evils. In fear and dismay 
men look upon God as an enemy, and seek to hide from his 
presence; yet "God is love," and 

He knows, not they, how sweet accord 
Shall grow at length from out this clash 
Of earthly discords, which have jarred 
On soul and sense: They hear the crash, 
But do not know that on His ear, 
Breaks harmony-full, deep, and clear. 

Now the love of God is vailed, but soon it shall be revealed in 
the glorious restoration to Edenic perfection and bliss. Soon "the 
redeemed of the Lord (all mankind) shall return and come with 
singing unto Zion, (the church in kingdom power,) and 
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain joy 
and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away." Thus 
viewing God's dealings, we see that his wisdom often veils his 
love. 

True love while it seeks to shield and protect, will justly judge 
and endeavor to eradicate a fault— expose it, let the light shine on 
it and show it up to those affected by it, that it may be removed, 
and grace and beauty take its place. 

A very false notion of love obtains among the majority of 
Christian people, and under this false notion our adversary 
endeavors to shield some of the most dangerous and deadly 
errors that seek to sap the very foundation of the Christian's 
hope. Let this deadly thing which the adversary dares to present 
to God's children be touched by the sword of the spirit 



R416 : page 2 

which is the Word of God, and he who wields it is said to be 
uncharitable, loveless. But does this make it so? By no means. 
Jesus was full of the love of God, but he spoke most 
emphatically against evil-doers:- "Ye blind guides which strain 
at a gnat and swallow a camel;" "Woe unto you for you shut up 
the kingdom of heaven against men; ye neither go in yourselves, 
neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in." (Matt. 23:13- 
33.) And again he said to erring Peter, "Get thee behind me 
Satan, (adversary) thou art an offence unto me, for thou 
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of 
men." (Matt. 16:23.) But how differently the Lord's rebukes 
affected his loving disciples and the proud pharisees. 

Paul was a noble pattern of his Master's spirit in his zeal for the 
truth, and his care for fellow members of the church. His usual 
manner toward all, like that of Jesus, was kind, generous, and 
affectionate, but did Paul cover the truth, shield error, or fail to 
warn an erring brother or the flock of God against the 
encroachments of the enemy? If he had so done, as an unfaithful 
steward he would have lost his stewardship. Though Peter was a 
noble soldier of the cross and fellow servant in the Lord, Paul 
withstood him to the face when, by giving way to the old nature 
for a time, he was to be blamed. (Gal. 2:11.) Note in connection 
with this, the sympathy and love existing between these 
brethren; (2 Pet. 3:15.) evidently the rebuke was accepted in the 
spirit of meekness. And again we find Paul faithfully warning 
the church against some ("many") who had become the enemies 
of the cross of Christ. (Phil. 3:18.) 

Does some one object that we must "judge not that we be not 
judged?" We reply that to exercise human judgement in 
condemning others would be wrong; but to apply the judgement 
of God as expressed in his Word is right. We are commanded to 
do so. And the various descriptions of evil deeds, false 
teachings, and seducing doctrines, are given that we may judge— 
"That the man of God may be thoroughly furnished, " for 
reproof, for correction of error and instruction in righteousness. 
(2 Tim. 3:16,17.) It is therefore the duty of every child of God to 
judge what is right and what is wrong, what is true and what is 
false. That against which we are cautioned is judging by other 
standards than the Word of God-condemning on our own, or 
any other human authority. That Paul judged according to God's 
Word and taught the church to do the same is very clear. (See 1 
Cor. 5:3; Gal. 2:11; 1 Thes. 5:21; 2 Tim. 4:2; 1 Cor. 6:2,3. Note 
also Paul's prayer that love might abound in judgement, Phil. 
1:9,10). 

No doubt Paul's faithfulness in seeking to build up and establish 
the church in purity of doctrine and life, was often 
misunderstood, and failed to be appreciated by them. This is 
very apparent from 1 Cor. chap. 4. "But (he says) it is a very 



small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment. 
He that judgeth me is the Lord. " Then speaking of his labor and 
suffering for them, he says: "I write not these things to shame 
you, but as my beloved sons I warn you. " (Read the chapter 
throughout.) 

Jesus said: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, 
if ye have love one toward another," and Paul says: "Let love be 
without dissimulation; abhor that which is evil, cleave to that 
which is good. " When contending with an unseen, but wily and 
powerful foe, what mere hypocrisy is that profession of love 
which fails to warn of immediate or approaching danger. 

The new creature in Christ is a jewel of infinite value, "and 
every one that loveth him that begat, loveth him also that is 
begotten of him." (1 John 5:1.) Dearly beloved, "Be kindly 
affectioned one to another, with brotherly love; in honor 
preferring one another;" "Reprove, rebuke, exhort (each other 
with all long-suffering and doctrine. " Give and receive in the 
spirit of meekness, remembering that "Love vaunteth not itself, 
is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly 
(unbecomingly) seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, 
thinketh no evil. " 

By this mutual love, and this care one for another, will all men 
be able to discover who are Jesus' disciples— "Let love be 
without dissimulation; abhor that which is evil, cleave to that 
which is good." So shall you "be blameless and harmless, the 
sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and 
perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world. " 
MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R416 : page 3 



OUR NEW NAME. 

Thy name, Oh, Heavenly Bridegroom! 
Can we ever hope to bear? 
Shall we see Thy matchless glory, 
And in Thy kingdom share? 

With smiles of loving welcome, 
Wilt Thou say to us, well done? 
When our pilgrim days are ended, 
And our race for life is run? 

Yes, I hear Thee sweetly saying, 
In words of love divine, 
"If now with Me thou'lt suffer, 
My glory shall be thine. 

If now with Me thou'rt crucified, 
New life to thee I'll give, 



And through eternal ages, 
My bride shall with Me live." 

Oh, glorious fount of blessing ! 
We will haste without delay, 
Our little all to Thee to give, 
Who dost such joys repay; 

We care not, Lord, for earthly fame, 
Its honors, or its pride, 
But let us bear Thy sacred name, 
And own us as Thy bride. 

Thy name above all others grand, 
Which Thy waiting bride shall own; 
When Thou shalt call her to Thy side, 
And share with her Thy throne; 

Through realms of fadeless glory, 
Shall all its power confess; 
And every tongue on earth shall praise, 
"The Lord our righteousness." 



MRS. A. AGENS, N.J. 



R416 : page 3 

A BIBLE READING. 



THE ATONEMENT. 

This subject is again coming up for consideration, and we 
would not hinder it if we could. Rather would we be found 
aiding in the investigation. When we know that a doctrine rests 
on the Word of God we can rest on it without fear. Many of 
God's children, though walking in the light, are inclined to lean 
too much on the arm of flesh; and if we mistake not God is 
going to shake them loose. Blessed will they be who are 
standing on the rock of his truth. 

All do not have equal facilities for searching the Word, so we 
wish to help. We would say, however, that there is but little 
excuse for the most of us, seeing that good reference Bibles are 
so cheap. A teacher's Bible and a full concordance, a prayerful 
heart and an honest mind, with time and patience, are all we 
need- God will give the rest. 

Study carefully and prayerfully the following texts; use them as 
starting points with your reference Bibles; you will find plenty 
more. Keep a list of all you find; compare any theory of the 
atonement, no matter where it comes from, with every text on 
your list; if it agrees, believe it; if not, reject it. Let God's Word 
be the end of all controversy between you and every doctrine 
brought before you. Don't be afraid to investigate. "Light is 



sown for the righteous." "Prove all things, hold fast that which is 
good." 

Here are some of the things that Jesus did for us in the atoning 
work: 

He died for us. 1 Thes. 5:10; Rom. 5:8. 

He died for all. 2 Cor. 5:14,15; John 11:50-52. 

He died for our sins. 1 Cor. 15:3; 1 Pet. 2:24. 

He justified us. Gal. 2:17; Rom. 4:25. 

The law could not. Gal. 5:4; Rom. 3:20. 

Our works could not. Gal. 2:16; Rom. 3:27,28. 

Faith in his work justifies. Gal. 3:13,14; Rom. 4:24. 

He bought us. 1 Cor. 6:20; 7:23. 

He redeemed us. Gal. 3:13; 1 Pet. 1:18-20. 

He ransomed us. Matt. 20:28; 1 Tim. 2:6. 

He washed us. Rev. 1:5; 1 John 1:7. 

He sanctified us. Heb. 13:12; Eph. 5:26. 

He saves us. 1 Cor. 1:21; 1 Tim. 1:15. 

He was an offering for us. Heb. 9:28; 10:10. 

He was sacrificed for us. Eph. 5:2; 1 Cor. 5:7. 

He knew no sin. 1 John 3:5; Heb. 4:15. 

He was made sin (a sin-offering) for us. 2 Cor. 5:21; 1 Pet. 

2:22-24. 

The just died for the unjust. 1 Pet. 3:18; consider also the 
meaning of the sacrifices of 4,000 years. 

His blood bought us; 1 Pet. 1:2. Purchased us; Acts 20:28. 
Redeemed us; Rev. 5:9. Justified us; Rom. 5:9. Washed us; 
Rev. 1:5. Sanctified us; Heb. 13:12. Saves us; Acts 4:12. 

"A little Scripture is better than a good deal of reasoning. " 

W. I. MANN. 



R417 : page 3 



MAN'S INHERITANCE. 



When God created man, he endowed him with qualities of 
being like his own. Qualities of justice and judgment fitted him 
to be a ruler; qualities of mercy and love prepared him to be a 
reasonable, kind and wise ruler. Such is a brief description of 



earth's first king- Adam. An image of his Creator, (not 
physically, but mentally and morally,) he is to be invested with 
authority over earth and its affairs, like as God is ruler over all, 
as we read: After our likeness let them have dominion over the 
beast of the field, the fowl of heaven and the fish of the sea. 
[Gen. 1:26]. Thus was he installed lord of earth. He was but 
another form of creation, a step lower than angels, as lower and 
under him, came the brute creation. Accordingly we read: "Thou 
hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned 
him with glory and honor. Thou madest him to have dominion 
over the works of Thy hands. Thou hast put all things under his 
feet." [Psa. 8:5-6]. 

All of this glory, honor and rulership was invested in him, to be 
used in harmony with his nature, which being perfect, was in 
perfect harmony with the will of God. This was his inheritance, 
but 

HE LOST IT. 

As God had foreseen, man disobeys his superior ruler, the King 
of Kings and Lord of Lords. This cannot be allowed to go 
unpunished. He had been informed from the first that 
disobedience to God would be sin, and that its legitimate 
punishment and effect is death. While man always was mortal, 
i.e. liable to death, if disobedient to God's laws, yet the loving 
Creator had made every provision necessary to his welfare, in 
the garden prepared for his trial. And not only had He arranged 
that the soul (person) that sinned should die, but also that if 
obedient the person should continue to live. The means for life's 
continuance was in "every tree of the garden," i.e., the food 
provided for man's sustenance was amply sufficient to meet all 
the wastes of his system, and would have preserved the 
freshness and vigor of his perfect being forever. This would be 
everlasting life. 

When man became a sinner the penalty "death" must be 
executed. It mattered not so far as the penalty was concerned, 
whether Adam should die the same moment that he disobeyed, 
or the same year, or a thousand years after. He must die. The 
word "day" used in connection with the penalty, is the general 
term used now as well as in past times, for a period or epoch of 
time, as: "The day of temptation in the wilderness -forty years;" 
the days of creation, etc. The marginal reading clears up the 
meaning: "In the day that thou eatest thereof, dying, thou shalt 
die." [Gen. 2:17]. This was fulfilled not by God's striking Adam 
dead with a thunderbolt but simply by cutting off his access to 
the life-giving food supplied by the trees of the prepared garden. 
Accordingly an angel drove Adam from the garden and 
prevented with flaming sword, his access thereafter to the tree 
(trees or woods) of life. [Gen. 3:24]. 



Thus was the Lord of creation driven out into the world which 
God, foreknowing his fall, had left in an unprepared or "cursed" 
conditions. The garden which we are told was "prepared" was 
doubtless an illustration of what the whole earth will be when 
man and his perfect conditions are restored-in "The times of 
restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of 
all his holy prophets. " 

Thus thrown upon his own resources for obtaining by sweat of 
face, elements to sustain life, Adam found it a hard lot, and by 
its effects was enabled to know what evil is, and the exceeding 
bitterness of sin. And oft, no doubt, he desired, perhaps prayed, 
that he might be permitted again to dwell in Eden, and promised 
that with his present knowledge of sin and evil he would more 
highly prize the good things there enjoyed and more fervently 
love and obey Him "from whom cometh every good and perfect 
gift." But though God's plan was no less loving than this, it was 
broader, wiser and more comprehensive. God's plan was to let, 
not only Adam, but also the entire race, learn just this same 
lesson of the bitterness of sin and disobedience which each must 
individually learn to fully appreciate. Then bringing all back to 
the Eden condition, sin might be forever banished, and the entire 
race live in harmony with God. 

Toil and care told in time upon even the perfect physical form of 
a perfect man, resulting finally in his complete overthrow and 
wresting from his grasp the last shred or spark of life. He is 
dead. After nine hundred and thirty years of struggle with his 
foe— death— he is conquered. The penalty of sin was inflicted and 
continues, to this moment, since he still is one of the prisoners in 
the great charnel house of death, which has since swallowed up 
the race, and will hold them all until the second Adam, who 
ransomed the race, and who declares, "I have the keys of hell 
and death" [hades-the grave] [Rev. 1:18] shall take his great 
power and reign, releasing "the prisoners of the pit" [grave], "the 
captives" of sin and death. 

But not only did the casting out from the life-preserving fruits of 
the garden tend, to the impairing of Adam's physical powers, but 
of his mental qualities also. It was not possible that he should 
retain perfect mental vigor, when he became physically 
impaired, thought being the product of the mental organism 
made active by the physical vitality. 

We see then that Adam's mental powers decreased with his 
physical deterioration, and the moral qualities of his mind 
suffered the most. While the energy of body and mind were 
taxed to their utmost to take care of self, it is but reasonable to 
suppose that the quality of benevolence (love) which as he was 
in God's image, must have been one of the ruling characteristics 
of his being was crowded out, and the qualities of 
acquisitiveness (selfishness) and combativeness were developed 
instead. This same idea followed out would show us that all the 



higher, grander, nobler qualities were suffered measurably to 
decline, while all of the lower ones (common to the lower 
animals) were the more developed. 

As man lost the grandeur of his being, and its powers decreased, 
his rulership over the lower creation, as well as over self gave 
way, until today we find him afraid of all wild beasts, and that 
they no longer recognize the rulership of their fallen lord. And 
the influence once exercised by our father Adam is barely 
discernable in the occasional man who can master and tame 
(partially) the ferocious beasts. Here we have a brief glance at 
the first dynasty of earth and its overthrow. Now we see the 
result: "By sin came death." In the expressive language of Paul, 

"DEATH REIGNED" 

King of Terrors under "him that has the power of death, that is, 
the devil" -"the prince of this world." All bow before him; all 
are under his control. From the cradle to the tomb, every ache 
and pain attests his power over us, and the same agency which 
first placed us under his rule (sin) conspires yet, to more quickly 
destroy the race. His rule or reign must continue so long as there 
is sin to be punished, or until the entire race is reduced to the 
condition of lifelessness. But Jehovah foresaw all this, and in his 
plan has 

A DELIVERER PROVIDED. 

Such a ransom and deliverance was a part of God's plan from 
the first; and we read "for this purpose the Son of God was 
manifested, that He might destroy the works of the devil"-sin 
and death. [1 John 3:8.] And not only so, but also, "him that hath 
the power of death, that is, the devil." [Heb. 2:14], and thus 
release from his grasp all of the race. 

But as Satan and death are acting in harmony with a law of the 
universe, viz: that no sinner shall be permitted to live, and that 
every creature shall be perfect in its own plane of existence, the 
one who would deliver the race from his authority must satisfy 
these claims of the law of the universe. This the fallen ones 
could not do for themselves, as God had from the first 
foreknown and arranged for in His plan. Carrying out this plan 
He had already condemned the entire race on account of one 
man's disobedience. His purpose from the first being that he 
would provide another man, who, being without sin, should give 
himself "a ransom for all" the race-that "as by one man's 
disobedience [the] many [all] were made sinners, so by the 
obedience of one shall [the] many [all] be made righteous" 
(justified from sin and death). Rom. 5:19. 

But who is the one righteous, pure, holy, sinless, one? How 
could there be such an one among a race all of whom were 
condemned. "There is none righteous, no not one," the scriptures 



answer. But when mankind had learned effectually his own 
weakness and inability to deliver himself from death, his 
extremity became 

R417 : page 4 

God's opportunity, and "God's eye pitied, and His arm brought 
salvation. " The very chief of God's creation higher than angels 
and archangels [Heb. 1:5-8], He who is called "the beginning of 
the creation of God" [Rev. 3:14] is selected as the one who shall 
undergo the labors of redeeming humanity. We are not to 
suppose this was an irksome or unwilling work, for we cannot 
suppose a being in perfect harmony with Jehovah who would 
not take delight in doing his will. Nor would obedience be the 
only motive which would actuate, partaking as all perfect beings 
on whatever plane they exist must, of the divine quality— love- 
he would love to do the work for the sake of its benefits to 
mankind, releasing them from death. This no doubt was a part of 
the joy set before him, for which he, endured the 

R418:page4 

cross despising the shame. [Heb. 12:2]. 

Aside from this joy at the opportunity to release the human race 
from death, was that of "bringing many sons to glory," i.e., a 
part of the race "a little flock." "To these gave he power to 
become sons of God. " "For, as many as are led by the spirit of 
God, are the sons of God. " These, according to God's plan, may, 
by intimate association with him be reckoned as the bride of 
Christ and as such enter the heavenly family. To these sons this 
mighty one would be a leader or "captain of their salvation. " 
And yet another part of this 

"JOY SET BEFORE HIM, " 

was that He himself should, because of his obedience, labor, 
sacrifice, etc., be accounted worthy of still higher honor and 
more intimate relationship and communion with Jehovah-the 
object of his supreme love and devotion, than he had ever yet 
possessed, even to partake of his divine nature. So we read: "He 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore, God also hath highly exalted him and given him a 
name which is above every name," [Phil. 2:8-9], "that all men 
should honor the Son even as they honor the Father. " [John 
5:23]. 

But how shall this redemptive work be accomplished? We have 
seen that God's plan was, that since by man came death, by man 
should also come the resurrection of the dead. [1 Cor. 15:21]. 
Then to redeem man, this mighty one must become a man in 
every particular. He must partake of "flesh and blood," [Heb. 
2:14], and consequently must have all the qualities of the fleshly 
race, not the sinful and depraved qualities with which we now 



are burdened, but he must be a perfect man, standing exactly 
where Adam stood, except that he would know more perfectly 
the exceeding sinfulness of sin and its dire effects which he saw 
everywhere about him, and also for what purpose he had come. 
He took not the nature and form of angels, for that would not 
have answered, but he took the nature and form of a man. 

All things are now ready. "In the fullness of time, God sent forth 
his Son, born of a virgin," "born not of the will of the flesh but 
of the will of God"— in a word, as much of a specially creative 
act on God's part as was the creation of Adam; the difference 
being that the one could say, "The earth is my mother," the other 
was "born of a woman. " Had he in any way been a descendant 
of Adam he would have been under the curse of death, as are all 
other members of that race. He would have been as unable to 
keep the law as other men in whom sinful dispositions and 
depraved human nature are born. But while of the same (human) 
nature he is a new being, distinct from the race. He is born, 
grows in wisdom and in stature but manifests powers beyond 
others because he is perfect, they imperfect. Now he has reached 
maturity (according to the law) at thirty years of age. He knows 
as no one else does the great work for which during those thirty 
years he has been coming-his body preparing -it was "for the 
suffering of death" -that he "should taste death for every man"- 
"that through death he might destroy death," and liberate the 
dead race— "in due time." Now he is come, the second perfect 
sinless man, and offers this perfect life as a ransom for the race— 
"Lo, I come, (as) in the volume of the book it is written of me, to 
do thy will, O, God." [Heb. 10:7]. This was his covenant, to die, 
as he afterward expressed it, saying: "For this cause came I into 
the world. " And here in type he was buried in the water and rose 
again, thus making the picture of that which he covenanted to 
do. 

Now as the perfect one he has done all that he can do, given 
himself up to die as the Father may will, but though the death 
has not actually occurred (at baptism) it is so reckoned, (as with 
us when we covenant), and the new nature's powers and will, 
which belong to the spiritual body, which he is to be when the 
work of death is complete; ("raised a spiritual body,") these 
powers and qualities were given him as soon as the human — 
earthly— body was consecrated. This was at his baptism when 
the spirit descended and a voice from heaven acknowledged His 
begetting again to the spiritual plane and to the Divine nature. 
"This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased." [Matt. 
3:17]. Henceforth the life of Jesus is that of a dual being, the 
outward form being the man Christ Jesus, whose life and being 
were daily spent for the good of others— a body already given up 
to death. 

The new being within-the Divine nature- was the spirit power 
of God. And in this he is the pattern and leader of "all who come 



unto God by Him," "who become partakers of the Divine 
nature"— the "little flock" called his bride-His body. We must 
surrender ourselves to God— be baptized into his death-in order 
to be begotten of the spirit and receive the earnest of our new 
spiritual being, the fullness of which will be received when we 
are completely delivered from this fleshy condition to our 
spiritual bodies. 

Thenceforth he "did not his own human will" but was "led of the 
Spirit," and the actions now were of God, as Jesus testified: 
"The word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's, which 
sent me." [John 14:24 and 17:8]. "The Father that dwelleth in 
me, He doeth the works." [John 14:10]. If we as our head "are 
led by the Spirit of God"-even unto death- we also become "the 
sons of God," [Rom. 8:14], who will also "work in us to will and 
to do of His good pleasure. " [Phil. 2:13]. 

And we who are now "new creatures (in Christ Jesus") should 
take courage from the life of our beloved master; as Paul says: 

"CONSIDER HIM 

who endureth such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest 
ye be weary and faint in your minds. " If you sometimes find it 
hard to endure the frowns of the world and to be thought of and 
treated as a deceiver by your friends, think of Him weeping in 
Gethsemane, condemned before Pilate, crucified as a 
malefactor, forsaken and denied by his loved ones, "yet He 
opened not His mouth. " And if your human nature sometimes 
shrinks, although reckoned dead, think again of Him. Remember 
that He was tempted in all points like as we are, (yet without 
sin), and can and does sympathize with us, and though you may 
sometimes cry out, as he did: "Father, if it be possible, let this 
cup (the ignominy) pass from me, " forget not to add, as he did, 
"yet not my will but thine be done. " The human will of Jesus 
though given up at consecration- baptism felt the crucifixion so 
that He needed the heavenly "grace to help in time of need" to 
keep the human will perfectly obedient to the will of the new 
being-the divine. 

This dying process continued during the three and one-half years 
of His ministry, from the moment of His consecration and 
acceptance at baptism, until on the cross He cried: "It is 
finished. " But what was finished there-the work of atonement? 
No, the work of atonement signifies the making at one of two 
parties. In this case God was one and humanity the other party. 
Man's sin had brought upon him God's curse, death, instead of 
his blessing; and by its degrading influence (as we have seen) it 
had so marred the mental and moral likeness of man to his 
maker, that he no longer took "delight in the law of God," but in 
sin, and it will be readily seen that there was much work 
necessary to bring about full reconciliation between God and 
man. First— Justice must be met, a ransom must be given for the 



sinner, else God could never, to all eternity, recognize him as 
having a right to live. Secondly-Man must be brought to his 
original condition of perfection-in God's image— before he can 
be of himself perfectly in harmony with God's perfect will and 
law. Now, while this work, as a whole, was Jehovah's plan from 
"before the creation of the world," its accomplishment only 
began with Jesus, and will not be completed until the end of the 
millennial reign, when Jesus shall deliver up all things to the 
Father, having put down (destroyed) all opposition to God's 
laws, (sin). 1 Cor. 15:24-28. 

When Jesus cried, "it is finished," he referred only to the first 
mentioned part of this work of atonement, viz: The giving of the 
ransom; this was now complete; the penalty of Adam's sin was 
now met, for "Christ died for our sins according to the 
Scripture" -"gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due 
time." "Who is a propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." [1 John 
2:2.] 

Having thus "purchased us from death with his own precious 
blood, " all the race belongs to him. A race of sinners they were 
having no right to life; a race of ransomed beings they are 
against whom justice has no claim, who may be restored to 
perfect life at the pleasure or will of Jesus their redeemer, who 
proclaimed, that in due time "all that are in their graves shall 
hear the voice of the Son of Man and come forth. " And again: "I 
am he that liveth and was dead, and behold I am alive 
forevermore, and have the keys of hell [hades— the grave] and 
of death." [Rev. 1:18]. Yes, says Paul: "For this purpose Christ 
was manifested, [in the flesh] that he might destroy death, and 
him that has the power of death, that is the devil. " 

But while we are thus informed of the plan of God to destroy 
"death" yet, nearly two thousand years have passed since the 
ransom was paid and still death reigns. Why does not the 
purchaser take possession of "the purchased possession?" Ah, he 
has a grand plan with regard to some of the race he has 
purchased-He will by trial of faith and patience develop 

R419 : page 4 

and separate from the world "a little flock" whom he will 
associate with Himself as His bride. They will be a peculiar 
people, zealous of good works, and full of faith, who walk in his 
footsteps of self-sacrifice and entire giving up of their human 
nature -will and body-receiving instead the Divine nature-will 
and body. 

When the church— body— of Christ is made perfect through 
sufferings and trials, and united with Him [which event we 
believe to be so close at hand], then the great work and reign of 
earth's new monarch-the second Adam-begins. Though 
possessing the power over evil ever since He rose from the 



grave its victor, yet he has not exercised that power up to the 
present time because evil is necessary to the development of his 
body. But when we are complete he shall take to himself his 
great power and reign. [Rev. 11:17]. This statement is applied as 
having its fulfillment at the end of the gospel age during the 
sounding of the seventh (symbolic) trumpet. 

Now let us enquire, how long will Christ reign— or exercise 
authority and rule? Answer. "He shall reign forever and ever," 
[Rev. 11:15], that is, being associated with the Father, Christ 
(and we in Him) shall always belong to the reigning and ruling 
power-Jesus at the Father's right hand (next in authority) and 
we at his right hand, consequently "above all principalities and 
powers." But in the especial sense of ruling over and subduing 
earth, the reign is limited to the period of time necessary to the 
restoring of all earth's people and affairs to a condition of at- 
one-ment or harmony with God, the Father, as Paul expresses it: 

"HE MUST REIGN TILL HE HATH PUT ALL 
ENEMIES UNDER HIS FEET. 

The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. " For "He (the 
Father) hath put all things under his (Christ's) feet, " but it is 
evident that the Father did not put himself under the control of 
Christ. "And when all things shall be subdued unto Him, then 
shall the Son also, himself, be subject unto Him (the Father) that 
put all things under Him, that God may be all in all," (or above 
all). 

Man having been restored to his original dominion, every 
inferior creature will recognize him as its Lord, and every 
human being will recognize "Christ as Lord to the glory of God 
the Father." [Phil. 2:1 1]. And thus will be completed the great 
work planned before our creation, commenced at the baptism of 
Jesus and ending with the close of the millennial reign. [Rev. 
20:6] viz: At-one-ment. 

Then, "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," and 
His "will be done on earth as in heaven." 

That this is God's plan, is implied in the term "Restitution," and 
is the legitimate conclusion to be drawn from Paul's argument. 
[Heb. 2:6-9.] He starts out with the original plan of God in 
creating man perfect -"Thou madest him a little lower than the 
angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honor and didst set 
him over the works of Thy hands. Thou hast put all (earthly) 
things in subjection under his feet. " But as we have seen, sin has 
marred all this 

R419 : page 5 

glory and honor, and has degraded us far below angels; taking 
the dominion out of our hand and permitting "death to reign." 
And if we look about us we will say with Paul that it seems as 



though God's plan were a failure, for though six thousand years 
have passed, "We see not yet all things put under him" [man]. 
But is there any hopeful sign to indicate that man may yet be 
restored to his honor and glory, and set over the earthly works of 
God's hand? Yes, we have the assurance that ALL God's 
purposes shall be accomplished, [Isa. 14:24], and that a "seed of 
the woman" should yet destroy the serpent-evil— and "bless all 
the families of the earth. " And though this work is not yet 
accomplished yet we see a beginning of it. As Paul says, "we see 
Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels," [the 
condition of a perfect man], for the suffering of death... that He, 
by the grace of God, should taste death for every man. " Thus far 
had the plan progressed in Paul's day, and if he were living now, 
he would doubtless add, as we can, that the church, as his body, 
is about complete; that the gospel age of suffering with Him and 
"filling up the measure of the afflictions of Christ which are 
behind" is ending and the millennial age in which we shall "live 
and reign with Christ a thousand years" is dawning. 

As those who expect to be of the bride— the body-of Christ and 
be glorified together with Him, we rejoice to think that the time 
is so near at hand when we shall be changed, leaving forever the 
human form and nature, and being made "like unto Christ's 
glorious body. " But one thing which adds much to our interest 
and rejoicing is the thought of the necessity of our development 
and changing, as the body of the great deliverer, before death 
can be destroyed and the race liberated and brought to the liberty 
of the sons of God, as Adam and angels— free from the bondage 
of corruption-death. For we know that "they without us shall 
not be made perfect. " We must be perfected on the spiritual 
plane as divine beings before they can be perfected on the 
earthly plane as human beings. 

Seeing then what high honors and glory await the overcoming 
sons of God, and the blessings awaiting the world through us, 
can any one wonder that we long for the happy moment of 
change? Surely not, and not only we, but the world, also, are 
waiting and hoping [though ignorantly] for a good time coming, 
for the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together 
until now waiting for the manifestation of [the Church] the sons 
of God, (Rom. 8:22,19)- the sun of righteousness which "arises 
with healing in his wings" to heal, and perfect, and restore all 
things to the perfect will of God. 

Thus earth will have had, when man is restored, the following 
great 

OVERRULING POWERS: 

First-Man under God. 

Second-Death and evil, under Satan. 
Third-Righteousness under Christ. 



Fourth-The first restored, i.e., man under God. 

In the second and third of these dynasties, viz.: The reigns of 
Satan and of Christ, the active rulers are invisible to humanity 
and their powers only recognizable by the effects and results. 
The devil is called "the prince [ruler] of this world, "-"him that 
has the power of death, that is, the devil. " The effects of His 
reign and rule have been, as we have seen, to degrade man in 
every way. How wonderfully successful he has been is evident 
as we look about us. Sin, misery and death are on every hand, 
and yet Satan, the ruler, is invisible, seen only through his 
agencies, and he has plenty of them, for "his servants ye are to 
whom you render service." We claim, then, that all persons, or 
institutions, or governments, which aid in the work of death and 
degradation and oppression of right and truth, are Satan's agents. 

God classes all present governments of earth as Satan's. "The 
prince— ruler— of this world" would not permit any government 
which would not act in harmony with him, as long as he has the 
control, which will be until the end of this age, when the 
Redeemer takes his great power and reigns. Satan has ruled 
among the nations for ages, except the one nation, Israel, of 
which God says: "You only have I known of all the [nations] 
families of the earth. " (We have seen that they were used thus as 
a type of the higher spiritual Israel, the church, which was to be 
in the world, but not of it.) The time came, however, that God 
gave over even this nation as the others when they went into 
captivity to Babylon, and God's prophet said of the last reigning 
prince, "Take off the diadem, remove the crown; this shall not 
[continue to] be the same, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it 
[the kingdom] until He come whose right it is, and I will give it 
Him" [The Christ]. Ezek. 21:27. 

At the same time, God indicated that the government of earth 
was given over to depravity's rule, and pictures it to 
Nebuchadnezzar as 



A GREAT IMAGE 

illustrative of human power, divided into four parts, 
Nebuchadnezzar's government representing the head; the 
succeeding, Medo-Persian government represented by the breast 
and arms; and the belly and thighs representing the third or 
Grecian government; while the fourth and last part, the legs and 
feet represent the last phase of earthly government, the Roman 
Empire, which, in a divided form, still continues, and is to be 
followed by Messiah's Kingdom— the kingdom of heaven, which 
"shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms [not 
people], and it shall stand forever." Danl. 2:44. 

Thus, as a glorious image, did these earthly kingdoms appear to 
the natural man; and as glorious they still are regarded by the 
world. Extolled in prose and verse, through all generations, are 



their deeds of blood and violence, which shock the feelings of 
all possessed of the spirit of love. Their history is one successive 
record of crime and death, each of their heroes claiming higher 
honor than his predecessor because he had butchered greater 
numbers of his fellow-beings, and made more widows and 
orphans and more misery. No wonder that when God pictured 
the same four earthly governments to the holy prophet Daniel, 
he gave it as a beastly picture. (Danl. 8). They are indeed beastly 
governments. How perfectly they represent, in their evil and 
death-dealing power, their master, the devil. The picture, or 
likeness of the fourth 

R420 : page 5 

(Roman power) to Satan is so strong that Jesus, when presenting 
it in symbol in Revelation, almost invariably calls it "the 
dragon," "that old serpent, which is the devil and Satan," &c, 
thus using the names of its prince as a name for the kingdom. 

While God thus permits evil to triumph now, seemingly without 
restraint, and uses it as an agency for punishing sin, yet it is 
under an over-ruling guidance by which God "causes the wrath 
of man to praise Him, and the remainder He will restrain. " 

The inventions and arts of the last three centuries (machinery, 
printing, application of steam, electricity, etc.,) have come about 
gradually, but we believe are none the less of God— His 
agencies now in preparation for the blessing of humanity during 
the coming reign of righteousness. These scientific attainments, 
which will so fully bless in the future, are even now exercising a 
powerful effect upon humanity, enlightening the understanding, 
and, by increasing the dependency of one upon another, it 
naturally tends to promote sympathy, affection, and fraternity 
between the various members of the human family. 

But all of these blessings, while they serve to lift mankind in a 
measure out of evil, are only temporary helps. Satan is still equal 
to the occasion, and though he could not now induce millions of 
men to follow for years a leader for his glory's sake, he can 
foment angry strife between nations upon pretexts of honor, etc., 
and, though men do not now fight as incessantly as of old, yet 
the "arts of war" more than keep pace with those of peace, so 
that to-day the standing armies of earth are far larger and far 
better prepared for mutual destruction than ever before. 

The progress of science and art fails to bring now the blessings 
which will result in the future, because avarice (selfishness) has 
crowded out love and benevolence. Capital and power combine 
to oppress the poor, and they in turn despise and envy the rich. 

Nor can we wonder if the masses of mankind notice this 
condition of affairs; and that as knowledge increases among 
them, they should seek to band themselves together for self- 
protection, especially if they see, as in Europe, kings, emperors, 



nobles, and landlords rolling in wealth and luxury, while some 
of them barely eke out an existence on the commonest 
necessaries of life, without luxury or comfort. All that they can 
earn more than will purchase meal, potatoes, and salt, with 
coarse fabric for clothing, is required as tax to support these 
corrupt governments, which, like great boils, absorb the strength 
and vitality of humanity. So we see that Satan is still ruling over 
earth. Satan may change tactics according to the necessities of 
the hour, but he is ruling still. 

God's Word informs us that, by the general uprising of humanity 
and overthrow of governments, the new age will be introduced. 
In the coming struggle the two spiritual powers, Christ and his 
saints, and Satan and his angels, will each have earthly armies 
whose causes they will support and advance. Satan's will be the 
kings, chief captains, rich men, and mighty men, [Rev. 19:19] 
while Christ will espouse and bring to victory the cause of the 
oppressed, who, inspired by justice and right, will be used to 
some extent as agents to their own liberation from the thraldom 
of evil and oppression. 

How we see the preparation for this time of trouble in the world, 
going on all around us, and how unconsciously each one takes 
his place to play his part in the closing act of the reign of sin and 
death. In this country, less oppressed and in every way more 
blessed than others, 

CAPITAL AND LABOR 

are arraying themselves against each other as if against enemies; 
labor fearing that capital will grind the life out of it unless it 
organizes and protects itself; capital fearful of losing the upper 
hand of labor. Look abroad and see the Nihilists of Russia, the 
Land Leaguers and Liberals of Great Britain and Ireland, and the 
Socialists and Communists of Austria, Germany, and France, 
and tell me, do not all of these things, visible to our natural eye, 
corroborate what our spiritual eye of faith has seen by the light 
of the prophetic page— that "the day of the Lord is a day of 
trouble," and that we are now in the "harvest" of the gospel age, 
the chief reaper present, and the work of separation going on [in 
the church] between wheat and tares? 

THE RESTORATION. 

The third dynasty of earth, like the second, will be the ruling of 
an invisible power through seen agencies of earth. As now Satan 
reigns unseen, then "The Christ of God" will reign and rule 
unseen. As now sin abounds, so then the opposite— righteousness 
—will rule. As Satan now has agents in men and governments, so 
with Christ's reign, every man coming into harmony with truth 
and righteousness will be reckoned a servant of God. The 
kingdoms of this world being all overthrown, [Dan. 2:44,] will 



be re-established on principles of justice and equity, based upon 
the golden law of love to God and men. 

The chief nation of earth during that age, the Word informs us, 
will be fleshly Israel, in glory and prominence exalted above all 
other nations -"The joy of the whole earth." And next in 
positions of favor and blessing will come other nations in 
proportion as they conform to the law of the Kingdom of God. 
Thus will the light of knowledge and truth emanating from the 
spiritual city-the church -the New Jerusalem, [Rev. 21.] bless 
all nations, and result in healing and blessing all mankind, until 
ultimately, having put down all opposition, and brought all men 
to the condition of perfection and righteousness, the third empire 
will give place to the fourth, which is the first restored, viz. : man 
over earth its lord and himself in perfect obedience to the King 
of Kings and Lord of Lords. Thus, "God [will be] all in all." 
Amen. "Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, on earth as it is 
in heaven. " 



R420 : page 5 

CHRIST OUR PROPITIATION. 

It has been claimed by some, as disproving the necessity of 
Jesus as our Ransomer, and his blood (death) as our ransom 
price, that the word propitiation, used by the apostles, merely 
means that Jesus was the channel through which God exercised 
pardon-the mercy-seat or place of mercy-and that therefore the 
accepted idea, that Jesus made satisfaction or appeasement for 
our sins is erroneous, and not the proper meaning to attach to the 
expression, "propitiation for our sins." 

In proof of the above, they call attention to the fact that in Rom. 
3:25, the same word is rendered propitiation which in Heb. 9:5 
is rendered mercy seat. Here they leave the matter, evidently 
considering it proved. 

We object, that in so construing it they are at variance with the 
Greek scholarship of the world. We read- "He (Jesus) is the 
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the 
sins of the whole world"; and again- "Herein is love, not that 

R420 : page 6 

we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son-the 
propitiation for our sins." (1 John 2:2 and 4:10). In both cases 
the Greek word rendered propitiation is hilasmos. Its definition 
by able Greek scholars is- "What appeases "-"What 
propitiates." 

These are the only instances in which this Greek word 
(hilasmos) is used in Scripture, and we know of no translation 
which uses any other word than propitiation as a translation of 



it. As the word propitiation is but vaguely understood, we here 
give you Webster's definition of its meaning- "The act of 
appeasing wrath and conciliating the favor of an offended 
person"- "atonement or atoning sacrifice." Read the above texts 
in the light of this definition, and you will see that as John 
understood the subject, there was need of a redeemer and a 
ransom. 

Concerning Heb. 9:5, and Rom. 3:25, we would say: The Greek 
word here used is entirely different from the above; it is 
hilasterion; nevertheless, it stands related to the former. Young 
translates it "place of appeasement. " In the Tabernacle was the 
Ark, and the top of it, a solid lid of gold, was the spot upon 
which the High Priest sprinkled the blood of the sin-offering, 
which God accepted as the satisfaction for sins of the under 
Priests and of Israel (typical of the church and of the world 
also). This slab of gold forming the cover of the ark, was 
therefore called the "Mercy-seat" (or spot) because there, by 
God's arrangement, mercy was obtained. In the Hebrew the 
word is kapporeth, meaning- "place of (sin) covering"; and in 
the Greek, hilasterion, meaning- "place of appeasement. " 

With this explanation, we trust all will be able to see the true 
meaning of "propitiation, " and "place of propitiation or 
appeasement" (mercy-seat), and not allow any one to cover the 
meaning of these very forcible expressions. 

Rotherham's translation of Rom. 3:25 reads thus: "Whom God 
set forth to be a propitiatory covering through faith in his 
blood," etc. 



R421 : page 6 



CONSIDER HIM. 



The attention of all mankind has been turned with perplexity 
and questioning to Jesus of Nazareth. For four thousand years 
men expected, Prophets wrote, and Poets sung of a coming 
deliverer; and for nearly two thousand more, all eyes have been 
turned to Jesus of Nazareth saying, Can this indeed be he?-a 
babe of humble mother-a boy of marked intellectual ability and 
moral integrity —a young man of thirty years just emerging from 
obscurity. Three and a half years more gathered about him a few 
disciples who hung upon his words, almost persuaded that this 
was indeed the sent of God, until his young and beautiful life 
was suddenly and ignominiously terminated in death. Then hope 
was blighted and sadly they turned away saying, "We trusted, it 
had been he who should have redeemed Israel. " 

In the short period of his public career (three and a half years) 
when the eyes of all men were centered on him, they all 
marveled at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth, 



saying, "never man spake like this man. " Some thought he was 
one of the Prophets risen from the dead-others that he was that 
great Prophet whom Jehovah had promised to raise up. Some 
said he was an impostor and a fanatic, but he claimed to be the 
Son of God- the Christ-the promised deliverer. 

No other character on the pages of history ever attracted such 
universal attention for so great a time, yet his career was so brief 
and he was distinguished by none of this world's marks of 
greatness. The spirit of Jehovah gives us the history of this 
wonderful being and to his Word alone we turn for the answer to 
our questionings. 

In the first chapter of John's Gospel, we find the most concise 
and comprehensive sketch, therefore let us consider its teaching. 
(N.B. Read with open Bible referring constantly to it.) 

The Greek word, logos, translated word in vss. 1 and 14 of this 
chapter, would be properly translated by the words, intention, 
plan, purpose, or expression. Apply this definition to the 
following passages where the same word (logos) occurs: Acts 
10:29. "I ask therefore for what intent (logos) ye have sent for 
me." Acts 4:29. "Grant unto thy servants that with all boldness 
they may speak thy word" -declare thy plan, purpose, or 
intention. Acts 8:4. "They that were scattered abroad went 
everywhere preaching the word," plan or purpose of God. Acts 
18:11. "Teaching the word (intention, plan or purpose) of God 
among them." Mark 4:20. "Such as hear the word (intention, 
plan or purpose of God) and receive it." Matt. 24:35. "Heaven 
and earth shall pass away, but my words (plans or purposes) 
shall not pass away. " 

With this understanding, then, we may thus read John 1:1. "In 
the beginning," before anything was created, and when none 
existed, but Jehovah, "was the word"-plan, intention, or 
purpose of God. Yes, God had a well defined, and matured plan, 
formed in his own mind before it found expression in the 
slightest development. The great Architect of the universe and 
Author of all life, first counted the cost, and reckoned that all 
should culminate to his honor and glory. (Luke 14:28-31; Rev. 
4:11.) 

"And the word (plan or purpose) was with God." So far, it 
existed only in his own conception; it was his own thought, 
intention, plan, purpose, not yet expressed. 

"And the word was God." The term logos, not only applied to 
the plan existing only in the mind, but also to the expression of 
that plan. We understand this text then, to mean that the word- 
plan or purpose of God, found its first expression in the creation 
of him, who was "The beginning of the creation of God"- "The 
firstborn of every creature" or better translated "born before all 
creation" (who afterward became the man, Jesus). Rev. 3:14 and 



1:5. Col. 1:15; and though now fully exalted to the divine 
nature, still "His name is called the "Word of God." Rev. 19:13. 

This being, in whose creation, Jehovah's plan began to find 
expression, is here called a God- "And the Word [expression of 
the plan] was God." The word God signifies mighty one; but not 
always the All-mighty One. It is the translation of each of four 
Hebrew words— el, elah, elohim, and adonai, all signifying the 
mighty, or great. It is a general name, often and properly applied 
to our Heavenly Father, as well as to Jesus, angels, and men. 
(Deut. 10:17. Gen. 32:24,30; Judges 13:21,22; Jer. 16:13, 10:11; 
Exod. 7:1.) In Psa. 82 the distinction between beings referred to 
by the word God is very marked: "God (elohim) standeth in the 
congregation of the mighty (el); he judgeth among the Gods" 
(elohim). Here the first word, God, evidently refers to Jehovah, 
the All-mighty one, while the others evidently refer to other 
mighty ones— the church, the sons of God, of whom Jesus is the 
head or chief. Again vs. 6, "I have said ye are Gods (elohim); 
and all of you are children of the Most High (el yon, the highest 
God,) but as men ye die." We, now, though sons of the Most 
High die and appear to men nothing more than others. In us, as 
in our Leader and Head, God is manifest in our mortal flesh. 
(See John 10:35 and 2 Cor. 4:11). 

The Hebrew word Jehovah is the distinctive name of the 
Almighty Father and is never applied to any other being-"I 
appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac and unto Jacob, as God 
Almighty, (el-God shaddai- almighty) but by my name 
JEHOVAH, was I not known to them." Exod. 6:3. In our 
common version (O.T.) its distinctiveness as a name is lost, 
being generally rendered the Lord. 

"And the word was God." The Son of God (afterward called 
Jesus,) is here called THE WORD, because Jehovah revealed his 
word— plan or purpose, through him. It was an eastern custom 
for kings to have an officer, called the King's Word or Voice, 
who stood upon the steps of the throne, at the side of a lattice 
window, where there was a hole covered with a curtain. Behind 
this curtain the king sat and expressed his commands to this 
officer, who communicated them to the officers, judges and 
attendants. It is from this custom, it is thought, that the 
phraseology of the text is derived. 

Primarily then, the word refers to the plan of God, and it is 
afterwards applied to the messenger of that plan -the Son of 
God. 

Vss. 2 and 3. "The same (being) was in the beginning (of 
creation) with God. All things were made by him, (as the agent 
of Jehovah) and without him was not anything made that was 
made. " He then, as here plainly stated being the first and 
chiefest of Jehovah's creature, was honored by him, as the agent 



through whom all things, both animate and inanimate were 
afterwards created— "Without him was not anything made." 

Jehovah had no beginning but is "from everlasting to 
everlasting;" (Psa. 90:2) hence that which is here called the 
"beginning" must refer to the beginning of creation. 

"In him was life. " How brief this expression, and at first sight 
how simple and seemingly absurd. If the surface meaning were 
taken, the statement of such a self-evident truth would indeed be 
absurd-that in the Son of God, who was Jehovah's agent in the 
works of creation, was life. But let us look deeper, and we will 
see that it is just like God's grand and eloquent brevity. Since the 
accomplishment of the work narrated in verse 3, the Son of God 
had laid aside the glory of his pre-existent condition, and 
become a man. As a man, he had lived 30 years— the maturity of 
manhood— and had consecrated his human being to death. Here 
he received the earnest of his after, high exaltation— the 
begetting of the Spirit, to the divine nature, to which he was 
born in the resurrection, when the consecration of the human 
being to death, was actually accomplished. In the Son of God— 
the Word-Jesus, then, from 30 years of age, was this Divine life 
which he never before possessed. (See "Narrow way to Life, " 
page 134, of "Food for Thinking Christians.") "And the life (this 
divine life) was the light of men. And the light shineth in 
darkness, and the darkness apprehendeth it not." (Diaglott.) 

Verses 10 and 11. "He was in the world and the world was made 
by him; and the world (of mankind) knew him not. He came 
unto his own, (people— the Jewish nation) and his own received 
him not. " 

But, though the world knew him not, neither did his own receive 
him, yet, nevertheless-vs. 9, "That was the true light which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world. " This light has 
not yet enlightened every man. It now lights only those referred 
to in vs. 12— "as many as receive him and believe on his name. " 
To this class— believers— "gave he privilege (margin) to become 
sons of God" on condition that they follow in his footsteps, 
sacrificing the human nature. These, throughout the Gospel Age, 
"walk in the light," and like their Head, Jesus, are "lights in the 
world." (Phil. 2:15.) But still the world fails to apprehend the 
light, and will, until Jesus and all the members of that 
overcoming company —followers in his footsteps— constituting 
the Heavenly City (Rev. 21:2) are as a "city set on a hill" which 
"cannot be hid;" Matt. 5:14. Yes, this heavenly city "shall be 
established in the tops of the mountains, and shall be exalted 
above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it: (Isa. 2:2.) "and 
the nations shall walk in the light of it." (Rev. 21:24.) Then this 
"true light shining in its strength, from the exalted Divine 
Christ-head and body, will enlighten every man that cometh 
into the world. " 



That this interpretation of vss. 4 and 5 is correct, is proven by 
vss. 6,7,8, and 15. (Note what positive proof.) John came six 
months before Jesus' baptism, and begetting to the divine nature, 
bearing witness of the coming light, saying, "There cometh one 
after me, who is preferred before me, FOR HE WAS BEFORE 
ME." 

R422 : page 6 

Jesus had already come as a human being, and had, as John 
declared, existed before him, not as a man, for John was six 
months older than Jesus; but in his glorious pre-human 
condition. In what sense, then, did Jesus come after John's 
preaching? We answer that at the time of his consecration and 
typical baptism, he came as the Anointed One, the Christ, the 
divinely begotten Son of God, and consequent light of the 
world. 

Vs. 14. "And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us." 

As in verse 3, we are informed of the glory and power of the 
pre-existent Word, and in vs. 4, ignoring the subsequent human 
nature for which he left that glory, we are informed of that 
divine life which is ultimately to enlighten every man that 
cometh into the world; so vs. 14 goes back to tell how he left the 
glory which he had with the Father, gave up his spiritual being, 
and became a human being. 

"And we beheld his glory (the glory of his perfect humanity), 
the glory as of the only begotten of a father. " His perfect human 
nature shone with such lustre in contrast with all imperfect men, 
that he seemed not to be a son of the fallen race, but the only 
begotten of some perfect being— and such he was, a new creation 
of God, the second direct human creation of God, just as 

R422 : page 7 

Adam was the first. Jesus was born of the virgin Mary, while 
Adam was born of the virgin Earth.* 

Jesus, because a perfect man, was full of grace (favor) and truth. 
He lived in full and constant favor with God, and therefore God 
made known his truth-his plans-to him. 

Vs. 16. "And of his fullness have all we (believers) received." 
Yes, of that same fullness of favor with God, which Jesus 
enjoyed because of his sinless perfection, have all we received 
because of our justification through faith in his blood. Thus 
Jesus lifts believers out of condemnation and sin, up to the plane 
which he occupied, into fullness of favor and communion with 
God- "justified freely from all things." 

"And grace for grace," or favor on account of favor: that is, 
being lifted from the condition of rebels and sinners to that of 
justification by faith, was one act of favor; then that favor 
opened the way for another favor— viz., the call to become 



partakers of the Divine nature, to become heirs of God and joint- 
heirs with Jesus by suffering with him. 

Yes, with Paul, because of this grace (of justification) wherein 
we stand, we rejoice in hope of the glory of God— a further 
grace. (Rom. 5:2.) 

Vs. 17. "For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth 
came by Jesus Christ. " Here a contrast is drawn between the 
Jewish and Gospel Ages: In the former, only the Law was given, 
(the shadow of good things to come during and after the Gospel 
Age.) But it could never give life, because none were able to 
measure up to its requirements. "But grace"— the payment of our 
ransom price, and not only so, but also the additional favor- 
"truth," or the knowledge of God's plan, and our high-calling as 
revealed through it— both these favors came by Jesus Christ. 
"The appearing of Jesus Christ, our Savior, brought life (the 
"restitution" to perfection of humanity) and immortality 
(believers' high-calling) to light." (2 Tim. 1:10.) This special 
favor ("grace,") and this wonderful knowledge ("truth") belong 
only to the Gospel Age. 

In the brief space here considered what a glorious biography we 
have presented to us, of the once glorious spiritual, subsequent 
perfect human, and now "highly exalted" Divine, Immortal 
WORD. Her it stands on the sacred page in its simple, eloquent 
brevity as dictated by the spirit of Jehovah. Behold what grace 
the Father bestowed upon him- "That all men (and all created 
beings) should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. " 

If all the world my Savior knew, 
Then all the world would love Him too. 

Thank God the happy day is dawning in which this knowledge 
shall fill the whole earth. 

Beloved followers in his footsteps, "behold what manner of love 
the Father hath bestowed upon us that we (as partakers with 
him, and joint-heirs of the same things) should (also) be called 
the sons of God. " 

Turning again to the Scriptures, we inquire, 

WHY THIS EXALTATION 

of one of God's creatures so far above all others? Paul replies- 
Hath not God power to make one vessel unto more honor— what 
if God wills to show the riches of his glory on the vessels 
prepared unto glory; Who art thou that repliest against God?- 
Shall the thing formed say unto him that formed it Why hast 
thou made me thus? (Rom. 9:21-23,20.) No, Paul, we would not 
question Jehovah's absolute right to do what he will with his 
own. If he has created angels perfect and glorious on their own 
plane of being, and men perfect and glorious on another, a little 



lower, and Jesus still higher, the Lord over all, each rejoices in 
the perfection of his being, and all redounds to the glory of God. 

But we would inquire why the additional glory of Jesus, and his 
exaltation to the divine nature? 

Paul would here point us to a principle in God's government as 
expressed by Jesus and Peter- viz. : that "God resisteth the 
proud, and giveth grace to the humble"- "Whosoever shall exalt 
himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall 
be exalted. " And again Jesus intimates that if any of God's 
creatures are exalted above others, it is for the blessing and 
service of all— "He that is greatest among you shall be your 
servant." (Matt. 23:11,12.) 

Paul seems to have in mind and to contrast the pride and 
ambition of Satan with the humility and obedience of Jesus. The 
former aspired to exalt himself above the stars (sons) of God, 
even to usurp Jehovah's throne. But of Jesus, Paul says that 
"though being in God's form (a mighty spiritual being), yet (he) 
did not meditate a +usurpation (of God's authority) to be like 
God, but divested himself, taking a bondman's form, having 
been made in the likeness of men; and being in condition as a 
man, he humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross." (Phil. 2:6-8. Diaglott.) Here we see the 
grandest intelligence next to Jehovah, recognizing his rightful 
authority, and bowing in meek and loving submission to his 
will. 

"WHEREFORE"-on this account, says Paul- "God hath highly 
exalted him. " 

In his glorious exalted condition and divine nature, we now see 
Jesus prepared for the work of blessing. Of this he informed his 
disciples after his resurrection, saying, "All power in heaven and 
in earth is given unto me;" and Prophets and Apostles, in types, 
and symbols, and wonderful sayings, tell of the glory that shall 
follow. Now taking Jehovah's standpoint of view, which his 
word reveals, we look away back to the dim and distant 
universal void, and beholding the former glory of the first- 
begotten, we exclaim in the sublime words of the poet— 

The mighty God, from out whose hand, 
The planets rolled like grains of sand. 

And who can estimate the exceeding, and ETERNAL WEIGHT 
of that glory to which he is now exalted, and which the 
revolving ages shall accumulate. 

And yet this was not Jehovah, but only his honored agent, 
looking up to him as his rightful Lord, and rendering implicit 
obedience to his will. 

Now we are prepared to understand the words of Jesus to John 
onPatmos. (Rev. 1:8,11,18.) "I am Alpha and Omega, the 



beginning and the ending, which is, and which was, and which 
is to come, the Almighty"— Almighty since Jehovah had given 
to him all power in heaven and in earth. And again he declares, 
"I am alpha and omega, the first and the last; I am he that liveth 
and was dead, and behold I am alive forevermore, and have the 
keys of hades (the grave) and of death." In or through him as 
here declared, we see the whole plan of Jehovah consummated. 
Beginning with creation we have seen him as the alpha of the 
plan, and faith looks into the revealed future and beholds him as 
its omega. 

With such an example before us as Jesus' humiliation and 
consequent exaltation, let us, as the Apostle says, consider him 
lest we be weary and faint. Let us call to mind our high calling 
to become his bride, and as such to be joined in heirship with 
him whom God hath appointed heir of all things. To appreciate 
this wondrous calling is to lay aside every weight and hindrance. 
To make its fulfillment sure, is to humble ourselves under the 
mighty hand of God that he may exalt us in due time to be "the 
Bride, the Lamb's wife." (1 Pet. 5:6. Rev. 21:9.) 

With such a hope clearly in view, who would not gladly trail his 
bit of earthly reputation in the dust, and take joyfully the 
spoiling of his earthly treasures, while he is counted the filth and 
offscouring of the earth? Dearly beloved, keep the prize for 
"him that overcometh" before you; keep your garments 
unspotted from the world; make your calling and election sure 
by being "faithful unto death. "-"Consider Him." 



*A father is a life-giver— The life which comes to us through 
Adam is an impaired and forfeited one; but the life which Jesus 
had, was not received through Adam, but from his Father— God. 
He was no more contaminated with sin by his association with 
Mary, than was Adam by the dust of the earth from which he 
was formed. God was directly the Father of both Adam and 
Jesus, therefore the life of both was perfect and unforfeited. 



+The Greek word harpagmon, here rendered usurpation being a 
word of very rare occurrence, a great variety of translations have 
been given. The following may serve as examples: "Who did not 
think it a matter to be earnestly desired."— Clarke. "Did not 
regard as an object of solicitous desire."— Stuart. "Thought not a 
thing to be seized."— Sharpe. "Did not eagerly grasp. "- 
Kneeland. "Did not violently strive. "-Dickenson. "Did not 
meditate a usurpation. "-Turnbull. This last is adopted by the 
Emphatic Diaglott. It is the clearest expression of the same idea 
which is conveyed by all. 



R423 : page 7 



AN UNPLEASANT DUTY. 

Duty is not always pleasant but it would be sin to shirk it. 

Less than a year ago, and frequently since, we warmly 
commended to our readers a publication called "Zion's Day 
Star." This we now regret, because that commendation makes 
necessary a statement to the opposite effect concerning that 
paper. 

We are not of those who disfellowship Christian brethren on 
account of some differences of opinion, but when it comes to the 
point of denying the very foundation of all Christianity, we must 
speak out and withstand all such to the face, for they become 
"the enemies of the cross of Christ." (Phil. 3:18.) This 
opposition to the cross, the world has always had. The thought 
of "redemption through his blood" has always been to the Greek 
(earth's wise) foolishness, and only the faithful have recognized 
the cross as the power of God unto man's salvation from death. 

"Zion's Day Star" at the time of our commendation was in fullest 
accord on the fundamentals of Christianity; teaching that the 
death of Jesus was the ransom price paid for our liberation from 
sin and its penalty, death-that "Christ died for our sins 
according to the scriptures." And its editor was then so true and 
faithful to the foundation doctrines, that he refused the articles 
of a valued correspondent in Michigan, because said 
correspondent had repudiated the Rock foundation, viz: our 
being "bought with a price, even the precious blood of Christ. " 
But we are pained to say, this is all changed, and the "Day Star" 
has locked arms with those who deny that the Lord BOUGHT 
them. 

Not only so, but as though anxious to lead in the race for open 
infidelity, the "Day Star" openly affirms that Jesus was the Son 
of Joseph as well as of Mary, thus implying that he was as much 
a sinner through partaking of Adamic imperfection and curse as 
any other man. It not only implies but asserts that he by nature 
was a child of wrath even as others; and then adds, "By and by 
as the truth (?) shines more clearly, it will be seen that the 
difference between Jesus, and the members of his body, is not so 
great as has been supposed. " This it characterizes as a "grand 
truth." 

One wrong step leads to another, so we are not so much 
surprised to find an attempt made to cast discredit on the first 
chapters of Matthew and Luke, giving the impression that they 
are Papal interpolations to prove the doctrine of the "Immaculate 
conception. " 

We protest against such misleading statements*. Many who 
have no access to proofs on these matters, might reasonably 
suppose that there existed some good ground for questioning the 
authority of the scriptures referred to, while the truth is, there is 



no ground for the statement whatever. All of the oldest and 
recognizedly reliable MSS. contain these chapters which record 
the fact of Jesus' miraculous conception and birth, a fulfillment 
of the prophecy: "A virgin shall conceive and bear a son and 
shall call his name Immanuel. " Such a method, of saying of any 
text which does not fit human theories-it is evidently an 
interpolation— would soon destroy the Bible as a teacher, for 
thousands of people know thousands of texts which oppose their 
theories, and which they would like to think and to have others 
think spurious. We are very glad that few are so bold as to make 
such claims where they have no foundation whatever in fact. 

The fact that the "Day Star" does not advocate the more open 
and blasphemous forms of infidelity, makes it none the less 
poisonous and injurious. The Apostles say little about the 
general unbelief of the world, but they do warn us repeatedly of 
those who will privately bring infidelity into the church. Peter 
says: "among you will be false teachers who will privately 
introduce heresies of destruction, even the having bought them, 
Sovereign Lord, denying." (2 Pet. 2:1, literal Greek rendering of 
Diaglott.) 

We are well aware that the foregoing remarks will be 
misunderstood by some, and credited to wrong motives. It will 
be thought uncharitable and unkind. To such readers we can 
only say, that personal feelings for the Editor of the "Day Star" 
are warm and strong, and it gives us more pain to thus write, 
than you to read. But it becomes a matter of duty to God, and to 
His children to show errors in their true light, particularly when 
so fearfully destructive. We can only say with Paul when writing 
under Similar circumstances. "It is a very small thing that I 
should be judged of you," 



*We purpose, the Lord willing, to perfect arrangements by 
which any of our readers who desire, may possess at small cost a 
copy of the N.T., which will give the various readings, 
omissions, etc., of the three oldest and best Greek MSS. of the 
N.T., viz: the Sinaitic, Vatican, and Alexandrian. Those who 
have the Emphatic Diaglott will find the various readings of the 
Vatican MSS. in the foot notes. The Diaglott was ready for press 
before the readings of the Sinaitic, the oldest and last found 
MSS. were obtainable in full. 

R423 : page 8 

(your human judgment.) "Yea I judge not mine own self" (by 
my own human judgment.) "He that judgeth me (and all of us) is 
the Lord," and his judgment is expressed in his Word. 

True, there are several other publications teaching very nearly 
the same things, which we do not thus publicly oppose, nor have 
we ever publicly commended them. Should the "Day Star" at 



any time alter its course, and return to the rock foundation of 
faith— the ransom given for our sins— we shall gladly and warmly 
welcome it back, and in that event, you may expect that its name 
will again be mentioned in the TOWER approvingly. 

One word more— regular readers are well aware that while we 
are neutral on no doctrine, we believe that liberality should be 
exercised by all Christians, to all Christians who are building on 
Christ the Rock, even though they are building poorly; but we 
call you all to witness that the differences above alluded to, are 
most vital. They assault the foundations of Christianity, who 
deny the ransom price. It became a question of whether we 
would be faithful to God in defending his truth, or be acceptable 
to men by passing quietly by and ignoring error. The latter 
course would have been the easiest and most agreeable to the 
flesh, but the former was duty and has been performed to the 
best of our ability. 



R423 : page 8 



THE ENEMY. 



We have been asked what we meant by our sickness being 
intended for evil by the enemy, and who the enemy is, referred 
to in our letter, which appeared in October number. At first we 
were inclined to be surprised at such a question, but when we 
considered that people have long been taught that sickness and 
death are manifestations of God's providence, and that it is not 
an uncommon thing to hear the officiating clergyman at a 
funeral speak of the "singular providence which has taken the 
deceased out of the world," we concluded that possibly others 
might wonder at the statement referred to. To such we reply: 

The letter was not worded as carefully as it would have been, 
had it been intended for publication. 

We said we did not under- value our sickness, and pain, and 
sorrow, and darkness, and gloom, which though intended for 
evil by the enemy, is among the "all things" working for good. 

We suppose, what puzzled the inquirer, was, that we should set 
a value upon what came from the enemy, or if good, how could 
it have come from an enemy. 

First, then let us make sure that the things spoken of, (sickness, 
pain, &c.,) are the work of the enemy, Satan. 

In the first chapter of Job you will see how Satan wished to have 
God afflict Job, thinking, doubtless, thus to spoil Job's trust in 
God. Did God do it? No, but he allowed Satan to do it, while he 
(God) comforted and strengthened him. 

In Acts 10:38, we are told that Jesus healed certain ones "that 
were oppressed of the devil." In 1 Peter 5:8, it is said "be 



vigilant because your adversary the devil as a roaring lion, 
walketh about seeking whom he may devour." In Hebrews 2:14, 
we are told plainly that the devil has the power of death. We 
think this is sufficient to prove that he is our enemy, and that he 
is the cause of sickness, pain, death, and ought always to have 
the credit (?) of it. But do you say: how is it that through 
affliction he does us good? He does not do us good in any sense 
whatever. 

What any of God's agents do, (according to God's estimate, 
Matt. 5:28, 1st John 3:15), is what they intend to do, and not 
what they accomplish. If our Heavenly Father were to leave us 
where Satan has done his work with us, our case would be truly 
hopeless, but Our Father's infinite love and wisdom takes us out 
of the ruin, out of death. 

Satan's work, disease and pain when finished is death; all tends 
that way, and is so intended by the arch enemy. It is our faith in 
Our Father's wisdom and love that sustains us, that causes us to 
hope, and enables us to profit by our afflictions. This is what 
Paul meant when he said: (2 Cor. 4:17,18), "Our light affliction, 
which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of Glory, while we look not at the things 
which are seen. " 

So let us never say, nor intimate by word or deed, that sickness, 
pain and death are manifestations of God's providence, when a 
great share of Jesus' time was spent in undoing that same. They 
are manifestations of Satan's envy and malice. So Satan's 

R424 : page 8 

work is utter ruin, and all our hope is in the resurrection. "For 
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might 
destroy the works of the devil." 

We have a guarantee of the final destruction of the enemy, and 
of our liberation from death, in the resurrection of Christ, and 
also in the support which we receive from the Spirit while 
suffering at the hands of the enemy. This is the "earnest of our 
inheritance until the redemption of the PURCHASED 
possession." Eph 1:14. If an enemy should come along and pull 
up a young fruit tree of mine, thinking to kill it, and I should 
immediately transplant it and graft better fruit into it, there 
would be no thanks due him; he intended to ruin it. 

Perhaps some one suggests that Paul says: (Hebrews 12:6), 
"whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom he receiveth" Yes, chasteneth, i.e. "instructs, trains up;" 
he comes in with the comforting influences of his spirit and 
turns our sufferings into blessings. 

But there are times when we wander or neglect to do what he 
teaches us is duty; we then feel that he "scourgeth every son that 
he receiveth. " We have no rest of spirit; we smart under the rod; 



we weep and mourn; we turn again and do his will and receive 
his smile; we have been "corrected. " But that our Father 
administers corporal punishment; that he sends pain and death, 
we find no warrant in scripture for believing. But does not the 
prophet say: (perhaps one would ask), speaking of Christ, that 
"he was smitten of God and afflicted?" No, he says: "surely he 
hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows, yet we did esteem 
him smitten of God, and afflicted." Isa. 53:4. 

Just so, now those who suffer with Christ, those who bear with 
patience, pain and sorrow, and are thus disciplined, and accept it 
as such, and thus fill up the afflictions which are behind, " are 
often thought to be "smitten of God." This is what Job's friends 
thought. 

Now we claim, (and we hope you will examine scripture to see 
if it is not so), that all physical pain which the "body of Christ" 
are visited with, comes from Satan, but is turned into instruction 
and discipline, (chastening), and accrues to the good of the 
world in the coming age; the future rulers having been touched 
with a feeling of the world's infirmities. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R424 : page 8 

COLONIZING PALESTINE. 

The movement is irresistible. If we cannot stem the tide, let us 
at least guide it into fruitful channels. We cannot suffer 
ourselves to stand by with folded hands when this new exodus is 
taking place. We Jews have held for nearly two thousand years, 
that the consummation of the ages of suffering we have passed 
through will only be reached when we again possess the land of 
our fathers. Is that trust to die away just at the moment when it 
appears about to be fulfilled? Or, is it to be expected that the 
return will be brought about by means so mysterious as to be 
beyond the co-operation of human beings? God works his will 
through the wills of men, and if the prophecies are to be 
fulfilled, it will be because they are to be fulfilled by human 
wills and energies. These may seem to be high topics to drag 
into connection with a practical plan for placing a few Jewish 
colonies in Palestine. But it is from small beginnings, such as 
these, that great events often arise, and the return of a small 
body of Jews to the Holy Land can never fail to bring to mind 
the possibility and the practicability of the larger return to which 
all Jewish history and all Jewish aspirations have hitherto 
pointed. -Jewish Chronicle. 



R424 : page 8 



JESUS died, not to permit us to sin willfully, but to release us 
as a race from the condemnation and weakness which came 
upon us unwillingly— which came as a result, directly or 
indirectly, of Adam's fall. His sacrifice for sin atoned for the 
Adamic sin; that is, for all sins directly traceable to weakness 
and ignorance, resulting from Adam's transgression; all this is 
covered— fully covered-by the precious blood of Christ. But 
when once justified, and made free, and sanctified by his blood, 
if then we sin voluntarily, there remaineth no more a sacrifice 
for sin; that is, such an one, having already received his full 
share in the benefits of that sacrifice for sins, need look for no 
further interest in the blood, which, with knowledge, he has 
counted "common," or ordinary; nor need he look for further 
favor from the one he knowingly and willingly trampled under 
foot. (Vs. 29.) 

Dear brethren, we can hold out no hope to any, either in this age, 
or that coming, who, after being fully enlightened, after tasting 
of the good Word of God, and the powers of the coming age, 
shall sin willfully-become knowing and willing rejectors of the 
Son of God and his cleansing blood. No; such, we believe, merit 
the second death, and with a thousand chances would probably 
be the same adversaries of God— just as Satan, who, despite all 
the manifestations of God's goodness and love during ages past, 
remains an adversary still. 



R424 : page 8 

DR. ABBOTT ON 
"CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY." 

Dr. Lyman Abbott, the well-known editor of the Christian 
Union, in an editorial in a recent number of that paper, 
announces his belief in the probability of the doctrine of 
conditional immortality and of the annihilation of the 
incorrigibly wicked. As the article is lengthy and contains much 
relative to other points than those above mentioned, only that 
part of it relating to these particular doctrines is here given. 
After mentioning the final triumph of Christ over all things and 
the consummated glory of the redeemed, he says: 

"In the New Testament picture of this hour of triumph I see no 
shadow of scowling faces, of angered and unrepentant rebels; in 
the New Testament echo of this song of the redeemed I hear no 
interrupting of wail or wrath from any far-off prison-house of 
despair. After the last enemy is destroyed, shall sin, worst of all 
enemies, still live, and work his ruin eternally? When God hath 
put all enemies under Christ's feet, shall this worst of all 
enemies still rule in triumph over some remote, reserved corner 
of creation?... The more I study my Bible, the more unscriptural 
seems to me the conception of endless sin; the nearer I come 



into fellowship with God my Father, my Savior, my Comforter, 
the more intolerable grows the thought of it to me. And I thank 
God for the good hope in His Word, which permits me to look 
forward to and haste toward the day when this terrible tragedy of 
sin and pain will come to an end. If I believe in the hopeless 
doom of incorrigible sin, and also in the undimmed glory of a 
perfected kingdom of love, I must believe in the annihilation of 
the incorrigibly wicked ...Fire in the Bible is generally an 
emblem of destruction, not of torment. The chaff, the tares, the 
fruitless tree, are thrown into unquenchable fire, not to be 
tortured, but to be destroyed. The hell- fire of the New Testament 
is the fire of Gehenna, kept burning outside of the walls of 
Jerusalem to destroy the offal of the city; here was the worm 
that dieth not and the fire that is unquenched; emblems of 
destruction, not of torment. ...I find nothing in the new 
Testament to warrant the terrible opinion that God sustains the 
life of his creatures throughout eternity only that they may 
continue in sin and misery. That immortality is the gift of God 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, that man is mortal and must put 
on immortality, that only he can put it on who becomes through 
Christ a partaker of the divine nature, and so an inheritor of Him 
'who only hath immortality,' that eternal life is life eternal, and 
eternal death is death eternal, and everlasting destruction is 
destruction without remedy-mis is the most natural, as it is the 
simplest, reading in the New Testament."— Selected. 



R424 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques. Should we vote or hold public office? 

Ans. "Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto 
God the things that are God's." (Matt. 22:21.) If we have 
changed our allegiance from this world to Heaven— if we "are 
not of this world"-if "our citizenship is in heaven" (John 17:16. 
Phil. 3:20.) then we are aliens, pilgrims and strangers and not 
citizens of this country, and should claim and use only such 
favors as are accorded to aliens. If we are wholly consecrated to 
God, we have neither time nor influence to devote to politics. If 
we see clearly that present governments are those of the "prince 
of this world" and must all be shattered and give place to the 
Kingdom of God for which we pray, "Thy kingdom come, " then 
we shall have no further desire to be mixed up with them in any 
way. 

The "little flock" is so small and insignificant anyhow, that their 
votes would not turn the scale. Let the world manage its own 
government while we wait for ours. 


