The Bible Affects Youths for Good
YOUTHS today are often disillusioned by the corruption and hypocrisy they see practiced among adults, including members of Christendom’s churches. This has led to a general disrespect for authority and a breaking down of family relationships. Though perhaps not setting a bad example themselves, many parents have been unsuccessful in helping their children to avoid the trend toward rebellion. Their church has failed to give them needed Biblical direction for training their children.
This was the experience of a schoolteacher in El Salvador. She had been separated from her husband for several years and was trying to raise three boys, ages fifteen, seventeen and twenty respectively. While the youngest was still obedient and respectful, the eldest son had no regard for his mother and was associating with a bad crowd. He would come home late at night, sleep for a while and then leave early in the morning, without ever talking to his mother. In fits of anger he would break some of her appliances. The seventeen-year-old was also pursuing bad associations.
After a period of sickness, this woman asked one of Jehovah’s witnesses to visit her. She then told her: ‘You know, when I was sick, my oldest boys were not concerned at all. They didn’t speak to me; they didn’t inquire about my health. What has my Catholic religion done for me? Not a thing. We’re spiritually bankrupt as a family. Can you help me? You’re the only ones who have ever come to my door, talking about the Bible.’
Her visitor replied: “Well, at least, I could start studying the Bible with you and your youngest son. We would then have to wait to see how we could help the other two boys.”
A Bible study was started immediately and the woman soon began attending the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses at the Kingdom Hall. The youngest son likewise made fine progress.
One day, while sitting with her Witness companion in the Kingdom Hall, this woman glanced behind her. Grabbing the Witness’ arm, she exclaimed: ‘Look, look who’s here!’
Turning around, her Witness companion noticed a young man in the back of the hall.
Who was the young man? The eldest son of the schoolteacher. He had begun to share in a Bible study being conducted with his girl friend.
The relations between mother and son were still strained, and they were not speaking to each other. Through his study of the Scriptures, however, the son began to change. The frustrations that had prompted him to be disrespectful and violent began to clear up. Appreciating that he was under divine command to honor his mother, he became very considerate of her. Eventually the breach was completely healed, and mother and son became very close.
As for the second-oldest boy, young male members of the congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses showed a real interest in him and this resulted in his agreeing to study the Bible. He, too, is now a fine example in Christian conduct.
What is it about Jehovah’s Christian witnesses that has given young people like these and others an appreciation of the need to apply the Bible in their lives? A young man from the state of Wisconsin relates what impressed him about his first visit to a Kingdom Hall:
“It was so different from my old church services. It wasn’t as if people were just coming to church to ‘put their time in,’ but they really participated in worshiping God. Also, there were different speakers, not just one, and they all seemed qualified to preach. Another big difference from my old church was that there were no collections taken; the emphasis was on worship, not money. And finally, the people were really friendly.”
So the example of Christianity in practice has been a strong incentive for youths to begin living in harmony with the Bible. Why not visit a Kingdom Hall in your locality and see for yourself how the Bible has affected youths for good?

