Announcements
● Literature offer for October: One-year subscription for Awake! or Watchtower, or both, for a contribution of $5.00 each. Six-month subscriptions to semimonthly magazines and one-year subscriptions to monthly magazines are $2.50 each. There are no six-month subscriptions to monthly magazines. November: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and the Trinity brochure for $4.30. December: Young People Ask, for a contribution of $1.50, or Bible Stories or Live Forever for $3.00. January and February: Any 192-page book published prior to 1980 that the congregation has in stock for the reduced contribution of 50¢, with the following exceptions: Family Life, Great Teacher, This Life, Truth, and Youth. There is a limited supply of Commentary on James that may be ordered from Brooklyn. (For obtaining credit, elders should refer to the guidelines in the Society’s letter of December 21, 1988.) If the congregation has no stock of books to be offered at the reduced rate, the Worldwide Security book should be offered for a contribution of $1.00. These books may be ordered from Brooklyn.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—Large print (set of four volumes)—​Spanish
  Volume #1 (Genesis-Second Samuel)
  Volume #2 (First Kings-Song of Solomon)
  Volume #3 (Isaiah-Malachi)
  Volume #4 (Matthew-Revelation)
Aid to Bible Understanding, Volume 5 (Jiz-Lez)​—Dutch
Listening to the Great Teacher​—Polish
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work—​Danish, Norwegian, Portuguese
The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?​—Portuguese
True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It?​—Arabic
Watch Tower Publications Index 1951-1985​—Japanese
Watch Tower Publications Index 1981-1985​—German
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)— Polish
Everlasting Life in Paradise!​—Iban
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Bicol, Gilbertese, Ibanag, Pangasinan, Samar-Leyte, Samoan, Tongan, Tuvaluan
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Danish, Norwegian, Portuguese, Swedish
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Nauruan
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
My Book of Bible Stories (set of four cassettes in an album; congregation and public: $8.00; pioneers: $6.00)​—Chinese (Cantonese)
Daniel (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Japanese

