Family Cooperation Brings Benefits
1 The family unit is the oldest of all human institutions. It is precious to Jehovah, since to him “every family in heaven and on earth owes its name.”​—Eph. 3:15.
2 In Bible times, the father had the prime responsibility to see that the family was fully theocratic. So it is today. (Josh. 24:15; Eph. 6:1-4) To take care of all necessary family matters is a challenge. How can this be accomplished? By family cooperation and organization.​—1 Cor. 14:40.
AS THE HEAD, TAKE THE LEAD
3 The spirituality of all is a chief concern. The family study should be held on a regular basis and tailored to the needs of the family. This should be true also of the consideration of the day’s text. What a fine thing to start the day off with a discussion of the Word of God! Meditating upon it during the day will help us to ‘keep considering things that are chaste, lovable, and well spoken of.’ (Phil. 4:8) Can you make improvement in this?
4 In addition to the family study, a personal study program is important. The words at Joshua 1:8 apply with equal force to each of us individually: “This book of the law should not depart from your mouth, and you must in an undertone read in it day and night, in order that you may take care to do according to all that is written in it; for then you will make your way successful and then you will act wisely.”
5 It is a challenge to be on time for congregation meetings. This too requires cooperation. Direction from the family head will ensure that assistance is provided where needed. This will enable all to arrive in time to share in the opening song and prayer.
6 With so many elements working against the unity of the family arrangement, it is vital that the family head take the lead in prayer. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) “Persevere in prayer” is the admonition of Paul at Romans 12:12. Doing this on a regular basis can help cement the family together. This prayer should be in addition to the individual prayers of the family members.
PREPARE
7 Included in our worship of Jehovah is the making known of his name. Family practice sessions will help all to be prepared for the ministry. A fine instrument that we can use is the Reasoning book. Introductions may be selected from pages 9-15 to complement the Topic for Conversation. Appropriate suggestions for improvement may be made by the family head.
8 Is it possible for one or more members of the family to be in the full-time service? (1 Cor. 16:9) This will call for good cooperation and organization on the part of all in the family. By simplifying their life-style and being resourceful, many families are having this joy and privilege.
9 Although the father or family head is to take the lead, each member needs to remember that he is individually responsible to help the family in the worship of Jehovah. Looking out for the interests of all will make for a happy and united family.

