Make Full-Time Service Your Career
1 A work that bears directly on fulfilling our dedication and attaining everlasting life is the Christian ministry. (Rom. 10:10; 1 Tim. 4:16) When Jesus invited others to be his followers, he made it clear that this included declaring abroad the Kingdom of God. (Luke 9:57-62) Although our responding to this invitation may not require a change of employment, it definitely involves a change in priorities. A most important work is to “declare abroad the excellencies” of Jehovah, which includes making disciples. (1 Pet. 2:9; Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) All who are wholly dedicated to Jehovah, therefore, center their lives around the ministry. Many whose personal circumstances permit have been able to make the full-time service their career.​—2 Cor. 4:1, 7.
A REWARDING WAY OF LIFE
2 In looking back on 54 years of full-time service, a pioneer was moved to write: “The joys that Jehovah has given far outweigh the tribulations. If I were given the opportunity to live my life over again, I would willingly spend all my time praising the great God, Jehovah.” No worldly career or profession could bring the kind of deep inner satisfaction and joy that results from such a course. Pursuing a life of full-time service is an expression of godly devotion that holds out inestimable rewards now and sure blessings to be realized in the future.​—1 Tim. 4:8.
3 A career in the full-time ministry can bring great happiness because it involves so much giving. (Acts 20:35) The most valuable friendships, those with Jehovah and his Son Jesus Christ, are cultivated and strengthened by becoming more fully involved with Kingdom interests. (Luke 16:9; 1 Cor. 15:58) Contentment and a clear conscience are experienced because you are acting in a whole-souled way in accord with your circumstances. Your more disciplined way of life enables you to accomplish more in obedience to Christ’s command to ‘seek first the kingdom and his righteousness.’​—Matt. 6:33.
BE PROGRESSIVE IN YOUR MINISTRY
4 A career involves pursuit of progressive achievement in some field or endeavor. Progressive achievement is important to endurance and to maintaining joy and zeal as a pioneer. Through his organization, Jehovah provides spiritual education at congregation meetings and at assemblies. Added to this are meetings with the elders in December and with the circuit overseer when he visits. During the week of the circuit assembly, a special session is arranged for pioneers. Do you take notes and conscientiously apply the fine suggestions given at such meetings?
5 If you are not conducting a progressive Bible study, do you have this as a goal? Could you improve your introductions at the doors or the way you deal with objections common in your territory? Have you considered the privilege of working unassigned territory or even transferring temporarily or permanently to assist a congregation needing help? In these and many other ways, you may be able to progress in your career and refine your abilities in accomplishing God’s work.
6 If you are seriously considering joining the many who are taking up the pioneer work this fall, persist in prayer to Jehovah about the matter. (Matt. 7:7, 8) Many have built up their reliance on Jehovah by first serving as auxiliary pioneers.
7 It is not some unusual ability or gift that enables a person to pioneer. A genuine love for God and for people, along with a willingness to make personal sacrifices, is needed. (Matt. 22:37-39; Phil. 4:13) The Christian ministry can help you cultivate qualities that must be evident in those who will survive Armageddon. Pursuing it full time can enhance your love, faith, joy, and peace. (Gal. 5:22, 23) So reach out for and hold on to the pioneer ministry as your treasured career!

