Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 2
Song 1
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: “Praise Jah by Obtaining Subscriptions.” Question-and-answer consideration. Demonstrate use of Topic for Conversation and include suggestion made in paragraph 5.
15 min: How we will place subscriptions. Two Congregation Book Study conductors discuss how they will encourage publishers in their respective groups to have full share in placing subscriptions. Consider opportunities for individual publishers in various situations in life. May relate one or two brief experiences showing how subscriptions have been obtained in local territory.
Song 5 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 9
Song 9
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Advise congregation of any contribution acknowledgments from Society. Express appreciation for financial support of local congregation. Encourage all publishers to share in field service this weekend. Suggest talking points from current magazines that may be used in offering either subscriptions or individual copies of Awake! or The Watchtower.
25 min: “Make Full-Time Service Your Career.” Question-and-answer discussion of article, followed by interview of full-time ministers who can relate how they were encouraged to make the full-time ministry their career. What blessings have they enjoyed? Why would they encourage others to take up the full-time ministry as a career?
10 min: Report number of subscriptions turned in thus far and relate selected experiences.
Song 17 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 16
Song 40
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Magazines.” Question-and-answer consideration. After discussing paragraph 5, have well-prepared publisher give three 30- to 60-second magazine presentations. Each presentation should be to a different householder with differing circumstances. The publisher should demonstrate familiarity with the magazines and flexibility in using points that appropriately fit the householder’s circumstances.
15 min: “New Releases Help Us Train With Godly Devotion.” Enthusiastic talk encouraging all to become thoroughly familiar with new releases. May include one or two selected brief expressions of appreciation from brothers who have read and used publications.
Song 51 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 23
Song 69
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to be out in field service this weekend. Demonstrate two 30- to 60-second presentations using the latest magazines.
20 min: Question-and-answer discussion of “Family Cooperation Brings Benefits.” To be handled by an elder who is a family head.
15 min: Talk on “Are You Always Late?” based on pages 21-3 of the June 8, 1989, Awake!
Song 73 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 30
Song 52
10 min: Local announcements.
20 min: Preach the Word during November. Talk encouraging full participation in field service during November. Jehovah’s inspired Word is clearly presented for all to read and study in the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. Along with the Bible, we will present the new brochure Should You Believe in the Trinity? Help honesthearted people see the fallacy of the God-dishonoring doctrine of the Trinity that Christendom declares to be its central or main teaching. By helping sincere people learn the truth about the one God and Father, Jehovah, we will be directing them onto the road to everlasting life. (John 17:3; 1 Cor. 8:6) Conclude presentation with one or two brief demonstrations of how this literature offer can be made in your local territory using new Topic for Conversation.
15 min: Local needs or encouraging talk based on “Why Fear God, Not Men?” from pages 4-7 of the June 1, 1989, Watchtower. Slant material to needs of congregation.
Song 57 and concluding prayer.

