New Releases Help Us Train With Godly Devotion
1 Having attended this year’s district convention, we are more keenly aware of the need to be training ourselves with godly devotion as our aim. (1 Tim. 4:7) As we reflect on all the information presented on the program and strive to apply it in our daily living, we are helped to draw closer to Jehovah in true worship.
2 However, our training in godly devotion will be particularly enhanced as we progressively digest the wealth of information set out in the three new releases received at the “Godly Devotion” District Convention. Have you already read these new releases?
A NEW BROCHURE
3 The convincing Scriptural arguments employed in the brochure Should You Believe in the Trinity? help us not only to establish that the Trinity is a false doctrine to be rejected but also to explain to others the truth about God, his Son, and the holy spirit.
4 Our Bible-based position is that “there is actually to us one God the Father.” (1 Cor. 8:6) This new brochure will help us expose the fallacy of the pagan doctrine of the Trinity as we encourage all meek ones to ‘let God be proved true, even though every man be proved a liar.’​—Rom. 3:4.
ANSWERS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE
5 We will not soon forget the straightforward convention talk and the special arrangement for releasing the book Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work. Although it was provided for the benefit of young people, parents, especially fathers, were urged to take the lead in using the book to train their children and ‘bring them up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.’​—Eph. 6:4.
6 Parents and children alike should become thoroughly familiar with this vital information provided by Jehovah’s organization to help young ones go on training in godly devotion. As indicated in the convention talk, this can be done in family discussions.
GOD’S WORD​—NOT MAN’S
7 The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?, the new book released on Saturday, is designed to help honesthearted people understand that the Bible is inspired and that it contains “the truth which accords with godly devotion.” (Titus 1:1) What a boon to our work this new book should prove to be! But in order to use it effectively in the field, we must become personally acquainted with its instructive features and be able to direct attention to specific points in the book when using it in field service.
8 How grateful to Jehovah all of us are for the abundance of timely spiritual food received at the “Godly Devotion” District Convention! Let us be resolved to demonstrate our heartfelt appreciation through diligent use of these provisions in our pursuit of godly devotion. This would include using these provisions in helping others to become worshipers of our one God and Father, Jehovah.

