Praise Jah by Obtaining Subscriptions
1 What a joy it is to receive each new issue of Awake! This fine journal helps us keep up-to-date on world happenings as they relate to Bible prophecy. Thus, we can better appreciate our opportunities to praise Jehovah.​—Amos 3:7; Heb. 13:15.
2 So far in 1989, Awake! has featured such engaging subjects as “Who Will Inherit the Earth?” “What Is Happening to Values?” and “Violence​—What Can You Do?” Such information enhances our appreciation for The Watchtower, which for more than a hundred years has championed God’s Kingdom as the real solution to mankind’s problems. Together, these magazines have alerted readers to see how present-day happenings mark “the last days” of this old system. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) Of course, April and May of this year saw historic issues of The Watchtower boldly exposing wicked Babylon the Great.
SUBSCRIPTIONS SUPPLY SPIRITUAL FOOD
3 During October we will have the privilege of featuring subscriptions to Awake! or The Watchtower or both. Does each member of your family have a personal subscription? If so, then you are better equipped to recommend that others subscribe also. As a regular reader of both The Watchtower and Awake! you can be just as enthusiastic about offering subscriptions as you are in presenting individual copies on magazine day.
4 Do not prejudge whether an individual would like to subscribe, but, rather, let the person respond to your sincere, enthusiastic presentation. One sister was helped to develop a more positive attitude by reflecting on the saying: “You cannot judge a book by its cover.” She learned to be more like Jehovah, who is not partial. (Acts 10:34) In addition to your door-to-door ministry, have you offered subscriptions to your Bible students, those on your magazine route, fellow workers, neighbors, and relatives and while doing street witnessing?
5 Many have had householders say they do not have the money for the subscription at that time. Or they may say it is inconvenient for them to subscribe for some other reason. When that happens and if the person is willing, fill out the subscription blanks right there on the initial call and then return for the contribution later. Be sure to follow up by calling back at the agreed-on time. This emphasizes the importance of keeping accurate house-to-house records.
INFORMAL WITNESSING
6 Although door-to-door work is still the mainstay of our witnessing, we know that informal witnessing is receiving added emphasis these days. It is an excellent means of contacting many of those who are not at home when we work from house to house. And what about those with whom you work secularly? During one subscription campaign month, a brother decided to witness discreetly to his workmates. He initially set his goal at ten subscriptions for the month. However, he was quite surprised when he reached that goal in two days. Imagine his joy when he was able to report 68 subscriptions for the month!
7 During October we may offer the subscriptions as we go from door to door, when we make return visits, and when we witness informally. When the subscription is refused, we may say something like this: “Although you do not wish to subscribe at this time, I believe you would enjoy this issue we have just discussed. We are leaving it with this companion magazine for a contribution of just 50¢.” Many magazines are placed in this way.
8 The psalmist urges us: “Praise Jah, you people.” (Ps. 147:1) How fitting it is for us to praise Jehovah during October by offering subscriptions to The Watchtower and Awake!

