Presenting the Good News​—With Magazines
1 Ecclesiastes 12:12 observes, “To the making of many books there is no end.” Those words have proved true in our day as high-speed printing presses send forth billions of pages of printed material, all vying for the attention of readers. The availability of so much printed material presents a challenge to publishers of the Kingdom good news. How can we convince individuals that The Watchtower and Awake! are the most worthwhile magazines published today?
VALUABLE MAGAZINES
2 It is good to examine our personal attitude toward The Watchtower and Awake! Do you view the magazines as precious, eagerly looking forward to each new issue? Do you schedule time to read all the articles? If we personally appreciate the magazines, our genuine enthusiasm and heartfelt conviction will help us to be successful in offering them to others.
3 People in our territory need the valuable information contained in The Watchtower and Awake! just as we do. We benefited from the articles that thoroughly exposed the wickedness of false religion’s clergy and explained prophetic warnings about the impending destruction of Babylon the Great. In the September 15, 1989, Watchtower, the subject “What Must We Do to Be Saved?” gave practical encouragement about our conduct and course of life. Recent Awake! articles have focused on man’s mismanagement of earth’s environment and God’s promises for restoring the earth to a paradise. What an abundant supply of spiritual food these magazines provide to awaken in people a consciousness of their spiritual need!
KNOW YOUR MAGAZINES
4 How can we convince a person that he will benefit from reading the Watchtower and Awake! magazines? The best way is to show him a specific point that may be interesting and relevant to him. To do this effectively requires that we be thoroughly familiar with the magazines and prepare in advance. Such preparation begins with our personal reading of the magazines before we use them in the field. As you read, be alert to points that could be used in the ministry. Why not mark these points in your personal copies of the magazines and then review your notes when you prepare for field service with that issue?
5 As you do your personal reading of The Watchtower and Awake! it is also good to think about which articles will be of special interest to certain people in your territory. Are there articles that would appeal particularly to doctors, lawyers, or teachers? In this regard, do not forget to look at the notices about articles in future issues so that you can plan ahead and order any additional copies you may need. Making lists of individuals to whom you wish to offer these magazines can be very helpful.
6 After speaking about the making of many books, Ecclesiastes 12:12 says that “much devotion to them is wearisome to the flesh.” Reading worldly literature can be wearisome because it provides no spiritual refreshment. In contrast, how thankful we are to have a full share in distributing the Watchtower and Awake! magazines, which honor Jehovah and proclaim his name and Kingdom!​—Prov. 3:9.

