VOL. XXXII SEPTEMBER 15 No. IS 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Views From "The Watch Tower" 355 

Speaking-With-Tongues Delusion 355 

Unrest in China 355 

The Matter With the Churches 355 

Persecutions of Jews Continues 357 

The Judgment of the Angels 358 

Some of Them Probably Repentant 358 

The Word and the Way 359 

Loyalty the Great Test 360 

Set as a Watchman 361 

"River of the Water of Life" 362 

No Bride to Say "Come" 362 

Endless Torments Unscriptural 363 

"Pray Always" 364 

Independent Bible Study 365 

Faith, Not Sight 365 

Some Interesting Letters 366 

Testimony Meetings— Volunteer Work 366 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 367 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 



CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



COLPORTEURS TAKE NOTICE 

Perfection is, of course, impossible, but we desire that all 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES shall be as nearly perfect as is 
reasonable to ask in any books. We request the assistance of 
Colporteurs to this end. If you receive damaged or imperfect 
books write to us immediately, giving particulars and sending 
a sample showing the imperfections. Deduct for same with 
postage from next remittance. Address book to the Society 
in care of "Colporteur Dept." Mark it "Damaged" and put 
your name on wrapper. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for October follow: (1) 273; (2) 



165; (3) 328; (4) 12; (5) 308; (6) 202; (7) 1; (8) 
91; (9) 59; (10) 299; (11) 8; (12) 286; (13) 170; 
(14) 259; (15) 177; (16) 293; (17) 283; (18) 159; 
(19) 106; (20) 112; (21) 105; (22) 130; (23) 79; 
(24) 214; (25) 119; (26) 332; (27) 108; (28) 95; 
(29) 51; (30) 230; (31) 313. 



R4877 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"SPEAKING -WITH-TONGUES " DELUSION 



WE HAVE heretofore referred to some earnest 

people who are evidently ensnared by 

the Adversary into believing that they are 

enjoying a restoration of the gifts whereby 

God blessed and established the Christian 

Church in the first century. Their strong 

delusions continue to increase under a 

spirit power which, we believe, is not from 

God nor from the dead, but from the fallen 

spirits, the fallen angels. In addition to 

the speaking with tongues and the miraculous healing of 

the sick and the seeing of visions, they now have spirit 

manifestations. Their latest claims, reported in their religious 

journals, are that the Lord Jesus, on several occasions, 

has appeared in their midst at their meetings, has 

been seen with the natural eye, etc. 

That these people are earnest and evidently honest 
only increases our sorrow for them. (For dishonest people 
we have comparatively little sympathy.) We fear 
that a later development will be spirit manifestations of 
a still more pronounced type. The fallen angels are evidently 
desirous of deluding the whole world. They have 
certainly had great success, so far as many of the false 
doctrines are concerned. And as we read the Scriptures 
we believe they will for a time have a still greater influence 
in human affairs shortly. Those of our readers 
who have contact with any of these deluded people 
should point out to them the Apostle's words, "Believe 
not every spirit," and should remind them that the fallen 
angels are "lying spirits," and that the entire confidence 
of God's people should be in the teachings of the 
Scriptures. 

The Scriptures clearly testify that those who possessed 
the gifts of the Spirit in the early Church received them 
from the Apostles by the laying on of hands, so that 
when the Apostles were dead and also those upon whom 
they had laid their hands and communicated the gifts, it 
ended those "gifts" in the Church. And the next step of 
progress was the manifestation of the fruits of the 



Spirit, as St. Paul most clearly points out— I Cor. 13:8. 



UNREST IN CHINA-BRITISH UNFAITHFUL 

Bishop W. B. Lewis, of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church of Foo Chow, China, discussing recent trouble and 
present unrest in the Canton Province, says:— 

"The real root of the trouble is because the Chinese 
government has suppressed the growing of poppy. In 
1906, England and China entered into a treaty to suppress 
the opium traffic. The terms of the treaty were 
that England was to decrease the importation of opium 
one tenth each year and China agreed to suppress the 
growing of poppy in the same ratio. 

"China has lived up to the terms of the treaty and 
England has not. In consequence of this the price of 
opium in China has increased fourfold and the result is 
that millions of dollars are flowing out of the country and 
nothing is coming in. All the time England is profiting 
by the condition as it now is. The residents of a large 
part of Southern China do not understand the treaty and 
hence the rebellion was brought about. However, the 
present condition will not continue much longer, as the 
British government cannot face the world because of 
failure to abide by the terms of the treaty. I believe the 
English are coming to the realization that this condition 
cannot go forward, and I believe developments will occur 
in the near future. The final outcome will be that England 
will have to abide by the terms of the treaty and then the 

R4878 : page 355 

opium traffic will cease. The Chinese government will 
effectively suppress the growing of poppy." 



THE MATTER WITH THE CHURCHES 

"What's the matter with the churches?" says the 
Toledo News-Bee: "It's only those who will not see who 
are sanguine enough to maintain that there is nothing the 
matter with them. For it is blazoned in actual fact, so 
that he who runs may read, that the churches, judged 
merely by what they have done outside of the spiritual 
realm, in the way of civic and social betterment, have 
failed thus far to show adequate results for the enormous 
sums they have invested in buildings, and for the preaching 
of the gospel at home and abroad. 

"Dr. Thomas E. Green, writing in Hampton's on 'What 
Is to Become of the Preacher?' says:— 

'"That of the 90,000,000 people in this country, 
32,936,446 are church members (census report of 1906). 

"That of the 1,440,000,000 people in the world, a billion, 



one thousand million, are not Christians. 

'"That church attendance is falling off. It needs 
neither figures nor argument to establish the fact that 
church attendance and church worship are in a condition 
of decline. The experience of any community is ample 
proof. 

'"That since 1905 the collections in London churches 
have fallen off 35 per cent. 

'"That not five per cent, of the workingmen of England 
and America attend church. 

R4878 : page 356 

'"That the supply of ministers is rapidly falling off.' 

"So much for that part of it. Now for the other: 
The average American minister earns less than half the 
wages of the average American bricklayer. 

"Americans give more liberally for missions than for 
home work, but for every dollar put in the 'foreign 
field' for actual mission work, more than another dollar 
is spent in administration. Of the ten million dollars 
contributed in this country for missions last year, less 
than five million dollars got to the 'heathen.' 

"Taking a certain Wisconsin town of 2,700 inhabitants 
as representative, we are shown 13 church organizations, 
the largest numbering 225 communicants, the smallest 25, 
keeping up 1 1 church buildings at an aggregate cost of 
$10,400 per year. 'There are in the United States 14 
kinds of Baptists, 24 kinds of Lutherans, 15 kinds of 
Methodists and 12 kinds of Presbyterians,' says Dr. Green. 

"To cap the climax with a final absurdity he cites the 
fact that there is a lone southern Methodist church on the 
Manitoba border and an equally lonesome northern Presbyterian 
church languishing in the beach of the gulf of 
Mexico." 



The Toledo News-Bee concludes its editorial above 
by saying, "It seems clear as daylight that the salvation 
of the sects lies in Christian co-operation." 

Just so. The disease is apparent, but the real cause 
and the proper remedy are not discerned. Why should we 
plan for the salvation of the sects? Should we not 
rather strive for the salvation of the people who for so 
long have been confused and misled in various directions 
by the sects and the creeds of the "dark ages"? If everybody 
agrees that our Lord and the Apostles recognized 
only the true Church, "the Church of the living God 
whose names are written in heaven," and if all the division 
of God's people into sects and parties with contradictory 
creeds has been wrong, why should any of us seek 
to uphold or to save the sects from destruction? Surely 
all true Christians should unite in abolishing sectarianism, 
each by destroying his own creed fences, which separate 
God's professed people into various more or less antagonistic 



little companies. 

The proposition of Church Federation is merely a 
method of sect salvation, preservation, the very thing 
which no true Christians should desire. We are told that 
Federation would ignore doctrines altogether and merely 
make of the different sects a social and working combination 
along lines upon which all could agree. But is this 
the Divine order? Would not this be substituting the 
commandments of men, the Federation, for the doctrines 
of Christ? Should we not, therefore, rather remember 
the Apostle's words which assure us, not only that there 
is but one Church of the living God, but also that there 
is but one Lord, one faith and one baptism, one God and 
Father over all and one Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?— 
Eph. 4:5,6. 

Manifestly it is our duty to abandon all of our various 
creeds formulated after the death of the Apostles and to 
go back to the words of Jesus, the Apostles and Prophets 
and to accept and believe these as the Divine revelation of 
the Divine will and purposes. Some may incline to say:— 

YOU ARE A CATHOLIC! 

In the sense that the word catholic signifies general 
instead of sectarian, the charge would be correct; but we 
are not Roman Catholic any more than Anglican Catholic. 
Nor were Jesus and the Apostles Roman, Greek or 
Anglican Catholics. They were catholics in a broader 
sense. And we strive to take a similar position, ignoring 
national as well as sectarian boundaries and lines and 
authority. The broad term Christian, without any limitations, 
includes the catholic or general thought and is quite 
sufficient for us and, we believe, should be sufficient for 
all of the followers of Jesus. 

But someone will ask, When you speak of the one 
true Church, do you not necessarily mean the Roman 
Catholic Church? Oh, no, my friend; there were plain 
Christians before there were Roman Catholic Christians 
or Christians of any of the other various branches. We 
refer to the one Church which Jesus and the Apostles 
established on the foundation of their teachings as found 
in the Holy Scriptures. It did not ignore doctrines, but 
admonished that we should contend earnestly for the 
"faith once delivered to the saints" (Jude 3), which would 
be sufficient for the man of God.— 2 Tim. 3:17. 

The one Church of Christ, inspired by the true faith, 
the true doctrines of the Bible, will be bound together 
by the cords of love, fellowship, brotherhood, "that they 
all may be one as Thou, Father, and I are one." (John 17:11.) 
As our Heavenly Father and our Lord Jesus do 
not need to be bound together by fear or threats, so likewise 
the true members of the true Church will need no 
such bondage to make them one in spirit or in doctrines, 
for, as the Master said, "Ye shall know the Truth and 
the Truth shall make you free." The secret of this true 
union is that each member of the true Church is fully consecrated 



to God and His service and is a saint striving 
for perfect mastery over his flesh and is begotten of the 
Holy Spirit and its holy desires for righteousness and 
truth, taught and providentially overruled and guided to 
a knowledge of His will and an understanding of His 
Word. Thus "they shall all be taught of God." This is 
the Holy Catholic Church. All of its members will be 
taught of God. 

Ah, you say, such a Church of saints would not number 
four hundred millions as we now boast! 

No, we reply; it would be as the Master declares, a 
"little flock" in comparison to the masses of humanity and 
the masses of Christianity. But that "little flock" would 
be burning and shining lights in the world, as the Master 
declares. The human organizations for benevolent, educational, 
charitable and other good works there might 
still be, but, disillusioned, they would no longer style themselves 
churches, but would know that there is but the one 
Church. 

When we learn to look from the Bible standpoint we 
see that inside and outside of all the different sects and 
parties and creeds of Christendom there is just such a 
"little flock" of saintly footstep followers of Jesus. These 
are the true Church as God sees it. The human institutions 
called churches, while containing some of these members 
of the true Church, are merely social clubs and not 
churches. There is but one, and it is scattered everywhere, 
and yet, "The Lord knoweth them that are His." 
-2 Tim. 2:19. 

THE CHURCH'S WORK FOR THE WORLD 

Ah! but, says one, where would come in the Church's 
work for the world? We reply: God's work for the 
world will be accomplished through the Church after the 
Church shall have been completed, changed, glorified, in 
the Kingdom. God's work in the present time is not the 
salvation of the world, but the salvation of the Church; 
the world's salvation will follow by and by during the 
reign of Messiah for a thousand years, when Satan shall 
be bound; then every evil influence will be restrained and 
every good influence let loose. 

Now the Church is to make herself ready as the Bride 

R4878 : page 357 

of Christ. (Rev. 19:7.) Now the individual Christians 

are called upon to make their calling and election sure. 

Only incidentally, and not as their chief work, are they 

to let their light shine before men. Now the Lord's 

blessing through Apostles, Prophets, evangelists, teachers, 

is exclusively for the edifying of the saints for the work 

of the ministry, until we all come to the full stature of 

the Man— the Christ, the Anointed, of which Jesus will 

be the Head and the Church the members in glory. (Eph. 4:12-14.) 

God is not now dealing by force to compel 



every knee to bow and every tongue to confess. That 
will be by and by. Now the still, small Voice is calling 
the saintly class to separation from the world, to fellowship 

R4879 : page 357 

with God, to joint-heirship with Jesus in the Kingdom 
soon to be established "under the whole heavens." 

What the world has so much been calling for will soon 
be realized, namely, a Church Triumphant, a Church in 
glory and perfection, a Church empowered of God to put 
down sin, to correct and chasten the sinners and to lead 
as many as possible of them into ways of righteousness 
unto everlasting life. 

Reverting, then, to the question at the head of this 
article, "What is the Matter with the Churches," our reply 
is that the difficulty is due to the formation and perpetuation 
of various human systems, each trying to palm itself 
off as the one true Church of Christ. Some time after 
the formation the self-deception gave way before the 
saner thought that none of them surely could make such 
a claim. The next step amongst the Protestant sects was 
to say, If you will recognize me, I will recognize you, and 
we will claim that Christ has many churches and ignore 
His statement that there is but one. This policy has been 
successful for quite a while. And it would even now be 
successful were it not that the eyes of human understanding 
are opening and the inconsistencies of all the various 
creeds of Christendom are recognized. Now it begins to 
be manifest that for centuries there has been something 
radically wrong with the faith, the hope, the baptism and 
the names of all the different sects; now true Christians of 
all denominations are perplexed and groping after truth, 
and so perplexed that they scarcely realize that, to find 
it, they should go back to the Fountain Head, Jesus and 
the Apostles and their teachings. 

Meantime, also, the masses of Christendom are becoming 
awakened— they are going into modern infidelity 
called Higher Criticism, New Thought, Theology, 
Theosophy, Evolution, Christian Science, etc. Thus, between 
the perplexity of the saints looking for truth and 
the nominal masses looking for the truth in other directions, 
no wonder the sectarian systems are uninteresting 
except to the comparatively few who, as ministers, officers, 
etc., "feel it their duty" to attend meeting and to profess 
creeds which they do not believe. 

The real duty of every Christian is to take his stand 
for the Truth and against sectarianism and its base misrepresentation 
of the Divine character. With the creed 

fences down these, the saintly few, would soon come together 
under the attractions of the green pastures and 
still waters of the Divine Word. The charities of the 
world would progress very much as now because the poor, 
the Master said, we would have always with us until His 
Kingdom would be established, which will destroy poverty, 
as well as overthrow sin and death. 



THE OUTLOOK IN GERMANY 

There is not a serious political mind in Germany today 
that does not consider the internal conditions as very 
grave, however different the political views may be. The 
leaders of the People's party at the decisive debates on 
the suffrage bill, one after another declared with greatest 
emphasis that they viewed the situation as very serious; 
that we are approaching very serious times; this conviction 
was also shared by the Social Democrats. In fact, 
the view has already been expressed that we are in an 
era of revolutionary legislation, of immense and inconceivable 
political, social and ethical transition. We 
merely mention this in support of our conviction that the 
internal conditions of Germany are in reality very serious, 
and we regard it not as a refutation, but as a confirmation 
that the sentiment prevailing in Germany is to some extent 
nervously hysterical and may be characterized partly by 
that expression which stamped the period preceding 
the French revolution— apres nous le deluge (after us the 
deluge) . — Rheinish-Westphalian News . 



PERSECUTION OF JEWS CONTINUES 

In Russia the tale of Jewish persecution continues to 
unfold itself. The recent political crisis was hailed by 
the Russian Jews as promising some relief, for it was 
thought that whatever resulted, the condition of affairs 
could not grow worse and no regime could exceed in 
cruelty that of M. Stolypin. In the result, M. Stolypin has 
remained in office and his myrmidons in different parts of 
the empire continue their foul work. The order has apparently 
gone forth that the conscience of Europe is no 
more to be shocked by massacres, but the same object is 
to be attained more thoroughly and without any scandal 
by means of relentless persecution. 

Odessa is in particular the center of Jewish persecution 
of the most heartless description. The anti-Semitic 
governor of that city has already succeeded in 
creating a mass of Jewish pauperism, estimated to number 
80,000, and at the same time, by seizing the management 
and the funds of the local Jewish charities, the means of 
coping with this appalling misery have been destroyed. 
The Universities of Russia have long been practically 
closed to Jewish students, but there has been no hindrance 
of their studying as external students. 

Almost the last act of the government previous to the 
recent crisis was, however, the exclusion of the Jews 
from the ranks of external students, and nothing that has 
since happened has served to alter this decree. Thus, the 
Russian government has now succeeded in depriving 



6,000,000 of the most enlightened of the inhabitants of the 
empire of all means of obtaining higher education. It 
seems as if the Policy of Pobedonostcheff still holds good 
—the solution of the Jewish question by the destruction of 
one-third of the Jewish population, the conversion of a 
second third, and the migration of the rest.— Exchange. 



INCIPIENT AGNOSTICS 

The Methodist Recorder notes the lament of Rev. 
Thomas Payne, D.D., respecting the mischief wrought by 
the theory of Evolution, especially among the young, and 
of the teaching of other false doctrines in Sunday Schools 
and Bible Classes and from many pulpits, as well as by 
professors in schools and colleges:— 

"He asserts that owing to this many young men have 
given up their reading of the Bible and other books of a 
religious nature, and gives instances in which young people 
from Christian families have come home from schools 
and colleges of this description incipient Agnostics. His 
avowed object is to help such by leading them back to 
faith in God and confidence in His Word. He charges 
the Theory of Evolution with being the chief cause of 
most of the erroneous teaching of the time; and to its 
unquestioned acceptance and hasty application he traces 
the mischief that he laments." 



R4879 : page 358 

THE JUDGMENT OF THE ANGELS 

THE APOSTLE PAUL asked of the Corinthian 
Church, "Know ye not that we [the 
saints] shall judge angels?" (I Cor. 6:3.) 
We have been frequently asked as to how 
the saints shall judge angels? 

We have given the suggestion that it 
would not be appropriate for the saints 
to judge the holy angels, for evidently the 
holy angels do not need any judgment. In 
the past there was one judgment of the 
angels; this is mentioned by St. Peter. (2 Pet. 2:4,5.) He 
says that in the time before the flood the angels had their 
trial; and that those angels who did not maintain their 
condition of loyalty to God were cast down to tartarus— 
that is, to our earth's atmosphere, there "restrained in 
chains of darkness until the Judgment of the Great Day." 
(See also Jude 6.) This "Judgment of the Great Day," 
to our understanding, means that in that Great Day another 
trial will come to those angels. 

The question might arise as to what will be the character 
of and when will be that "Great Day"? We answer 



that the Great Day is the Seventh Day. God divided the 
history of man, apparently, into seven great epochs of 
1,000 years each. Six days (1,000-year days) of this 
great Week are in the past; the Seventh Day is the Last 
Day (1,000 years long, as are the other six). So this 
Last Day is the Great Day of Messiah— of the Kingdom 
of Messiah— in which He will rule and reign in the world 
for its judgment, uplifting and blessing. That will be the 
Great Day, in comparison with other days; the Sabbath 
Day, as compared with the six days of trouble and unrest 
that the world has experienced. In that Day peace 
and rest will come to the world, for Christ who takes 
the Kingdom will bring everything into subjection. To 
Him "Every knee shall bow and every tongue confess." 
-Phil. 2:10,11. 

So in connection with that Great Day, humanity is to 
have a judgment— "He (Jehovah) hath appointed a Day, 
in the which He will judge the world in righteousness by 
that Man whom He hath ordained." (Acts 17:31.) The 
great "Man" God has ordained is Jesus the Head and 
the Church His Body, of which the Apostle says some 
are Jews and some are Gentiles— "to make of the twain 
(Jews and Gentiles) one New Man"— the Mediator, the 
Peace Maker between God and mankind.— Eph. 2:13-17. 

R4880 : page 358 

Without any question, then, we can see when the 
world will have its Judgment, or trial Day, to decide 
which of them will be worthy and which will be unworthy 
to receive perfect life as human beings. But now 
as to the trial of the fallen angels:— 

THEIR JUDGMENT PROBABLY NOW 

We have answered in previous issues of THE WATCH 
TOWER that this trial will be, we believe, at the very beginning 
of this Great Day. And why at the beginning? 
For the reason that there is only one way, so far as we 
can see, in which these fallen angels can have a trial, 
their trial consisting in having a fuller opportunity to 
sin, if they so desire, or an opportunity to show, if they 
wish, that they are sick of sin and desire to return to 
harmony with God. We cannot think that God will allow 
this trial of the angels during the Millennial reign, for 
then, nothing shall hurt; nothing shall destroy; Satan 
will be bound and all evil influences will be restrained. 
No, it cannot be then. And in order to be tried at all, 
these fallen angels must have certain liberties granted, 
to prove them. Otherwise, where would be their trial? 
Consequently, reasoning along this basis (2 Peter 3:7), 
we reach the conclusion that the trial of these fallen 
angels is in the near future— perhaps to some extent 
already begun. In what way? Somewhat after the manner 
of their previous trial before the flood. And what 
happened at that time? The account is given in Genesis, chapter 6. 



We read that at that time "The sons of God 
(materialized angels— Jude 6,7) saw the daughters of 
men that they were fair; and they took unto themselves 
wives of all that they chose (apparently without consulting 
anyone), ...and there were born unto them 
children, who became mighty men of renown"— giants, 
different from purely human stock. 

This was a very peculiar condition of things. How 
could this be, you may ask? How could the angels do 
this? The Scriptures answer that at that time the angels 
had a liberty which they do not now have. That liberty 
was the privilege of materialization— the taking on of a 
human body. They acted as men, they ate as men, they 
spoke as men; and as men they begot children. But 
since these fathers were of a superior stock, in some 
respects their children were men of renown and giants 
as compared with the ordinary human stock. 

THEY ARE CONFINED TO EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE 

The Apostles Peter and Jude tell us that after their 
wrong course these angels were separated from association 
with the heavenly and holy angels, who were in harmony 
with God, and were cast down to tartarus, to our 
earth's atmosphere, "to be reserved in chains of darkness 
until the Judgment of the Great Day." What does 
that expression mean? The "chains of darkness" we believe 
to be a figurative statement signifying that they 
were no longer permitted to materialize in the light and, 
generally, not able to materialize at all. But of late 
spiritists claim, and we believe truthfully, that these 
spirits can now materialize in as real and tangible flesh 
as any human being possesses. As they state, and as the 
facts prove, this can be done only under certain circumstances; 
they still have a great deal of difficulty in 
materializing in the light. The "chains of darkness" 
still seem to be on them to some extent. 

Spiritists further claim, however, that the spirits are 
breaking these bonds and that gradually they will be able 
to do fully in the light everything that they can now do 
in the dark, and even more than this. The Bible corroborates 
what the spiritists claim, only that the spiritists 
teach that these things are done by the dead; who, the 
spirits tell, are more alive after death than before. Spiritists 
assert that it is the spirits of dead human beings 
that materialize. But the Bible takes the opposite position 
and says that these spirits are the fallen angels, 
and that so far as humanity are concerned, the dead are 
totally dead and must remain so until the resurrection. 

So, then, the Bible and the Spiritists are in decided 
conflict; and yet there is this harmony that we speak of, 
namely, that at the time of the Judgment of the Great 
Day we may expect the bonds restraining these spirits 
to be loosened. Of course God could hold them in 
restraint; but He will now permit these fallen angels to 
have a great lease of liberty. Then will come to them a 



great trial and testing, or judgment, in respect to their 
willingness or unwillingness to do according to the 
Divine will. 

SOME OF THEM PROBABLY REPENTANT 

It would not surprise us if some of the fallen angels 
who sinned in the past have repented and have had long 
centuries of experience with the unrepentant ones; and 
that these have suffered persecutions from those of evil 
mind. And so there may thus be two classes among the 
fallen angels; the one class desirous of doing the will of 

R4880 : page 359 

God and the other class, like Satan himself, wilfully 
opposed to the will of God. The trial time will prove 
each of these angels and manifest to which class each 
belongs. 

We think, too, that we see in the Scriptures a passage 
which we had not seen with the same force before 
—a Scripture that seems to give a thought along this 
very line. It seems to imply that at a very near date 
probably these fallen angels will have wonderful power, 
such as they have never had since the days of the flood, 
and that this wonderful power will be used in a very 
malevolent manner, to stir up mankind to evil doing; and 
that this will be the key, the secret connected with the 
awful time of trouble which the Bible tells us will mark 
the conclusion of this Age and which will constitute the 
forerunner or beginning of the New Dispensation. 

THE HOLDING OF THE FOUR WINDS 

The Scripture we have in mind is found in Revelation 7:1-3. 
This symbolical passage speaks of the four 
angels which stand at the four corners of the earth and 
hold the four winds that they should not blow upon the 
earth or upon the sea "until we shall have sealed the 
servants of our God in their foreheads." To our understanding 
we are in that very time when the servants of 
God are being sealed in their foreheads. The forehead 
represents the intellect; and to be "sealed in the forehead" 
is to be intellectually marked. 

The intimation is that at this time, in the conclusion 
of this Gospel Age, God will grant some intellectual 
mark upon his servants that no others will have; that 
there will be a great work of sealing; and those in perfect 
harmony with God are to be His servants in the work 
of sealing. This seal is the Truth. "Ye shall know the 
Truth and the Truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) 
The Truth will mark in their foreheads those who receive 
it, branding them in a way that others of mankind 
are not marked or branded. 

All of the Lord's truly consecrated children can see 
what a wonderful power the knowledge of the Divine 



Plan has been. How different everything in the world 
seems! How the eyes of their understanding have been 
opened to see many things that they could not understand 
before! Just as soon as the sealing of the saints 
is completed, just as soon as all the elect are thus marked, 
just as soon as this Age shall be completed, then those 
four angels who are holding the four winds, that they 
should not blow upon the earth, will let them loose; and 
the effect will be— what? If four winds, from the four 
corners of the earth, come together, they make a whirlwind; 
and that is exactly what the Bible declares the 
great time of trouble will be. 

SOME FORCEFUL SYMBOLS 

The thought we wish particularly to call attention to 
is that these "winds of heaven" are symbolical winds— 
not literal winds; and that the "earth" that is not to be 
hurt is the symbolical earth— not the literal earth; and 
that the "sea" that is not to be hurt is the symbolical 
sea— not the literal sea. We have previously shown, in 
our STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, that these symbols are 
found throughout the Old and New Testaments; the 
earth represents the social order, government, restraint, 
etc.; and the sea represents the restless mass of mankind, 
which more or less lash and dash against the earth, 
the governmental power. "The winds of heaven," in this 
case, we understand to be "the powers of the air." 

The Bible says that Satan is the Prince of the Power 
of the Air, that he is the Prince of Demons. (Eph. 2:2; 
Matt. 9:34.) Therefore we understand that in this symbolical 
sense "the powers of the air" are the demons; 
that these powers of the air that are being held until 
the saints of God shall have been sealed in their foreheads, 
are these fallen angels. As soon as the power that 
is now controlling them shall be removed, we shall have 
a reign of evil all over the earth. The evil spirits will 
do all the evil that is in their power, and this will constitute 
the trial of all the fallen angels— the lifting of 
the restraints to see whether they will go contrary to 
the Divine will. All who thus manifest their alliance 
with evil in any way will become subjects of the Second 
Death; while others who show their loyalty to God will 
mark themselves as worthy, presumably, of everlasting 
life. 

It may be something in connection with the saints 
that will constitute the test of these angels. However, 
we need not wait many years until we shall know. 



R4882 : page 359 

THE WORD AND THE WAY 

"And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, 'This is 



the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and 
when ye turn to the left.'"— Isaiah 30:21. 

IN OUR DAY when the evil spirits seem to 

be trying very hard to get into close communication 

with humanity, we learn of 

what is called the "clairaudient power." 

Suggestions are made to the person having 

this power that he has a great favor from 

God in being able to hear what others cannot 

hear. Usually he becomes puffed up, 

thinking that he is in special favor with 

God and the angels. Then the fallen angels 

are very liable to take advantage of his wrong thought 

and to seek to obsess him. We have tried to guard people 

from this very condition of things; and from time to time 

we hear of those who are helped. Only a few days ago 

we had a letter from a lady who had thought that a godly 

influence was being exercised upon her, whereas later she 

found that it was a malevolent influence to bring her into 

slavery of mind. But the voice referred to in our text 

we understand to be the voice of God. The Scriptures, 

written in the past for our admonition, constitute this 

voice. This voice is behind us in the sense that the history 

of the centuries is behind us. So we are to hearken to the 

voice that comes through the Apostles and Prophets; 

and as we hearken, we recognize that it is the voice of 

the Lord, pointing the way in which we should go. 

But as we hearken to the past we hear also the voices 
of false prophets; as, for instance, the voice of Satan, 
the great Adversary of the past. The voice of God said, 
"Ye shall surely die." The Adversary's voice said, "Ye 
shall not surely die." At one time all of us were dead. 
Some of us, however, were blessed as we obtained the true 
information and followed in the way God directed. Many 
of the so-called "Fathers" of the past, we find, do not give 
the same voice that Jesus and the Apostles and Prophets 
gave. We are to guard against all such voices and to 
listen for the Shepherd's voice; to look for the righteous 
arrangements made for us. We are not to investigate 
anything which would not seem to be the voice of God, 
but which tends to deceive, to alienate the sheep from the 
Shepherd. 

R4882 : page 360 

The child of the Lord has learned where to seek 
counsel; and the counsel of wisdom is always ready to 
come to his aid. The Prophet describes it as a word, a 
voice "behind thee." It is not a voice before thee, of 
some new theology— of Evolution or Spiritism or 
Christian Science or other human philosophy— but it is 
the old theology, with its blessed doctrine of hope through 
Christ our Redeemer and Lord, our Teacher, our Example 
and our Leader. It is the voice of the Lord through His 
inspired Apostles and Prophets, from two thousand to 



four thousand years ago. It is to this Word of Divine 
inspiration, then, that the Prophet would direct the attention 
of all those desiring wise counsel; and in that 
Word we hear the voice of God, saying, "This is the Way, 
walk ye in it." 

BIBLE TO BE OPENED UP TO THE WORLD SHORTLY 

While these words of the Prophet were addressed 
directly to fleshly Israel, their application to spiritual 
Israel is none the less forcible. As applied to fleshly 
Israel, the Prophet foretells the return of Divine favor 
to them when the long season of their chastisement and 
of their blindness shall be at an end. Then, under the 
Mediatorial Reign of Christ, the blind eyes shall be 
opened, the deaf ears shall be unstopped and the voice 
of the whole inspired Word, then made clear to their 
understanding, will direct them in the right ways of the 
Lord; for the books (the Law and the Prophets and the 
New Testament Scriptures) shall be opened, and they 
shall be judged according to their teaching.— Rev. 20:12. 

The way then indicated to fleshly Israel and to all the 
world will be a grand highway of holiness; "and the 
ransomed of the Lord" shall go up thereon "with songs 
and everlasting joy upon their heads." (Isa. 35:10.) And 
the end of that way will be life and peace, salvation to 
the uttermost from sin and death, and complete restoration 
to human perfection. 

While the way of life will be made very clear to 
Israel and to the world, in the Age to come, it is made 
none the less clear now to the children of God who walk 
by faith and not by sight. It is shown to be, first, a way 
of faith; and those who now walk by faith are the true 
Seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:16,29), to whom pertain the 
Covenant and the exceeding great and precious promises, 
in their largest fulfilment. Second, It is a way of entire 
consecration to God, even unto death, which implies the 
burial of one's own will into the will of God— the presenting 
of self a living sacrifice. 

LET US WALK AFTER THE SPIRIT 

In harmony with these two principles— faith and consecration- 
we are taught to walk in newness of life, not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit; not as other Gentiles 
walk, in the vanity of their minds, but circumspectly; "not 
as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time"; not by sight, 
but by faith.-Rom. 6:4; 8:1; Eph. 4:17,18; 5:15,16; 
2 Cor. 5:7. 

By faith and consecration we have come into a new 
life as spiritual sons of God; and yet we have this treasure 
in earthen vessels and the new life is only in its embryo 
condition. Hence the necessity of walking after the 
spiritual instincts of the New Creature and keeping down 
the stronger impulses of the old creature. This is what 
it is to walk in newness of life, after the Spirit and not 



after the flesh. To "walk after the flesh" is to pursue its 
hopes, aims and ambitions; and since the flesh and the 
spirit are at war one with the other, it is impossible to 
maintain the life of both. Therefore, it is written, "If ye 
[spirit-begotten ones] live after the flesh, ye shall die; 
but if ye, through the Spirit, do mortify [put to death] 
the deeds of the body, ye shall live."— Rom. 8:13. 

While the Word of the Lord speaks thus on general 
principles as to the way in which we should walk, we are 
also bidden to come with all the minor affairs of life to 
inquire of these Divine Oracles. If we know not whether 
to turn to the right hand or to the left, we come and find 
the promise, "Commit thy way unto the Lord"; "He will 
direct thy steps." Or, if heavy laden, we find the promise, 
"Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest." Thus the voice behind brings 
comfort, peace and rest in the midst of all life's cares and 
trials, if we walk in obedience to all its principles and 
precepts. "And as many as walk according to this rule, 
peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God!" 
-Psa. 37:5; Prov. 3:6; Matt. 11:28; Gal. 6:16. 



R4881 : page 360 

LOYALTY THE GREAT TEST 

AT THE CLOSE of the Millennium, when men 

shall have been made perfect, the world of 

mankind will be subjected to a final test, 

not as to their perfection of human nature, 

but as to their loyalty to God. The test 

upon Mother Eve was of this character. 

She was not deceived in the sense of not 

knowing the meaning of loyalty to God or 

what constituted disobedience. God had 

forewarned her. She knew what was right. 

But she was deceived so far as the consequences were 

concerned. So with Satan. He was deceived as to the 

outcome of his course, in thinking he would be able to 

carry out his plans despite the Lord. 

So, we believe, it will be at the end of the Millennial 
Age. Some of mankind will be deceived as to the result 
of the course they will take. All who are entirely loyal 
to the Divine Law will perceive the error of the wicked. 
During the Millennial Age Christ, as the Mediator, will 
stand between mankind and the full requirements of 
Justice; and mankind will be, as it were, in a household of 

R4882 : page 360 

protection. When all evil influences are restrained mankind 
will have a very favorable opportunity for coming 
to a full knowledge of the Divine requirements. After 
they shall have enjoyed the blessings of Restitution to 



the full, then it will be appropriate that a test shall 
come to see whether their adherence to righteousness is 
merely a matter of policy or whether they have reached 
such a condition of heart-loyalty to God and righteousness 
as not to be moved from righteousness by any influence. 
At the end of the Millennial Age, then, after they shall 
have been turned over to the Father, He will thus test 
mankind to see whether or not they have learned full 
obedience. Evil influences will be let loose for a 
season. If they have not learned thoroughly the lesson 
of obedience they will be unworthy of everlasting life 
and will demonstrate that theirs has been merely a policy-service. 
It will be because they have not come into 
fulness of heart-harmony with God that they will be peculiarly 
susceptible, in this trial respecting their loyalty. 

ALL MUST BE TESTED AS TO LOYALTY TO GOD 

Satan was tested as to his loyalty to God. Adam and 
Eve were tested as to their loyalty to God. In the time 
of Noah the angels were similarly tested— not as to 
whether they preferred right to wrong, but as to their 
entire loyalty. Jesus Himself was tested as to His 
loyalty to the Father. So mankind, at the end of the 

R4882: page 361 

Millennial Age, will be tested as respects their heart-harmony 
with God. 

As to the nature of their test we are not specifically 
informed. Possibly the temptation that will 
come to mankind at that time will be the desire to take 
possession of the government of earth before it is 
fully turned over to them. If this be true, since they 
will know that it is God's intention to turn the earth 
over to mankind when the end of the thousand years 
shall come, they will be anticipating the immediate 
transfer of everything from the Ancient Worthies, who 
shall have been ruling as "princes in all the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) 
When the time shall be fully come, they will be 
disappointed. "And they went up on the breadth of the 
earth and compassed the camp of the saints about, and 
the beloved city."— Rev. 20:9. 

This shows the condition of many of the world at that 
time. Many of them will become restless. They will 
say, "These Ancient Worthies are holding back the 
Government from us. We do not need to have anything 
to stand between us and the government of the world." 
This attitude will be disloyalty to God. Knowing that all 
things are of Divine arrangement, they should say, "The 
thousand years, seemingly, are over. We thought this 
Government would be turned over to us. But we will 
leave matters entirely in God's hands. If He sees best to 
give us the Government, well and good. But if He 
sees best to hold it back after the time is up, we shall be 
satisfied." Such would be the attitude of loyalty. 



So today. Our attitude should be to recognize that 
there is but one God and one Lord Jesus Christ; and that 
we will obey them. In due time we shall see God's Wisdom, 
Justice, Love and Power fully demonstrated; that 
they are fully harmonious in all of the affairs that God has 
permitted. Those who can see this by faith, are now 
demonstrating their loyalty of heart to God. 



R4881 : page 361 

SET AS A WATCHMAN 

--EZEKIEL 3. --OCTOBER 1.- 

"Hear the Word at My mouth and give 
them warning from Me."— Ezek. 3:17. 

EZEKIEL RANKS amongst the great 

Prophets. Most realistic were his visions 

and powerfully described. A portion of 

his prophecy was written before the final 

serious troubles upon the kingdom of 

Judah, which resulted in the overthrow of 

Zedekiah's kingdom. The remainder of 

the book was written after the complete 

overthrow of the kingdom. The entire 

prophecy was given in Babylon, Ezekiel 

himself residing there and ministering as a Prophet 

chiefly to the captives, arousing their hearts to an appreciation 

of their situation and to a hope of return in God's 

appointed time to their own land. 

It would be a mistake, however, to suppose that 
Ezekiel's mission was entirely or even chiefly to the Jews 
of his time. Rather we are to understand, through St. 
Peter's statement, that he, with other Prophets of old, 
spoke and wrote things which they themselves and the 
people who heard them did not understand— things which 
God did not wish to have understood until after the giving 
of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost— things which would 
be "meat in due season" for the spiritual Israelites 
throughout this age. 

For instance, when Ezekiel tells the people, "The 
soul that sinneth, it shall die," he was delivering a truth 
applicable to the Gospel Church during this Age, and a 
truth which will be applicable to the whole world during 
the Messianic reign, but which was not truth nor applicable 
to the Jews at the time of the utterance. Why? 
Because the whole world at that time was lying in the 
Wicked One; as St. Paul explains, they were all under 
sentence of death through Adam's disobedience. They 
could not be put on trial for life, individually, until first 
they should be redeemed from the Adamic condemnation. 

The blood of bulls and goats could never take away 
sin from the Jews, nor redeem them; the redemption 



could come only in the Divinely appointed way— through 
the death of the Savior; and the Savior had not yet come, 
had not yet brought life and immortality to light through 
the Gospel. And as for Israel's Law Covenant, it was 
merely typical of the New Covenant of the future, and 
we have the Apostle's word for it that the Law could not 
make anything perfect. 

No amount of turning from sin could give anybody 
eternal life. None could so turn from sin as to be perfect, 
hence the necessity for the Savior. When Ezekiel 
refers to the proverb that "the fathers have eaten a sour 
grape and the children's teeth are set on edge," he was 
stating the general fact that all human sin and weakness 
descend by heredity from parent to child, and that the 
matter of recovery is therefore a hopeless one except as 
a Redeemer, separate and distinct from the sinner race, 
would be provided. And this provision for release from 
the weakness inherited from Father Adam has been provided 
by Jehovah through His Only begotten Son, the 
Lord Jesus Christ, the world's Redeemer. 

"TIMES OF RESTITUTION" 

In the 16th chapter of Ezekiel's prophecy the declaration 
is clearly set forth that in the Divine Plan a great 
restitution is sure to come which will affect not only 
Israel and the living nations of the time, but also the 
dead of all nations. From the 40th verse onward the 
Prophet describes the certainty of God's promise to recover 
Israel, to bring them back into His favor, and that 
on a better basis than ever in the past. At the same time 
the Lord declares, through the Prophet, that the Samaritans 
will be restored and blessed, and that the Sodomites 
will be restored and blessed. The latter nation had been 
entirely destroyed by fire from heaven, as the Redeemer 
declared. It follows that their restoration must be from 
the tomb, from death, hades, sheol. 

The prophecy goes on to declare that the Lord will 
not do this because of any worthiness of the Israelites 
or others, but for His own Name's sake— of His own 
good pleasure. In other words, this is the purpose which 
God purposed in Himself from before the foundation of 
the world. This is the purpose which He declared to 
Enoch, saying that in due time Messiah would "come 
with myriads of holy ones" to establish justice and 
righteousness in the earth, to bless the people. This is 
the same message which God declared to Abraham saying, 
"In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." This was the hope which Israel had so long 
entertained and which the Lord declares will not go 
unfulfilled. 

This description is found in verses 40 to 60, the conclusion 
being that when Israel thus experiences the goodness 
of God in their restitution they will be ashamed and 
never open their mouths again by way of boasting or 
complaint. This will be after God's favor shall have been 



R4881 : page 362 

restored to them, and He shall be pacified toward them 
in respect to all of their idolatrous doings of the past. 
The pacification of Divine Justice is found in the redemption 
accomplished by our Lord and Savior. 

Ezekiel is one of the Prophets referred to by St. 
Peter as prophesying respecting coming "Times of Restitution" 
—blessings of Messiah's Kingdom to be inaugurated 
at the close of this Age, as soon as the Church 
shall have been elected to be the Royal Priesthood and 
shall be glorified with the great Prophet, Priest, King, 
Mediator, their Head and Lord. St. Peter declares that 
these coming "times of restitution" are mentioned by all 
the Holy Prophets since the world began, and Ezekiel's 
reference to them marks him as one of the Holy Prophets. 
-Acts 3:19-23. 

Viewing our study from this standpoint we perceive 
that Ezekiel stood for, or represented the Son of Man, 
the great Teacher, the Redeemer; he also represented the 
members of the Bride of Christ whom the glorious Head 
may, from time to time, use as His mouthpieces. 

Ezekiel was carried miraculously forward to some of 
the captives residing by the river Chebar. After a time 
he received a message for them, declaring that God had 
appointed him a watchman to give warning from Him. 
This warning has been going forth ever since the Gospel 
was preached. It tells the wicked, that is, the wilfully 
wicked, the intentionally wicked, that the end of their 
way is death, but that by turning from wickedness they 
may live. This message of this Gospel Age is not to the 
whole world, but, as the Scriptures declare, "To him that 
hath an ear to hear." St. Paul uses this message saying, 
"The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is 
eternal life, through Jesus Christ Our Lord."— Rom. 6:23. 

NOT TORMENT BUT DEATH 

It is worthy of note here that neither the Prophet nor 
those whom he typified were ever commissioned to say 
to mankind that the sinner would be eternally roasted, 
nor suffer eternally in any condition. The extreme penalty 
for sin presented to us in God's Word is, "The soul 
that sinneth, it shall die." In other words, God declares 
that He will not give eternal life to the wicked, but only 
to those who will turn from sin to righteousness. Thus 
we read, "Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die?" And 
again, "He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath 
not the Son shall not see life (everlasting), but the 
wrath of God abideth on him"— the wrath or sentence 
of death everlasting. 

In any event, the Prophet and those whom he represents, 
including all of God's consecrated people of today, 
are duty-bound to make clear this feature of the Divine 
Program, namely, that all wilful sin will bring death; 



that all wilful sinners, as St. Paul declares, shall be punished 
with everlasting destruction— not with everlasting 
torment. (2 Thes. 1:9.) Every member of the Body of 
Christ is a watchman on the walls of Zion, even though 
today Zion be in Babylon, as were those typically 
addressed by the Prophet. 



R4882 : page 362 

"RIVER OF WATER OF LIFE" 

-EZEK. 47:l-12-OCTOBER 8- 

"Whosoever will, let him take of the 
Water of Life freely."— Rev. 22:17. 

IN THIS STUDY also we find that the Lord 
through Ezekiel gives us a picture of the 
Messianic Age, very similar to the one 
given us in the book of Revelation, seven 
hundred years after. 

Ezekiel's picture shows Jerusalem and 
the Temple of God as the starting point 
for the River of the Water of Life; so in 
the Revelation account. Ezekiel shows the 
river deepening and broadening from a rivulet 
to a mighty river. He pictures it as flowing down to 
the Dead Sea, and carrying life whithersoever it goes. 

He pictures the Dead Sea as being revived, recovered 
from its deadness, and full of fish. No such river has 
ever yet sprung forth from Jerusalem, nor can we imagine 
how the river would ever have its start in the mountain 
top and reach such proportions in the short distance. 

This description, picturing a great spiritual truth, is 
in full accord with the picture in Revelation. It represents 
beautifully, forcefully, the blessings of refreshment 
and restitution which will issue forth from the 
New Jerusalem, the Kingdom of Messiah, when it shall 
be established amongst men. Gradually the mighty influences 
of the reign of Messiah will extend blessings to 
all mankind, even to the submerged class, steeped in ignorance 
and superstition and degradation, fitly represented 
by the Dead Sea. 

Revelation pictures this river as flowing from under 
the Throne, the New Jerusalem, clear as crystal, and 
having trees of life on either side of its banks, good for 
food. Ezekiel has the same picture in mind; he tells of 
the same trees, whose leaves shall not fade and whose 
fruit shall not fall, but which will bring forth good fruit 
every month, because the water which refreshes them 
comes from the Sanctuary. "The fruit thereof shall be 
for meat, and the leaves thereof for healing." Similarly, 
in Revelation, we are told, "The leaves will be for the 
healing of the people; and the fruit for the sustenance 



of everlasting life; and the Water itself will be for their 
refreshment." Then, we are told, "the Spirit and the 
Bride" shall give the invitation— a world-wide invitation; 
"Whosoever will" then may come, and he who hears the 
invitation may say to others, "Come, and drink of the 
Water of Life, freely" ! 

NO "RIVER OF WATER OF LIFE" NOW 

We are certain in our application of these symbolic 
pictures, that they belong to the future and not to the 
present time. Where is the Water of Life of Revelation 

R4883 : page 362 

now? Where have we anything corresponding to the 
life-sustaining trees and their healing leaves? On the 
contrary, we have the Lord's Word for it that "No man 
can come unto Me except the Father which sent Me draw 
him." (John 6:44.) In other words, there is a measure 
of selection or election as respects the class invited to 
constitute "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife." "No man 
taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called." 

But with the end of this Age will come the end of the 
elective process; then the Divine Message will be Free 
Grace, an offering and opportunity to every creature of 
Adam's race. All blind eyes will be opened that all may 
see; all deaf ears will be unstopped that all may hear; 
and the knowledge of the glory of God shall fill the 
whole earth; none will need to say to his neighbor, 
"Know the Lord, for all shall know Him from the least 
unto the greatest of them."— Jer. 31:34. 

NO BRIDE TO SAY "COME" 

The Revelation picture tells us that the Bride of 
Christ, as well as the Holy Spirit, will give the invitation 
to every creature to come and partake of the Water 
of Life, freely. But how could the Bride give this invitation 

R4883 : page 363 

before she exists? That there is no Bride at the 
present time is manifest. Now is the time for calling the 
Bride class. Now is the time for those invited to make 
their "calling and their election sure;" but there will be 
no Bride until the Incoming Age. The name "Bride" 
implies a marriage; the Church is already espoused to 
Christ, but the marriage is promised to take place at His 
second coming. Then there will be a Bride, and shortly 
after, the Bride, in association with her Lord, will be in 
Kingdom power, in the New Jerusalem— the heavenly. 
From that City, that new Seat of earth's Empire, will go 
forth God's Message, gradually deepening and broadening 
until every member of the race shall have had an 
opportunity to share in its blessing of life everlasting. 



In thinking of these glorious favors coming to mankind, 
let us remember that they will all be earthly— a 
restitution to that which was lost. Earthly splendor and 
human perfection are God's provision for the willing and 
obedient of mankind in general. The invitation to become 
members of the Bride of Christ is a limited one, 
having a limited time; and if our understanding of the 
Scriptures is correct, the end of this special opportunity 
is nigh— the time for the change to the condition of 
glory is at the door— the time for the blessing of all the 
families of the earth is at hand. 

In view of these coming blessings foretold by the 
Prophet and by the Lord Himself, can we not join with 
the poet in singing:— 

"Rejoice! rejoice! the promised time is coming! 
Rejoice! rejoice! the wilderness shall bloom! 
And Zion's children soon shall sing, 
'The deserts all are blossoming!' 
Rejoice! rejoice! the promised time is coming! 
Rejoice! rejoice! the wilderness shall bloom! 
The Gospel banner, wide unfurled, 
Shall wave in triumph o'er the world, 
And every creature, bond or free, 
Shall hail the glorious Jubilee!" 



R4883 : page 363 

ENDLESS TORMENTS UNSCRIPTURAL 

-BY REV. CHARLES KINGSLEY-MAY 9, 1857.- 

ABOUT endless torment.— (Keep that expression 
distinct from eternal, which has been mixed 
up with it, the former being what the popular 
creed really holds.) You may say: 

"(1) Historically, that, 

"(a) The doctrine is found nowhere in 
the Old Testament, nor any hint of it. The 
expression, in the end of Isaiah, about the fire 
unquenched and the worm not dying, is plainly 
of the corpses of men upon the physical earth, 
in the valley of Hinnom, or Gehenna, where 
the offal of Jerusalem was burned perpetually. Enlarge on 
this, as it is the passage which our Lord quotes, and by it the 
meaning of His words must be primarily determined. 

"(b) The doctrine of endless torment was, as a historical 
fact, brought back from Babylon by the Rabbis. It was a 
very ancient, primary doctrine of the Magi, an appendage of 
their fire-kingdom of Ahriman, and may be found in the old 
Zends, long prior to Christianity. 

"(c) St. Paul accepts nothing of it as far as we can tell, 
never making the least allusion to the doctrine. 

"(d) The Apocalypse simply repeats the imagery of Isaiah 



R4884 : page 363 

and of our Lord; but asserts, distinctly, the non-endlessness of 
torture, declaring that in the consummation, not only death, 
but hell shall be cast into the Lake of Fire. 

"(e) The Christian Church has never really held it exclusively 
till now. It remained quite an open question till 
the age of Justinian, 530, and significantly enough, as soon as 
(200 years before that) endless torment for the heathen became 
a popular theory, purgatory sprang up synchronously by 
the side of it, as a relief for the conscience and reason of the 
Church. 

"(f) Since the Reformation it has been an open question 
in the English Church, and the philosophical Platonists, of the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, always considered it as 
such. 

"(g) The Church of England, by the deliberate expunging 
of the 42nd Article, which affirmed endless punishment, 
has declared it, authoritatively, to be open. 

"(h) It is so, in fact. Neither Mr. Maurice, I, nor any 
others who have denied it, can be dispossessed or proceeded 
against legally, in any way whatsoever. 

"Exegetically, you may say, I think, that the meanings of 
the word aion and aionios have little or nothing to do with it, 
even if aion be derived from aei, always, which I greatly 
doubt. The word is never used in Scripture anywhere else 
in the sense of endlessness (vulgarly called eternity). It always 
meant, both in Scripture and out, a period of time. Else how 
could it have a plural— how could you talk of the aeons and of 
aeons of aeons, as the Scriptures do? Nay, more, how talk 
of houtos ho aion (which the translators, with laudable inconsistency, 
have translated 'this world'), i.e., this present 
state of things, 'Age,' 'Dispensation,' or Epoch. Aionios, 
therefore, means, and must mean, belonging to an Epoch, or 
the Epoch; and aionios kolasis is the punishment allotted to 
that Epoch. Always bear in mind— what Maurice insists on, 
and what is so plain to honest readers— that our Lord and the 
Apostles always speak of its being in the end of the Age 
or Aion, not as ushering in a new one; that the Lord would 
come to judge and punish the old world, and to create a new 
one out of its ruins; or rather, as is better expressed, to burn 
up the chaff and keep the wheat; i.e., all the elements of 
food, as seed for the new world. 

"I think you may say that our Lord took the popular doctrine 
because He found it, and tried to correct and purify it, 
and put it on a really moral ground. You may quote the 
parable of Dives and Lazarus. 

"He there represents Dives as still Abraham's child, under 
no despair, nor cut off from Abraham's sympathy, but under a 
direct, moral training, of which you see the fruit. He is gradually 
weaned from the selfish desire of indulgence for himself, 
to love and care for his brethren, a divine step forward 
in his life, which of itself proves him not to be lost. The 
impossibility of Lazarus' getting to him, or vice versa, expresses 
plainly the great truth, that each being where he 
ought to be at that time, interchange of place (i.e., of spiritual 



state) is impossible. But it says nothing against Dives 

rising out of his torment, when he has learned the lesson of 

it, and of his going where he ought to go. The common interpretation 

is merely arguing in a circle, assuming that there 

are but two states of the dead, 'Heaven' and 'Hell,' and then 

trying at once to interpret the parable by the assumption, and 

to prove the assumption from the parable. Next, you may 

say that the English word damnation, like the Greek katakrisis, 

is perhaps krisis simple, it simply means condemnation, 

and is (thank God) retained in that sense in various of our 

formularies, where I always read the words, e.g., 'eateth to 

himself damnation,' with sincere pleasure, as protests in favor 

of the true and rational meaning of the word, against the 

modern and narrower meaning. 

"You may say that Fire and Worms, whether physical or 
spiritual, must, in all logical fairness, be supposed to do what 
fire and worms do do, viz., destroy decayed and dead matter 
and set free its elements to enter into new organisms; that, 
as they are beneficent and purifying agents in this life, they 
must be supposed such in the future life; and that the conception 
of fire as an engine of torture is an unnatural use 
of that agent, and not to be attributed to God without blasphemy, 
unless you suppose that the suffering (like all which 
He inflicts) is intended to teach man something which he 
cannot learn elsewhere. 

"You may say that the catch, 'All sin deserves infinite punishment, 

R4884 : page 364 

because it is against an Infinite Being,' is a worthless 
amphiboly, using the word infinite in two utterly different 
senses, and being a mere play on sound; that it is directly 
contradicted by Scripture, especially by our Lord's own words, 
which declare that every man (not merely the wicked) shall 
receive the due reward of his deeds— that he who, etc., shall 
be beaten with few stripes, and so forth; that the words 'He 
shall not go out till he has paid the uttermost farthing,' evidently 
imply (unless spoken in cruel mockery) that he may 
go out then; and that it is scandalous for Protestants to derive 
from thence the opposite doctrine, while they call the 
Papists rogues for trying to prove the perpetual virginity of 
the Blessed Virgin Mary from exactly the same use of heos. 

"Finally, you may call on them to rejoice that there is a 
fire of God, the Father, whose name is Love, burning forever, 
unquenchably, to destroy out of every man's heart and out 
of the hearts of all nations, and off the physical and moral 
world, all which offends and makes a lie; that into that fire 
the Lord will surely cast all shams, lies, hypocrisies, tyrannies, 
pedantries, false doctrines, yea, and the men who love them 
too well to give them up, that the smoke of their basanismos 
(i.e., the torture which makes men confess the truth, for 
that is the real meaning of it; basanismos means the touch-stone 
by which gold was tested) may ascend perpetually, for 
a warning and a beacon to all nations, as the smoke of the 
torment of French aristocracies, the Bourbon dynasties, is 
ascending up to Heaven and has been ever since 1793. Oh, 



Cooper— Is it not good news that that fire is unquenchable; 
that that worm will not die? They tried, we tried, in our 
ignorance, to quench that fire, when we put Louis XVIII. on 
the throne. But the fire burned up him and our chaffy works. 
The parti pretre tried to kill the worm which was gnawing 
at their hearts, making them dimly aware that they were 
wrong, and liars, and that God and His Universe were 
against them, and that they and their system were rotting 
and must die. And they put poor Poerios and Madiais in 
prison, and showed all the signs of weak terror, suspicion, 
spite; but they cannot kill God's worm, Thomas Cooper. 

"You cannot look in the face of many a working, Continental 
priest without seeing that the worm is at his heart. 
You cannot watch their conduct without seeing that it is at the 
heart of their system. God grant that we here in England— 
we parsons (dissenting and church)— may take warning by 
them. The fire may be kindled for us. The worm may seize 
our hearts. To judge by the temper of the 'Record' and the 
'Morning Advertiser,' it has its fangs in some of our hearts 
already. God grant that in that day we may have courage to 
let the fire and the worm do their work— to say to Christ, 
These, too, are Thine, and out of Thine infinite love they 
have come. Thou requirest truth in the inward parts and I 
will thank Thee for any means, however bitter, which Thou 
usest to make me true. I want to be an honest man, and a 
right man! And, of joy, Thou wantest me to be so also. Oh 
joy, that though I long, cowardly, to quench Thy fire, I cannot 
do it. Purge me, therefore, O Lord, though it be with 
fire. Burn up the chaff of vanity and self-indulgence, of 
hasty prejudice, second-hand dogmas— husks which do not 
feed my soul, with which I cannot be content, of which I feel 
ashamed daily— and if there be any grains of wheat in me, 
any word or thought or power of action which may be of 
use as seed for my nation after me, gather it, O Lord, into 
Thy garner. 

"Yes, Thomas Cooper, because I believe in a God of Absolute 
and Unbounded Love, therefore I believe in a Loving 
Anger of His, which will and must devour and destroy all 
which is decayed, monstrous, abortive, in His Universe, till 
all enemies shall be put under His feet, to be pardoned surely, 
if they confess themselves in the wrong and open their eyes 
to the truth. And God shall be All in All. 

"Those last are wide words. It is he who limits them 
(not I who accept them in their fulness), who denies the 
verbal inspiration of Scripture." 



R4883 : page 364 

"PRAY ALWAYS" 

"Pray without ceasing."— 1 Thess. 5:17. 

A LITTLE QUOTATION from somebody's 

brain seems wonderfully fitting in the consideration 



of our text— "Prayer is the 

soul's sincere desire, uttered or unexpressed." 

It is a complete definition, for 

sometimes we pray with groanings that 

cannot be uttered. 

There is one form of prayer, one feature 
of prayer, which is very appropriate 
to us, namely, thanksgiving. Yet the 
Scriptures discriminate between prayer, praise and 
thanksgiving, and use these words in the same connection, 
as representing various features of worship, communion 
with God. In the sense of petition our definition 
also applies when we include thanksgiving in our prayers. 
Expressed or unexpressed, prayer is the soul's sincere desire. 
Prayer that would not be the soul's sincere desire 
would not be acceptable. We may not always know how 
to render our thanks to God, but it is comforting to 
remember that the Lord knows our thoughts and is willing 
to accept our feeble expressions. 

All those who have come to the Lord must first have 
recognized their need of coming and His readiness, 
willingness and ability to supply all necessary things. 
We need rest and peace and life everlasting. These we 
do not find in the world around us. There is no real 
peace outside of the Lord's provision: "My peace I give 
unto you; not as the world giveth give I unto you. Let 
not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." 
(John 14:27.) The things which the Lord has promised 
to His people are things which eye hath not seen nor ear 
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man. 

Whoever, therefore, has received the earnest of the 
Spirit has something to desire, something to look forward 
to, something to pray for. Therefore we pray, Thy 
Kingdom come, that the blessings which the Lord has 
promised shall be fulfilled, not only those for the world, 
but also those for the Church. 

SHOULD PRAY FOR FORGIVENESS EVEN AS WE FORGIVE 

As the Christian goes through the world he finds various 
things to distract his heart. But since he finds that 
the Lord has promised that peace he should look for 
that peace, should expect it. We should pray to God for 
the things that we think we ought to have. But we are 
to take His superior wisdom as expressed in His Word 
as our guide; and we are to ask according to His Word. 
If we have a measure of peace and of blessing, we should 
pray all the more for the fulness of joy. While we have 
been cleansed from original sin by the precious blood of 
Christ, we must remember that we have daily trespasses; 
and we should pray daily, "Forgive us our trespasses." 
This request the Lord answers on condition that we ask 
for forgiveness of our trespasses as we forgive those who 
trespass against us. So the Christian will find a great 
deal to pray for in all of life's affairs. 

The Christian, however, should not be so absorbed in 



meditation that he cannot do his work. But the spirit of 
prayer should be with him, so that in every affair of 
life, in every perplexity, he would be ever ready to turn 
his mind toward the Lord for His blessings and to look 
to the Lord regarding all daily interests; for we are the 
Lord's. This course would be a life of prayer without 
ceasing. We do not cease to ask for the coming of the 

R4883 : page 365 

Kingdom simply because we have asked for it once. We 
do not cease to pray for our daily food. We acknowledge 
that all good things come from Him. We recognize 
that "Every good gift and every perfect gift is from 
above and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with 
whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning" 
(James 1:17); and that He who gave His Son for us is 
ever ready to give to those who seek to serve Him. 
This attitude of heart is praying without ceasing. 
Sometimes the thought may only flash through the 
mind, but, nevertheless, it brings a blessing to us. All of 
God's dealings with the Elect class are for their development; 
and one feature of this development is to learn to 
know whence our blessings come and to appreciate the 
fact that God is the Giver, and that "no good thing will 
He withhold from those who walk uprightly." 



R4885 : page 365 

INDEPENDENT BIBLE STUDY 

A BROTHER WRITES for our opinion respecting 

the wisdom and propriety of the 

different classes having "independent Bible 

study." 

We cannot be sure just what force or 
significance the Brother gives to the word 
independent. Just so sure as each individual 
has a full right to study the Bible 
without hindrance from anybody, so has 
every class this right or liberty. But in 
using our liberties it behooves us to exercise as much 
"wisdom from above" as possible. For four centuries 
Protestantism has been contending the right of private 
judgment for interpretation of God's Word and has exercised 
this right, and we would be the last to dispute it. 
At the same time two things are worthy of remembrance: — 

(1) There has been very little independent Bible 
study all this time. 

(2) No very clear understanding of the Bible was 
reached during all these centuries. We account for 
this by supposing that the Lord's due time for 
opening His Word to our understanding has only 
now come. If now the Lord has blessed us with 



clearer views of His Word, it behooves us to remember 
that we did not get it because of the four hundred years 
of independent Bible study, but by His specially calling 
it to our attention in His own peculiar way in recent 
years. Wisdom no less than humility should teach us to 
be neither too boastful nor too reckless in our use of 
the word independent in connection with this question. 
While we have the same right to independence that our 
forefathers had it might do us no more good than it did 
them. Rather we should seek for dependent Bible study, 
rather than for independent Bible study. Our dependance 
should not be upon man, but upon the Lord; yet we 
should expect the Lord to use human instrumentality in 
the present, as in the past. 

The matter is for each individual Christian and each 
class of students to decide. The Lord has laid down no 
law on the subject. His children are to use the "wisdom 
which comes from above" in respect to these and all 
matters. 

The questioner may mean to distinguish between the 
use of Berean Studies or topics from the topical index of 
our new Bibles and the taking up of a chapter or an 
Epistle without any guide or help, except such as would 
be given by the leader of the class and its members. If 
so, much would depend on the personnel of the class and 
their development in the knowledge of the Truth. It is 
for the class to decide for itself every particular respecting 
its meetings. And should a class so decide they would 
have a perfect right to try different methods and to judge 
which proved the most helpful. 

In any event those possessed of the new Bible study 
helps could follow nearly any lesson in the New Testament 
by noting the references and studying them and, if 
desirable, bringing them into the class. Any class leader 
who would make objection to a reference being made to 
THE WATCH TOWER or to STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
in connection with the discussion of any topic should 
properly be viewed with suspicion as a teacher. Why 
should he be afraid of any comment, from any quarter? 
And, especially, why should he fear or avoid or desire 
others to avoid any reference to the writings which God 
has used in giving him and the others instruction in the 
Scriptures? 



R4884 : page 365 

FAITH, NOT SIGHT 

"We walk by faith, not by sight."— 2 Cor. 5:7. 

THIS PRINCIPLE holds true in respect to 
all of God's dealings with His people during 
the night of weeping preceding the 
glorious morning of joy, when they shall 



see as they are seen and know as they are 
known. Hence, to approach God's Word 
and have a right understanding of it, implies:— 

(1) A heart condition of teachableness. 

(2) A heart condition of faith in God, as the great 
Teacher who knows our limitations and who has promised 
to guide the willing and obedient into all Truth as it 
becomes "meat in due season." 

R4885 : page 365 

(3) An expectation of Divine guidance in the understanding 
of the Scriptures, even as God has promised, 

and, expecting this, they may seek for it in prayer. 

(4) An exercise of their reasoning faculties that, 
while expecting and seeking, and looking in the direction 
of their expectations, they may thereby approve or 
disapprove what is presented to them. 

(5) Great care as to how they neglect these favors 

of God. They should beware of headiness and highmindedness, 

lest, having enjoyed the light and the blessing, 

these should slip from them and leave them again 

in the outer darkness in which we see the whole world 

of mankind groping. 

To continue in the light and truth and blessing necessitates 
character-development, for the privilege of the 
light of knowledge is God's reward for purity of heart, 
of intention, of endeavor. So may we come into Christ 
and abide in Him and bring forth much fruit. 



HEROES OF ALL TIME BUILT THEREOF 

"It takes great love to stir a human heart 

To live beyond the others, and apart; 

A love that is not shallow— is not small; 

Is not for one or two, but for them all. 

Love that can wound love, for its highest need; 

Love that can leave love, though the heart may bleed; 

Love that can lose love, family and friend, 

Yet steadfastly live, loving to the end. 

A love that asks no answer, that can live, 

Moved by one burning, deathless force— to give! 

Love, strength and courage; courage, strength and love- 

The heroes of all time are built thereof." 



R4885 : page 366 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is with joy and thanksgiving that we report the first 
public meeting at this place. 



There were forty-one present. Brother Sturgeon's discourse 
on "Where Are the Dead?" was heard with excellent 
attention. One lady has since attended several meetings. 

During the army maneuvers last week the leader of our 
class gave shelter to many of the soldiers who were drenched 
with rain, and almost exhausted from a forced march. The 
family remained up all night, serving hot coffee and a lunch, 
the soldiers having been without food about twenty hours. 
The men slept on the floors while their clothing was dried 
by the fire. Their offer to pay was declined, as the family 
considered it a privilege as Christians to do these things. 

When they marched away to the town the brother went 
with them. The sight of a church drew forth from an officer 
a slighting remark. The brother said he was an ambassador 
for Christ and could also serve them in that way. The officer 
called the men to "attention," and on the street the brother 
gave them a talk on "Restitution," which was very well received 
by the men. AMY M. CLOTTREY.-Mass. 



TESTIMONY MEETINGS-VOLUNTEER WORK 

DEAREST BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Inclosed find report for the first half of June. Praise the 
Lord! The work goes forward with great force. To say 
marvelous results are being accomplished now would be to 
put it mildly. Oh, how thankful we are and should be, and 
how diligent we all should be during these closing moments 
that no stone be left unturned by us to forward our own part 
of this glorious work! Surely everyone of the Lord's dear 
ones has a part, if it is only to patiently endure the weakness 

R4886 : page 366 

of their bodies, and comfort and pray for those a little more 
able in body, but no more so in spirit. God bless these exhausted 
ones. It is good to have them, and to see how they 
can be truly happy, though unable to work as formerly. 

Your suggestion re "Manna Texts" being used as subjects 
for prayer, praise and testimony meetings is a timely one and 
a good one. It appears to me it will meet a favorable reception 
everywhere. My hope is it may become universal. 

Another important matter which appears to deserve notice 
is that in some places the brethren appear not to appreciate 
the privilege of service— in "volunteering" in the distribution 
of the papers— not half as they should. Sometimes they hire 
boys to do it for them. The thought is that it would never 
do for them to risk their respectability by appearing on the 
street thus. It would endanger their popularity and thus 
injure their practise or trade, etc. It is, of course, all right 
to hand out medicine or goods to the public, "but not the 
Truth," for the world approves the one and frowns upon the 
other. The boy may burn up the papers, and no one attend 
the meeting, and the Lord's cause languish and die, but what 
matters that so long as they retain their popularity and 



practise ! 

Their sluggish consciences are in this way given another 
opiate and put to sleep. Evidently the thought is that 
the Lord is very thankful to have them on account of 
their attractiveness and agility in dodging the issue. Besides, 
in some places the papers sent on request and at considerable 
cost are not distributed at all. Oh, that we might see what 
a privilege it is to do the work, to "suffer with Him!" "Be 
not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his 
prisoner, but be a partaker of the affliction of the Gospel."— 
2 Tim. 1:8. 

Thank God much is being done, but the work is not yet 
at its best. Let everyone put his shoulder to the wheel, throw 
his popularity and pleasing personality into the wagon and, 
with a mighty shout, the work will go right on to completion 
and to Glory. 

Much love to yourself and to all the dear ones at Bethel 
and everywhere. 

I am faithfully your servant in the Master's service, 
O. L. SULLIVAN. 

RE MANNA TEXTS FOR TOPICS 

We learn that our suggestion has been quite misunderstood. 
It was that the Thursday MANNA texts be used as the topic 
for the Wednesday night Testimony Meetings in all the 
Classes. 

It appears that some of the dear brethren do not grasp the 
meaning of the word testimony. Some get the thought that 
a little talk or sermon on the suggested text is a testimony. 
Not at all, dear friends. Our thought re a Testimony Meeting 
is that during the week personal experiences, associated 
with the text of the week, be watched for, and the next 
Wednesday be told to the Class. Perhaps our thought would 
be better grasped if these were called "Experience Meetings." 

Such experiences are fresh and interesting— they seem 
never to grow stale. Besides, they are educational. We get 
more and better experiences out of life when we learn how 
to look for and note them. Try this plan! 

BROTHER RUSSELL. 



page 366 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

May I take a few moments of your valuable time to tell 
you how gracious our dear Lord has been to me, and how 
I thank him for the work you are doing? 

Last October one of your sermons, printed in the Southbridge 
Herald and entitled, "Where Are the Dead?" caught 
my eye. I read it with amazement. Never had I supposed 
the dead were asleep. I took my Bible concordance and 
looked up every reference under the word "dead." I found 
you were right. 

I took my Bible and your published sermon over to 



a friend, and asked her if she had ever thought of the subject. 
She said she had always believed the dead were asleep, 
and so did her mother. Her mother was a Seventh Day 
Adventist. She asked me if I would not like to read some 
books her mother had. I said, "Yes, I am interested in 
religious reading." 

Among the books was the second volume of the STUDIES 
in the SCRIPTURES. The title attracted my attention, as I had 
always been much interested in the time prophecies and 
wished I might understand them. Well, that book was a 
feast to me and made me long for the first volume. I determined 
to write the Society and see if the book was still 
published. The book I had was an old edition printed in 
Allegheny. 

Just then one of the dear Colporteurs canvassed our little 
town and found me. Was I not answered before I had 
asked? I learned then for the first time that you were the 
author of the books as well as of the sermons. I had until 
then thought the book an Adventist one, and that it was 
only a coincident that the sermons seemed to be along the 
same line of thought. I purchased the first three volumes 
and enjoyed a great spiritual feast. I saw and understood the 
truth clearly, but thought myself too unworthy to enter the 
race. 

In response to my request, my husband gave me the last 
three volumes as a Christmas present. I also have now THE 
TOWER, Diaglott and Bible Helps. 

I consecrated last February and symbolized it in April. I 
cannot tell you the joy I have had since I found "Him 
whom my soul loveth." I had always been a staunch church 
member, but felt I was not living up to my profession. 
Through a deep humiliation, I was constrained to a greater 
hunger and thirst for righteousness. Oh, how I have been 
filled! 

I withdrew from the church here and united with the 
Worcester class. The step cost me all but two of my friends 
here, but for everyone I lost I have gained a hundred in the 
Truth. Take the world, but give me Jesus. I know I am 
growing in the knowledge of the blessed Truth and trust, 
through the grace and merit of our dear Lord, to render an 
acceptable sacrifice. 

Now, dear Brother, I wish you to take my name as one 
who has taken and loves the Vow. It has been such a help 
to me in every way, especially in governing my thoughts and 
words and actions. 

God bless you richly for the work you are doing and grant 
the sermons may reach other hungry souls. 

Your sister by His grace, MRS. MABEL F. BROWN. 



R4886 : page 366 

AN APPROVED METHOD FOR BEREAN STUDIES 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-- 



I feel constrained to write you a few words in respect 
to the Berean Studies. The classes in some places are reluctant 
to yield even one Pilgrim address for Berean Study, 
saying, We have the Studies all the time, but the Pilgrim 
seldom. 

I know just how they feel and yet those Studies 
are the best lessons the Church has ever had. Since they 
are so generally used the friends specially need the sample 
illustration of how they can be made both interesting and 
profitable. A word from you in THE WATCH TOWER, I am 
sure, will be appreciated and would be a great assistance to 
many. 

When the Berean questions first appeared in THE WATCH 

R4886 : page 367 

TOWER they were different from what we had been forming, 
because I had always formed my own questions. Several 
times I was tempted to ignore the printed questions; yet I 
did not wish to do so, because, coming from you, I felt these 
to be additional "steps of the righteous ordered of the Lord." 
Now, however, having become accustomed to the Berean 
questions, I find them of great value and appreciate them 
highly. I will outline the rules I follow in Berean Studies. 
I will be pleased to have your criticism of them. 

I do not ask the class to formulate the questions, but read 
the questions from THE WATCH TOWER or pamphlet. I do 
not address the questions to one or two of the leading ones 
of the class, but give them, sometimes to one and sometimes 
to another, reaching as nearly as possible all of the class. If 
someone attempts to read the answer from a book I object, 
reminding the one that in school as children we were not 
allowed to look on the book, but were supposed to have 
learned the lesson and to know the answer before coming to 
the class. The reading of the answer from the book I may 
call for last; or, perhaps, I read it myself, but that is after 
the discussion and is generally understood to be the conclusion 
of the lesson. 

While I generally address the printed questions to individuals, 
sometimes I make it general and invite voluntary 
replies and encourage them. In some instances I have 
thought it advisable, for the sake of some beginner, to formulate 
questions additional to those printed in order to assist 
in bringing out some other good points. My effort continually 
is to draw the answers from the class and to say 
as little as possible myself, except by way of 
recapitulation. 

I believe it a mistake for the leader of Berean Study to do 
more talking than others in the class. If in leading I have 
been obliged to do most of the talking throughout I consider 
that lesson a failure so far as my leadership is concerned, for, 
if it had been profitable, the class would have been anxious 
to speak. 

Of course, I give the class opportunity for asking additional 
questions in line with the printed questions of the lesson; 
but I do not consider these questions as addressed to me 



personally, desiring a personal answer, so I turn the questions, 
the same as the others, to the class, and seek to draw 
out the proper answer and to supplement the answers by 
some words of my own, helping to make the matter still 
more clear if possible. 

After questions have been fully answered by the class, 
the leader also having given his thought, then I suggest 
that we call on Brother Russell to give his answer. (Then 
all may look in the book to note the answer given and not 
before.) I find it well to restate the question just before 
giving your answer so that the matter may be as clear as 
possible before the minds of all. 

After hearing Brother Russell's answer I, as the leader, 
ask the class if there are any further remarks. Some may 
have occasional questions. 

So far as I am able to judge, the class of International 
Bible Students giving most attention to the Berean Studies 
are spiritually and intellectually better nourished than some 
that are depending upon preaching. Preaching, of course, 
has its place; but it could not be expected that many of the 
dear friends have special talent along this line— nor would 
many of them have much time for preparation if they had the 
talent. 

Anyway, classes that have learned to appreciate the 
Berean Studies and to use them, generally give these the preference 
as being most helpful to growth in knowledge and in 
grace. 

Yours in His fellowship, JAMES H. COLE. 



page 367 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study VI., Order and Discipline in the New Creation. 
OCTOBER 1 

(11) Does the Lord recognize the elders alone as the Body 
of Christ, or has any elder the right to self-appointment, 

or to ignore the judgment of the Church as a whole in any 
matter? P. 279, top. 

(12) Should any brother assume public duties without an 
election, and what is the special advantage to the whole 
Ecclesia in following this Scriptural method? P. 279, par. 1. 

(13) Why are not these matters, so clearly Scriptural, more 
generally understood and set forth? P. 279, par. 2. 

THE PERIOD OF ELDERSHIP. 

(14) In view of there being no Scriptural limit to the 
period for which an elder should be elected, what course 
may be appropriately followed? P. 280, par. 1. 

NUMBER OF ELDERS. 



(15) What should determine the number of elders in any 
Ecclesia? P. 280, par. 2. 

(16) In the event of none being found possessed of the 
Scriptural qualifications, what course should be pursued in 
choosing an elder? P. 281, par. 1. 

OCTOBER 8 

WHO MAY ELECT ELDERS, AND HOW? 

(17) Who may vote for elders, or make nominations? 
And how should the latter preferably be done? P. 281, par. 2. 

(18) What disadvantage in voting by ballot for elders? 
P. 281, par. 3. 

MAJORITIES NOT SUFFICIENT. 

(19) So far as practicable, what proportion of votes should 
decide an election? P. 282, par. 1,2. 

VARIETIES OF MINISTRIES. 

(20) Read carefully the Apostle Paul's address to the 
Elders at Ephesus (Acts 20:17-33) and show how his words 

set forth the general scope of the ministry to which each individual 
must adapt himself and his talents as a steward. 
P. 283. 

LAYING ON OF HANDS OF THE PRESBYTERY. 

(21) Quote several Scriptures which mention the laying 
on of hands in the Ecclesia, and explain each in its proper 
connection. Pp. 283-285. 

OCTOBER 15 

(22) Do any of these texts signify permission or authorization 
to preach? 

A PAID MINISTRY? 

(23) Was a paid ministry the custom of the early Church? 
P. 285, par. 4. 

(24) Had our Lord's teachings been supplemented by appeals 
for money, how would they have been received? 

P. 286, par. 1. 

(25) What spirit should prompt the ministers of the Gospel 
of Good Tidings Unto All Men? P. 286, par. 2. 

(26) How reply to the argument that extremes of "large 
salaries or no salaries" should be avoided? P. 287, par. 1. 

(27) What was the example set by the Apostle Paul with 
respect to salaries? P. 287, par. 2; P. 288, top. 

OCTOBER 22 



(28) What was the attitude of the Lord and the Apostles 
on this subject? P. 288, par. 1. 

(29) Is there any Scriptural intimation that the elders 
serving the Church at home received salaries or expense 
money? P. 288, par. 2. 

(30) On the other hand is there Scripture forbidding the 
acceptance of such money, providing it was voluntarily offered 
by the Ecclesia? P. 288, par. 3. 

DISCIPLINE IN THE ECCLESIA.--MATT. 18:15-18. 

(31) Explain how the foregoing Scripture teaches that the 
administration of discipline is not confined to Elders, but a 
function of the entire Church. P. 289, par. 1. 

(32) In the event that any matter of difference cannot be 
settled by the two preliminary steps mentioned in Matt. 18:15-1£ 
what course should be pursued by the Elders? P. 289, 

par. 2, first half. 

OCTOBER 29 

(33) What is the object of these proceedings on the part 

of the Ecclesia to punish the offender? P. 289, par. 2, last half. 

(34) Should the transgressors refuse to obey the Ecclesia's 
decision, what further steps should be taken? P. 290, par. 1. 

(35) Are the faults of the offender to be made public 
property during these proceedings, or afterward? P. 290, par. 2. 

(36) Would this procedure give rise to frequent Church 
trials? P. 291, par. 1. 

(37) What is unquestionably the cause of the majority of 
Church and family troubles? And what instructions have the 
New Creation concerning this important matter? P. 291, par. 2. 



page 370 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY 