Do You Remember?
Have you read recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● How does Jehovah God draw individuals to himself?
He does this by making it possible for them to hear about his arrangement for salvation through Jesus Christ. Then the Most High enables individuals to develop heart appreciation for the grand benefits that result from being in union with the Son.​—4/15 p. 14.
● For a congregation of God’s people to be happy, how should every member of it be viewed?
Every member needs to feel that he is a necessary and valuable part of the congregation as he shares in Christian activities within the framework of his limitations.​—4/15 p. 27.
● As shown at Psalm 49:20, when is a man “comparable with the beasts”?
The man who does not understand or appreciate spiritual things and makes no room for the Creator in his life can be compared to an unreasoning animal that has no capacity for worshiping God.​—5/1 p. 11.
● What factors determine whether a person can acceptably approach God in prayer?
The approach must be made in sincerity, in harmony with the divine will and through Jesus Christ, God’s appointed high priest.​—5/15 pp. 14, 15.
● During what period may David have experienced the sickness referred to in Psalm 41?
This may have been while his son Absalom was plotting to seize the throne. The fact that Psalm 41 refers to a trusted companion who turned against David lends support to this conclusion. David’s personal adviser Ahithophel traitorously cast in his lot with Absalom.​—6/1 pp. 30, 31.
● What proves that infants will be resurrected?
According to Matthew 2:17, 18 the prophecy about Rachel’s weeping for her children was fulfilled when Herod directed the killing of all male children two years of age and younger in and around Bethlehem. (Jer. 31:15) The prophecy says further: “‘Hold back your voice from weeping, and your eyes from tears, for there exists a reward for your activity,’ is the utterance of Jehovah, ‘and they will certainly return from the land of the enemy.’” (Jer. 31:16) Only by being raised from the dead could those slaughtered infants return from Sheol, to the comfort of the mothers who lost them in death.​—6/15 pp. 18, 19.
● What identifies true Christians today?
It is their love for one another, their upright conduct, their being a people for God’s name, their proclaiming God’s kingdom and their being neutral as regards the world’s political affairs and conflicts.​—7/1 pp. 23, 24.

