Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will likely be able to recall the following:
□ Why should a Christian not celebrate Christmas?
One reason is that the festival of Christmas originated in the pagan celebration of Saturnalia, the Roman festival of the agricultural god Saturn. God’s Word says: “Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers.” (2 Corinthians 6:14-17) A Christian cannot be separated from unbelievers while he is still celebrating a festival of pagan origin.​—12/15, page 6.
□ What is the Christian Jubilee?
It is a liberation involving “the truth” that can set humans free from “the law of sin and of death.” This truth is centered on “the Son,” Jesus Christ. (John 8:31-36; Romans 8:1, 2, 21)​—1/1, page 21.
□ When is the Christian Jubilee celebrated?
On Pentecost 33 C.E., the Christian Jubilee began to be celebrated by those destined for life in heaven. For believing mankind who will enjoy everlasting life on earth, a grand Christian Jubilee will be experienced during the Millennium, as all traces of inherited sin and imperfection are wiped out.​—1/1, pages 21, 22, 27.
□ Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses not operate schools for children in Asia and elsewhere?
Because of what the Bible says, Jehovah’s Witnesses must be principally concerned with their commission to preach the vital message about God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20) They are not unaware of human suffering and injustices in the present system, and they help as they can. Yet they recognize that the true remedy lies, not in human hands, but in the deliverance that God’s Kingdom will soon bring. (Psalm 146:3-10)​—1/15, page 7.
□ What facets of faith can we learn from the examples of Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and Moses?
Faith like Abel’s enhances our appreciation for Jesus’ sacrifice. True faith helps us to be courageous, like Enoch. As with Noah, faith moves us to follow God’s instructions. Abraham’s faith impresses us with the need to obey God and to trust in his promises. We should remain unspotted from the world and stand loyally by God’s people, as Moses exemplified.​—1/15, page 20.
□ In what way can curiosity be either a blessing or a curse?
A healthy curiosity about our Creator, his will, and his purposes can be very satisfying and beneficial, bringing joy and refreshment into our life. On the other hand, an unbridled curiosity can lead us into a morass of speculation and human theories, undermining genuine faith and godly devotion.​—2/1, page 29.
□ What did Jesus mean when he prayed: “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass away from me”? (Matthew 26:39)
Jesus was concerned about the charge of blasphemy that he saw would be hurled against him. This was the worst crime of which a Jew could be guilty. His death under that circumstance might seem, therefore, to bring reproach upon his heavenly Father.​—2/15, page 13.
□ If a person has to endure suffering or affliction, what is the wise course for him to take?
It is best for him to be patient, looking hopefully to God for relief, and to draw closer to Him. This will make it easier for the person to undergo other similar experiences in life without losing hope. (Lamentations 3:25-31)​—2/15, page 24.
□ Who are “the twelve tribes of Israel” spoken of by Jesus at Luke 22:28-30?
These represent all the peoples of mankind who are to be judged by Christ and his 144,000 underpriests in connection with a regeneration of all that Jehovah has purposed for this earth. (Matthew 19:28)​—3/1, page 28.
□ What is meant by divine peace, and how can it be attained?
Divine peace is a calm condition of mind and heart, an inner state of quiet, regardless of what may be taking place. (Psalm 4:8) It can only come about from an approved relationship with God, made possible by the ransom sacrifice of Christ Jesus. (Colossians 1:19, 20)​—3/15, pages 11, 14, 15.
□ What provisions do we have today to help us get to know God intimately?
We have both the Bible and the perspective of centuries of fulfilled Bible prophecies. Also, we have the Gospel records of the life, works, and words of Jesus Christ, concerning whom Paul wrote: “It is in him [Christ] that all the fullness of the divine quality dwells bodily.” (Colossians 2:9)​—4/1, page 6.

