God’s Wisdom​—Can You See It?
VISUALIZE the court of an ancient king. There, arrayed in royal robes, the monarch sits on a throne of splendor as he presides. He is renowned not only for his wealth but also for his wisdom. His court attendants are organized to perfection. The scene of magnificence is breathtaking. Behold: King Solomon!​—1 Kings 10:1-9, 18-20.
Listen, now, to the man recognized as the Great Teacher, Jesus Christ: “On the matter of clothing, why are you anxious? Take a lesson from the lilies of the field, how they are growing; they do not toil, nor do they spin; but I say to you that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.”​—Matthew 6:28, 29.
What did Jesus mean by that? Well, he was certainly giving counsel about not being materialistic. But could his words about Solomon be literally true? Remember, Jesus used true-to-life illustrations. So Solomon’s designers and craftsmen, though competent, could not equal the designs, the blending of colors, the symmetry of “the lilies of the field” framed in their natural surroundings.
Jehovah’s Wisdom Made Manifest
Even a casual examination of flowers may cause you to endorse Jesus’ statement. We do not know just what variety of lily Jesus may have had in mind, but flowers abound in most parts of the earth. Look carefully at a flower, any flower: a lily, a rose, an orchid. What delicate shades of color and intricate designs you see, a blending of the sepals, the leaves, and other parts of the flower’s body. Can you see the silent but strong proof that a Great Designer of infinite wisdom and imagination is behind this beautiful handiwork? Not only do our eyes revel in their beauty but our nostrils take in their fragrant perfumes in the air we breathe.
The apostle Paul observed that Jehovah God’s “invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made.” (Romans 1:20) However, God created more than flowers to robe the earth; he made countless shrubs and trees, all of which form a practical, yet handsomely verdant, kingdom. If you could visit the Humboldt National Forest in California, U.S.A., you would find a giant redwood that is believed to be the tallest tree in the world. If you could stand at its foot and gaze up at its height of over 360 feet (110 m), would you not silently praise the One who knew how to make such a tree?
The Instinctive Wisdom of Animals
On land and sea there are animals, small and great, that impress us with God’s wisdom. Apparently each serves some purpose of the Creator. Wise King Solomon counseled: “Go to the ant, you lazy one; see its ways and become wise.” (Proverbs 6:6) Those who have observed the ant marvel at its organizing ability. Ants are not isolationists; they live in communities. Some are farmers and harvest seeds. In the tropics you see some ants busily nipping off pieces of leaves to carry to their nests. How do they know to do this? Agur, one of the writers of the book of Proverbs, answers that the ant is “instinctively wise.” Who made it that way? Jehovah, the Producer of heaven and earth.​—Proverbs 30:24, 25.
Yes, the animal creation has instinctive wisdom. It is very apparent in the migration of birds. You may have heard about the migration of the Capistrano swallows. At a certain time each year, they travel thousands of miles from their wintering grounds in South America to a mission at San Juan Capistrano, California, U.S.A. Instinctively and unerringly they come to the same place at the same time in March.
As to the vast sea, the psalmist states: “How many your works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made. The earth is full of your productions. As for the sea so great and wide, there there are moving things without number.” (Psalm 104:24, 25) From the tiny minnows to the great whales, divine wisdom is seen in their form and function.
God’s crowning creation on earth was man himself. Here was a creature that did not act just by built-in, or instinctive, wisdom. He had the capability of being like God in many ways. How true of him that “in a fear-inspiring way” he is wonderfully made! Even if we are not medical scientists, we can read their findings and draw the same conclusions as the inspired writer. The Creator’s works evident in the human body are wonderful.​—Psalm 139:14.
Jehovah’s Heavenly Wisdom
Psalm 19:1 states that the heavens declare the glory of God. How very true! The psalmist David had no telescopes or electronic instruments, but he had reverential appreciation for what he could see. Today, the average person knows much more than David did about our solar system and our great galaxy, the Milky Way. He also knows that there are countless other great galaxies in the limitless reaches of space. How do you feel as you contemplate the wisdom of the great and matchless Designer? Can you say with reverential voice: ‘Jehovah, you are “doing great things unsearchable, and wonderful things without number”’? You should.​—Job 9:10.
In the untold past aeons, Jehovah proceeded with his acts of creation, first his only begotten Son, then the rest of his spirit creation. This was followed by the material universe. All was serene and orderly. Why, the angelic sons of God actually shouted their appreciation in applause at the founding of the earth! (Job 38:4-7) Man and woman were created and placed in a perfect garden, but then a shocking thing occurred. A voice out of the invisible, speaking through a serpent, slandered the Grand Creator. It charged that Jehovah was misusing his sovereignty; it called God a liar. Hence, the owner of the voice gained unsavory names that identify him, such as Devil, Serpent, and Satan. What now would the All-Wise One do? What could he do? A new dimension of wisdom would be required that would eclipse designs that already outshone Solomon’s glory.​—Genesis 3:1-5.
[Blurb on page 4]
From tiny minnows to great whales, divine wisdom is seen in their form and function

