Proving “Zealous for Fine Works” in Kenya
“THIS is what I have been looking for all my life!” exclaimed a man of Hindu background after having attended a recent convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Kenya, Africa. “This is something special.”
What was it that moved him to say that? “People of so many colors, backgrounds, and countries​—all mixing freely with evident affection for one another,” he said. But how was this possible in a world so full of disunity and racial prejudice? What led to such unity and spiritual harmony in Kenya?
Early Pioneers Pave the Way
Back in 1931, Frank and Gray Smith sailed from South Africa to Mombasa with 40 cartons of books. From there they made an exhausting and hazardous journey to Nairobi, where they distributed their entire supply of literature in about a month. Both contracted malaria, and Frank died​—faithful to the end. Later the same year, Robert Nisbet and David Norman followed up on a similar expedition, distributing 200 cartons of publications in East Africa. Thus were the first seeds of truth sown in Kenya.
Then in 1935, Gray Smith and his wife, together with Robert Nisbet and his brother George, set out to follow up the interest found. This time Robert contracted typhoid fever. The others were afflicted with malaria and blackwater fever. Opposition and deportation orders by the colonial government added to the hardships. Despite all of this, however, these early zealous pioneers distributed a tremendous amount of literature, laying a foundation for growth. For instance, about 30 years later, a Witness working remote rural territory in Kenya was surprised to find a man who had a copy of the book Reconciliation. His brother had obtained it in 1935. This man progressed and is now one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Further Growth
It was not until 1949 that the first Witness, Mary Whittington, came to reside in Nairobi, the capital of Kenya. She had been baptized in England only one year earlier. Little did she know of the isolation, hindrances, and opposition she was about to face. Yet, she had the joy of seeing the ‘little one become a thousand.’ (Isaiah 60:22) Today, at the age of 73, she is still serving as a regular pioneer.
Bill and Muriel Nisbet, the first graduates of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead to be assigned to Kenya, arrived in 1956. At the time, racial segregation was prevalent, and the colonial administration had laws that restricted the preaching activity and limited the size of meetings to no more than nine people. So the work of the Nisbets was confined to only the European field and informal discussions with the African people. Nevertheless, growth came.
In 1962 the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses was legally recognized. Shortly thereafter, in 1963, colonial rule ended, thus opening the door to further expansion of our Christian work. Now publications could be printed in the Swahili language, and elders of Jehovah’s Witnesses were authorized by the government to officiate at weddings. Since that time, Jehovah’s Witnesses have been instrumental in helping almost 2,000 couples to register their marriage legally.
By 1972 a fine new branch office building, conveniently located in Nairobi, was dedicated. (It has since been expanded.) Kenya was now better equipped to oversee the Kingdom work in the ten East African countries under its care and to fill the need for publications in the various native languages.
Fine Examples of Zeal
The proclaimers of the good news in Kenya manifest the same ‘zeal for fine works’ that was noticeable among the first-century Christians. (Titus 2:14) They do not allow hardships to deter them from helping others to gain an accurate knowledge of the Bible.
In one instance, a Witness received a request from the branch office to call on an interested blind man, who lived 16 miles (26 km) away. The Witness regularly made the journey by bicycle to conduct a Bible study with him. Although this man went through stages of negative thinking and depression, now he is a Witness himself, zealously telling others about God’s promise of Paradise restored when even the eyes of the blind will be opened.​—Isaiah 35:5.
In some areas, great efforts have to be made to attend Christian meetings. A 70-year-old woman regularly walks about six miles (10 km) to get to the weekly meetings. On the way, she wades through one of Kenya’s biggest rivers, even though crocodiles are lurking nearby. At times the current becomes so strong that it almost sweeps her away. Yet, she considers the spiritual feast well worth the effort. What an outstanding example of zeal!
Another fine example of zeal and appreciation was provided by a Witness who walked nine hours to attend the circuit assembly. Why did he do so, even though he had enough money for bus fare? Motivated by love, he gave his funds to his Bible student so that he, too, could enjoy the assembly program! Yes, love and ‘zeal for fine works,’ based on accurate Bible knowledge, are clearly seen in Kenya.
Pioneer Spirit
This zeal has been displayed in the full-time pioneer ministry in an outstanding way. Many have found joy in this service in spite of difficult circumstances. One young regular pioneer serves in the hot and humid port city of Mombasa. Some years ago both his legs had to be amputated because of a truck accident. While in the hospital, he contemplated suicide and begged the nurse to give him a lethal injection, which she refused to do. After his release, he found the Witnesses and began studying the Bible with them. This led to his baptism and a new life in the full-time service. He overflows with zeal and gratitude.
A large number of mothers with family responsibilities have also become regular pioneers. Among them is one with three children. She has severe high blood pressure and a speech impediment. She has to work full-time, and her husband is not a Witness. Yet, she is a happy pioneer. Of course, not only mothers share in the regular pioneer service; recently, a father who has eight children to look after and a job that involves shift work also took up this privilege of service.
Many who are not able to be regular pioneers glow with the pioneer spirit. They look for opportunities to share in the full-time ministry as auxiliary pioneers, spending 60 hours in the preaching work each month.
In April 1984, as well as in 1985, more than a third of all the publishers in Kenya participated in some form of full-time service. One congregation had 73 publishers enrolled as auxiliary pioneers that month, working along with the five regular pioneers. The other 28 members of the congregation averaged 64.6 hours, even though many of them were not baptized. As a result, a total of 233 Bible studies were conducted!
Age does not prove to be a barrier. A 99-year-old grandmother took up the auxiliary pioneer ministry. Despite her physical limitations, she lets her light shine courageously toward young and old. (Matthew 5:16) Through her efforts, a number of others have been helped to become Kingdom proclaimers, and they fondly remember the devotion and pioneer spirit of this grandma. Yes, such ‘zeal for fine works’ has led many to cultivate the pioneer spirit.
Praise​—Out of the Mouths of “Babes”
Young ones, too, though not yet baptized, happily and eagerly accompany their parents in bringing good news from the true God to other people. (Matthew 21:16) During a special campaign, a four-and-a-half-year-old girl worked with her parents in isolated territory. She spent 160 hours in the field ministry that month, placing 27 books, 66 booklets, and 47 magazines with people who were interested in the Bible!
This ‘zeal for fine works’ is manifest in the schools as well. In a rural area outside Nairobi, a primary-school boy, whose mother was studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, was able to help his teacher on the road to eternal life. In class, when the teacher brought up the subject of life after death, this young boy politely mentioned that his mother had taught him something different, based on the Bible. This aroused the teacher’s curiosity. She contacted the boy’s mother, who directed her to a more experienced Witness. Now the teacher herself is spreading Bible truth to others, thanks to the courage of this young one. What a fine example of the zeal that exists among Christian children today!
More Growth Expected
Over half of Kenya’s population have yet to hear the good news of the Kingdom. Because of distance, some isolated territories can be covered only once a year. Upon arriving in such areas, it is common for Witnesses to be greeted with the words: “Where have you been? We have been missing you.” Then, after witnessing there for a few days or weeks and the time comes to leave, one is touched to hear expressions like: “Now are you going to leave us again? How are we going to progress?” Happily, arrangements have been made to call back on most of these spiritually hungry individuals.
Today, there are 3,686 Kingdom ministers in Kenya. At the 1986 Memorial celebration of Christ’s death, 13,067 were in attendance. That was almost four times the number of Witnesses! Former alcoholics, brawlers, gang leaders, extortioners, spiritists, and others have made great changes in their lives and now walk in the pathways of truth. What does this tell us about the future?
Obviously, more growth is to be expected. Yes, people in Kenya are responding favorably to the “good news of the kingdom.” (Matthew 24:14) Many have joined the ranks of Jehovah’s Witnesses​—a people “zealous for fine works.” Because of these works, they stand out as a unique people, free from racial barriers and other hindrances to true unity. Truly, “this is something special.”
[Maps on page 22]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
KENYA
Nairobi
Mombasa
[Picture on page 23]
Thousands of Swahili-speaking delegates attended the “Integrity Keepers” Convention in December 1985
[Picture on page 24]
Bible dramas presented in Swahili and English edified the audience
[Picture on page 25]
The public baptism gave evidence of Jehovah’s blessing

