
COVER SUBJECT | DOES IT DO ANY GOOD TO PRAY?
Why God Invites Us to Pray



God extends his hand of friendship.

Friends communicate with each other to cultivate a good relationship. Likewise, God invites us to talk to him, opening the way for a warm friendship. He says: “You will call me and come and pray to me, and I will listen to you.” (Jeremiah 29:12) As you speak to God, you will “draw close to [him], and he will draw close to you.” (James 4:8) The Bible assures us: “Jehovah is near to all those calling on him.” (Psalm 145:18) The more we pray to him, the more our friendship with God will flourish.
“Jehovah is near to all those calling on him.”—Psalm 145:18




God wants to help you.

Jesus said: “Which one of you, if his son asks for bread, will hand him a stone? Or if he asks for a fish, he will not hand him a serpent, will he? Therefore, if you . . . know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will your Father who is in the heavens give good things to those asking him!” (Matthew 7:9-11) Yes, God invites you to pray because “he cares for you” and wants to help you. (1 Peter 5:7) He even invites you to go to him with your problems. The Bible tells us: “Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God.”—Philippians 4:6.



Humans have a spiritual need.

Experts on human nature have observed that hundreds of millions of people feel a need to pray. Even some atheists and agnostics are included in this number.a This attests to the fact that humans were created with a spiritual need. Jesus said: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matthew 5:3) One way we can fill that need is by regularly communicating with God.
If we accept God’s invitation to pray to him, what benefits may we expect?



A 2012 Pew Research Center survey revealed that 11 percent of atheists/agnostics in the United States pray at least once a month.

What Does Prayer Involve?
The Bible shows that prayer can embrace every facet of our life. Prayer may include the following:
Confession “I confessed my sin to you; I did not cover my error.”—Psalm 32:5.

Thanks “It is good to give thanks to  Jehovah.”—Psalm 92:1.

Praise “I will praise Jehovah at all times; his praise will be on my lips constantly.”—Psalm 34:1.

Requests for Guidance “Guide me in the pathway of your commandments, for in it I take delight.”—Psalm 119:35.

Request for Strength “Turn to me and show me favor. Give your strength to your servant.”—Psalm 86:16.





