VOL XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., SEPTEMBER 1, 1917 


No. 17 


THE BOND OF PERFECTION 


" And besides all these things, put on love; it is the bond of completeness; and let the peace of the Anointed preside in your 
hearts, for which you were also called in one body; and be thankful. ' ; — Colossians 3 :14, 15, Diaglott. 
The children of God, walking toy faith, rejoice in the hope 
of the glory of God, and all along their journey are striving to 
put on the bond of perfection, which is love. To aid us in the 


development of the likeness of our Lord and Master, God has 
given us in his Word many great and precious promises. 

Love is an inexhaustible sirbject. Only when we have attained
 to that perfect state which Gad has promised as a reward
 to those who love him supremely shall we be able to love 
as we ought and to manifest it as we desire. 

The Apostle Paul, a faithful servant of Jesus Christ, was 
wholly devoted to the Lord and his righteous cause; and possessing
 a keen -desire to build up the brethren in the most holy 
faith, he wrote much to them concerning love. Since he tells 
us it is the bond of perfection, we can with profit meditate 
much upon the subject. 

What is love? It is the greatest and grandest attribute 
of character possessed by any creature. The Scripture declares
, "God is Love." This does not mean that Love i3 God, 
but that in Jehovah is found the perfect expression of love. 

The Scriptures show that there is a distinction between 
our love for God and our love for the brethren. It is well 
that we get this distinction clearly in our minds, that we may 
analyze the subject and have a deeper appreciation thereof. 
Love for God may be defined as a worshipful adoration of Jehovah
, a fellowship of spirit, and a joyful submission to his 
holy will because of our reverence for him and gratitude to 
him as the Almighty One, for what he has done for us. 

WHY IW> WE LOVE GOD? 

We believe that our heavenly Father is pleased with an intelligent
 worship of him. The Apostle Peter tells us that we 
should be able to give a reason for the hope that is in us. ( 1 
Peter 3:15) We should likewise be able to give the reason 
why we love Jehovah. The reason that must appeal to our 
minds is the reason which we find in the Word of the Lord. 

Sweeter than all things else is love. The human race has 
had only a taste of that which pertains to life, and never the 
enjoyment of life with the right thereto, since Adam forfeited 
that right. Any one who would give to us the thing that we 
chiefly desire would merit our deepest gratitude. Desiring life, 
death has ever been the certain portion of man. Desiring love, 
how few have found its satisfaction! Behold the unselfish 
desire of God to do good to man, to give him a supreme exon
 him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 
3 j 16) It would be impossible for one to truly love God without
 having a knowledge of him; and as a man with a reverential
 mind increases in knowledge of the gracious and loving
 character of* Jehovah, his love necessarily increases. 

WHO 18 GOD? 

Who is the great and mighty One who has taken cognizance 
of us to provide a means whereby we may obtain life? — the 
Giver of this unspeakable gift provided for all his obedient 
creatures? Answer: He is the great First Cause, without beginning
 and without ending, "from everlasting to everlasting/' 
It is he who created all things for his pleasure and for the Joy 
of those who will love and serve him faithfully. All creation 
bespeaks his justice, wisdom, love and power. Truly did David, 
the sweet musician and singer of Israel, say to him: "The 
heavens relate the glory of God, and the expanse telleth of 
the works of his hands; day unto day uttereth speech, and night 
unto night showeth knowledge. There is no speech; there are 
no words ; their voice is not heard ; but their melody extendeth 
through all the earth and to the end of the world their words. 
For the sun hath he set a tabernacle among them." — 'Psalm 
19:1-5, Leeser. 

As a youthful shepherd David reveled in the visible- creation
 of God. With the field for his bedchamber, with probably 
a sheepskin for his mattress and a stone for his pillow, he gazed 
into the expanse above him with the naked eye and beheld the 
myriads of stars moving noiselessly through space, and his own 
heart was moved to adoration and praise, and with reverential 
mind he gave utterance to these words of worship and devotion
. 

What might one say if he could behold all the wonders of 
God's creation? By the use of modern appliances, scientists 
tell us that they are able to measure the distance to the sun, 
and even to the Pleiades, supposed to be the throne of Jehovah. 
They tell us that millions of planets— which are merely the 
satellites of great suns and which have their own satellites — 
have been discovered by the use of such ■ instruments ; and 
doubtless if man could stand on the outer rim of the orbit of 
the farthest world that has been discovered, and gaze on into 
space with even stronger instruments, millions more of God's 
wonderful suns with their retinue of planets would appear. 

As we have in mind the visible creation of Jehovah and 


pression of his love by making provision whereby these deep contemplate its wonders, beyond all that man can comprehend, 
fully gratified! "God so loved the world we begin to have a deeper appreciation of the works of King 


longings may yet be 

that he gave his Only Begotten Son that whosoever believeth 


David, when he said on another occasion, "0 Lord, how mani- 


[6133] 


(260-261) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


fold are thy works! In wisdom hast thou made them all! The 
earth is full of thy riches! So is this great and wide sea, 
wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great 

beasts The glory of the Lord endureth forever; the Lord 

shall rejoice in his works. T will sing unto the Lord as long aa 
I live; 1 will sing praises to my God while I have my being. 
My meditation of him shall be^sweet; 1 will be glad in the 
Lord."— Psalm 104:24, 25, 31, 33, 34. 

Language is a poor vehicle to convey our conception of 
God ; and yet our conception is as nothing compared to what 
he really is. This is the Mighty One who takes cognizance 
of man. Who, then, beholding his power and wisdom, would 
not reverence this great One? He who possesses a reverential 
mind is led indeed to adore and worship such a God. It was 
his beloved Son Jesus who said, "This is life eternal, that they 
might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom 
thou hast sent." (John 17:3) If to know him and his beloved
 Son means life, and life in perfection, the greatest thing 
that we desire, then why should not all with eagerness seek a 
knowledge of Jehovah and of his Son? Truly, if mankind knew 
the Lord, the earth would be filled with the creatures who 
would love and adore him. 

But for six thousand years the adversary has blinded man 
to the goodness of God. " As St. Paul declares, "The god of 
this world [Satan] hath blinded the minds of them which believe
 not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who 
is the image of God, should shine unto them," — 2 Corinthians 
4:4. 

GOD'S GEE AT PLAN OP REDEMPTION 

Let us review some of the reasons why we should have 
gratitude and why we should worship and adore Jehovah and 
obey his holy will. Created in the image of God, man lost this 
by disobedience. In sorrow he went forth to battle against his 
many foes, and to battle thus unto death. There was no way 
for him to regain life by his own efforts. But Jehovah in his 
own due time and in the exercise of his wisdom and lovingkindness
 sent his dearly beloved Son to redeem man from death. 
This he did at great cost to himself. He gave up the dearest 
thing to his heart — that great and unspeakable gift, his Only 
Begotten! St. John tells us, "In this was manifested the love 
of God toward us, because that God sent his Only Begotten 
Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein 
is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent 
his Son to be the propitiation for our sins." (1 John 4:9, 10) 
All this Jehovah did for us without our knowledge, yea, even 
before our existence. Abstractly, then, we may define love as 
an unselfish desire to do good, and to do good without regard 
to whether the recipient knows or does not know of it. This 
love may include the sentiment of appreciation, or it may be 
only a sympathetic desire to aid, its scope depending upon the 
object loved. 

HEAVENLY CAUSING OF THE GOSPEL AGE 

God foreordained before the foundation of the world that 
Christ Jesus should be the Redeemer and King of the world, 
and that he should have associated with him in this great work 
144,000, designated as members of his body and as his bride. 
He did not call the angels of heaven to this high and honored 
place, but his call was issued to some from the children of 
men. This call was an invitation. Jesus, having ascended into 
heaven, opened the way to life and immortality! and then the 
invitation went out, calling some to become j oint-aacrificers 
with him and to share his glory. In phrase more beautiful than 
human tongue could form, Jehovah sent this call: *'Hearken, 
O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also 
thine own people and thy father's house; so shall the King 
greatly desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou 
him." (Psalm 45:10, 11) Never was a proposal of marriage 
couched in phrase so sweet! Thus he called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light! He called us to a heavenly calling, 
to be kings ajid priests unto him and unto Christ, and to reign 
with Christ in glory ; to be joint heirs with him in all blessings
 to be received at the hands of Jehovah in the ages to come. 

Those who hear and respond to this call by fully consecrating
 themselves to do the will of Jehovah he begets to the divine
 nature. (James 1:18; 1 Peter 1:3, 4) Such also he 
anoints at the same time to the high office of kings and priests ; 
and this anointing enables such to grasp the deep things of 
God's Word. (1 Corinthians 2:9, 10) "The anointing which 
ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that 
any man teach you; but as the same anointing teacheth you of 
all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath 
taught you, ye shall abide in him." — 1 John 2:27. 

Foreknowing the church, God aforetime made provision for 
their feeding and nourishing. He caused to be prepared for 
their benefit the expression of his will, which is set forth in 
the holy Scriptures: "For whatsoever things were written 


aforetime were written for our learning, that jve through patience
 and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope." {Romans
 15:4) All the types and shadows recorded in the Old 
Testament and all the exceeding groat and precious promises 
of the New Testament God provided for our benefit — "according
 as his divine power hath given unto us things that pertain 
unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that 
hath called us to glory and virtue; whereby are given unto us 
exceeding great and precious promises, that by these ye might 
be partakers of the divine nature." 

COMFOBTS, PROTECTS AND DELIVERS 

The Lord foreknew that the church would ha\e many trhN 
and sorrows, and that in these they would need comforting 
assurances; hence lie provided in his Word for all such need-*. 
And it is his will that we in turn use this same comfort which 
we receive to comfort and bless others who journey with us 
in the narrow way. St. Paul, having this in mind, exultantly 
exclaimed, "Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort, who 
comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to 
comfort them which are in trouble, by the comfort wherewith 
vc ourselves are comforted of God." — -2 Corinthians 1:3, 4. 

In addition to till this, our dear Father protects us from 
the evil one; He gives us the assurance that thus he will do. 
"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that 
reverence him, and delivereth them." (Psalm 34:7) "There 
shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh 
thy dwelling." (Psalm 91:10) King David was a type of 
the Christ, head and body. David means "beloved, " and he 
prophetically expressed the sentiment of our hearts when he 
said, "I will love thee, O Jehovah, my Btrength; the Lord is 
my rock [solid foundation! and my fortress [invulnerable to 
any enemy's attack] and my deliverer; my God, my strength, 
in whom I will trust; my buckler and the power of my salvation
, and my high tower. [In this tower the Christian can see 
what others cannot see, because he is above them,] I will call 
upon Jehovah, who is worthy to be praised; so shall I be 
saved from mine enemies." (Psalm 18:1-3) Again says King 
David, "Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits
—the God of my salvation!" (Psalm 68:19) "Bless the 
Lord, my soul, and forget not all his benefits." — Psalm 103 : 2, 
WHY WE LOVE OtTR LORD JESUS 

In all that God has done for us, Jesus has been his honored 
instrument. In every purpose and work the Father and the Son 
are one. All things are of the Father; all things are by the 
Son. {1 Corinthians 8:6) If a man of great wealth should 
give one of us a million dollars that we might use it to the 
Lord's glory, we should feel very grateful to such an one. But 
if he would give us all of his millions, and in addition would 
devote his life, with ua, in proclaiming the Message of Messiah's 
glorious kingdom, surely our hearts would respond with gratitude
 and love to him! 

But Jesus did far greater things for us than this. "For ye 
know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was 
rich, for your Bakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty 
might be rich." (2 Corinthians 8:9) He was rich in heavenly 
honor, glory and power. By him were all things made, and he 
enjoyed the glories and blessings of the heavenly realm. All 
this he left, and took upon himself the form and nature of 
man, and then surrendered his humanity to the most ignominious
 death known, in order that we might have life. 

It was Jesus himself who said: "Greater love hath no man 
than this, that a man lay down his' life for his friends; and 
ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you." (John 
15:13, 14) He shed his blood for us; and all who become his 
friends receive the benefit of the merit of that sacrifice, which 
leads to life everlasting in a state of supreme happiness. Man 
comes into the world with burdens; and as he journeys along 
life's Way his burdens increase until he finds the Lord, who 
graciously says: "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy-laden, and I will give you rest/ 1 (Matthew 11:28) 
His love prompts him thus to do. 

HIS BRIBE AND JOINT-HBIB 

God instituted the relationship of bride and bridegroom. 
It is the sweetest relationship known to mankind. From the 
time of the betrothal contract between the bridegroom and 
bride, they both look forward with sweet anticipation to the 
full consummation of their agreement. The Prophet of the 
Lord foretold this beautiful relationship between Jesus and 
the church, and speaking to the prospective bride as the 
mouthpiece of the Bridegroom, said, "I will betroth thee unto 
me in righteousness [and since she has no righteousness or 
wedding garment of her own, Jesus provides it], and in justice 
and in loving-kindness and in mercies [suggestion of his own 
beautiful attributes of 'character, which she must also work 


[6134] 


SttFTKMBKR 1, 1917 


T H li WA T C H TOW E R 


(261-262) 


out in her character, while wearing and at the same time embroidering
 the wedding garment] ; I will even betroth thee unto 
me in faithfulness [suggesting that she as well as lie must be 
true and loyal to the end], and thou shalt know Jehovah. " 
(Hosea 2:19, 20) Thus the Bridegroom offers her the wonderful
 blessing of being associated with himself forever in unspeakable
 joy, and as an additional reward, that she shall 
know the great and mighty God of the universe, the One who 
inhabiteth eternity. 

AMBASSADORS FOR CHRIST 

To be an ambassador of a government, such as that of the 
United States, to foreign courts, is a position greatly desired 
by honorable men. To be an ambassador of the King of kings 
and Lord of lords in this world, to whom the message of reconciliation
 is committed to be delivered to the peoples of earth, 
is an honor not within the comprehension of the human mind, 
and is greatly to be desired above all honors that could be conferred
 by any official position upon this earth. Such an honor 
the Apostle Paul declares Jesus grants unto every one of his 
followers who love him and manifest their love for him. — 2 
Corinthians 5:20. 

THE PROOF OF OUR LOVE 

How may we know that we love God and love the Lord 
Jesus? It will not always do to rely upon our feelings, because
 feelings are deceptive. Sometimes we feel joyful and 
exuberant, and at other times exactly the reverse. We must 
have more certain proof than this. "Jesus said, If a man love 
me he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and 
we will come unto him and make our abode with him. He 
that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings." "If ye love me, 
keep my commandments." (John 14:23, 24, 15) "This proves 
our love to God — that we keep his commandments with joyful 
heart."— 1 John 5:3. 

The foregoing Scriptures approve of the element given in 
the definition of love as it applies Godward; namely, a worshipful
 adoration for God and the Master, a reverence for him, and 
gratitude to him for what he has done for us, bringing a joyful
 submission to his will. Wbo could know these precious 
things bestowed upon us by our Father and fail to love such 
a God and Father! 

LOVE FOR THE BRETHREN 

The more we understand the love of God and of Christ 
Jesus as manifested for us, and the more we increase in our 
love for them, the greater the necessity appears to us for 
loving the brethren, and the greater desire we have for the 
perfection of our love toward them. 

Love for the brethren may be defined as an unselfish desire 
to do them good, an affectionate and tender regard, and a 
kinship of spirit; and this in proportion as we see the manifestation
 of the spirit of the Master. If we possess this love, 
we shall desire to do good to the brethren, even to the degree 
of sacrificing our own interests, having in mind the one purpose
 of building up the brethren in the most holy faith, that 
they may grow more and more into the likeness of the Lord. 
The comprehensiveness of this heavenly love is shown in the 
words of the Apostle Paul in Ephesians 3:13-21. 

WHY SHOULD WE LOVE THE BRETHREN? 

Our love or lack of love for the brethren will prove the extent
 of our love for the Lord. When we have the proper appreciation
 of the fact that the brethren in Christ are really 
a part of the Christ, and when we appreciate what it means to 
love God and to love Jesus, our hearts will increase in love 
for the brethren. Jesus said that the proof of our love for 
him and for the Father would be made known by the manner 
in which we keep his commandments. Among his commandments
 is a very important one. He said to his disciples, "A 
new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another : 
as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this 
shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love 
one to another*" (John 13:34, 35) To what extent shall we 
love one another? Jesus answers: "This is my commandment, 
That ye love one another as I have loved you." (John 15:12) 
The love of Jesus for us was an unselfish love, a sacrificial love, 
a desire to do us good, with no thought of reward from us. 
And he did this at a great cost to himself. This is the kind 
of love he says we must have for the brethren — a sacrificial 
love. 

The Anostle Paul tells us that if any man be in Christ 
Jesus he is a new creature, and that henceforth "we know 
no man after the flesh," but know him as a new creature. (2 
Corinthians 5:16, 17) This would mean, then, that we should 
love each other as new creatures in the Lord. If we were required
 to love each other because of physical appearance, that 
might often be a great difficulty. But the new creature in 
Christ should love his brother because of the spirit of the Lord 
in him and manifested by him. And as we grow more in the 


likeness of our Lord, we thus cause the brethren to love us 
more. 

SOME OF OUR TESTS 

The Apostle Paul, giving an analysis of love in 1 Corinthians
 13, points out that it is the crown of all the fruits and 
graces of the spirit. He emphasizes the fact that we may 
possess all knowledge of the Scriptures and have the ability 
to present them to others, may make full sacrifice of all our 
time, strength and energy, even to the giving up of our lives, 
and yet if we have not love, we have profited nothing. In our 
text he points out that love is the bond of perfection. In the 
context he has called attention to other qualities of character 
that we must develop, and then adds that if we would be perfect
 we must put on love; and that if we do this, the peace of 
Cod which passeth all understanding shall keep our hearts-and 
minds through Christ Jesus. 

So, then, \i love is the chief of all the attributes of character
 to be developed, it follows that love must be put to the 
most severe tests. Tests are for the purpose of demonstrating 
that one possesses an approved character. 

Our love for Cod and for the Lord Jesus will be tested in 
the manner of our obeying the will of God — whether we do 
this in a joyful manner or not. In proportion as we have and 
maintain our love for the Lord, in that proportion will our 
joy increase in the performance of his will. We can see how 
many have fallen under this test. Once ambassadors of the 
Great King, they became ashamed of the Gospel of Christ 
Jesus and him crucified, and desired more the plaudits of men. 
They failed, therefore, in keeping the commandments of the 
Lord. The Apostle sets us an example, saying: "I am not 
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God 
unto salvation to every one that believeth." — Rom. 1:16. 

The Lord Jesus put to the test the love of the Apostle 
Peter. He said to him, "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me 
more than these? He saith unto him, yea, Lord, thou knowest 
that I love thee. He [Jesus] saith unto him, Feed my lambs." 
Again a second and then the third time, Jesus said, "Simon, 
lovest thou me? And Simon answered, Lord, thou knowest all 
things. Thou knowest that I love thee! He saith unto him, 
Feed my sheep.'* (John 21:15, 17) What a wonderful lesson 
is in this for all the brethren who are elders in the various 
classes 1 If we see pride developing in our hearts, a disposition 
to put aside the food that the Lord has given with which to 
feed -the lambs and the sheep and Jo substitute something of 
our own, in order that we might shine before men, or a disposition
 to neglect the lambs and the sheep in helping them with 
the food, then this would prove that we were not standing the 
test being placed upon us. Addressing the elder?, the Apostle 
said, "Take heed, therefore, unto yourselves, and to all the 
flock over which the holy Spirit hath made you overseers, to 
feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with the blood 
of his own."— Acts 20:28. 

Upon what food should the elders and leaders feed the 
ecclesias? How did the teachers, as well as the ecclesias get 
their knowledge of God's plan? Did not Jesus declare that 
when he came at his second advent He would provide for the 
household of faith through his chosen servant the food which 
should be "meat in due season" for them? This being true 
{and all who accept present truth must admit that it is true), 
then any disposition to depart therefrom and to encourage the 
flock to look elsewhere for spiritual development would prove 
that the test of faithfulness to the Lord and his flock was 
not being properly met. We observe this test being put upon 
the classes everywhere. Let us, then, take heed to ourselves 
that we prove our love for the Lord and for his "little ones" 
by keeping his commandments with a joyful heart and in safeguarding
 the interests of the little ones of the Lord. 
A FINAL FIERY TEST 

More than a quarter of a century ago our attention was 
called to the fact through The Watch Tower that one of the 
final and crucial tests that would come to the church would be 
the test of our love for the brethren. Do we not see this test 
being applied? Jesus said, applying his words to the time 
of his second presence, in which time we are now living, "Because
 iniquity shall abound, the love of the many shall wax 
cold." (Matthew 24:12) The word "iniquity" is derived from 
the word "inequity," and literally means injustice. There can 
be no love without justice first. We must be just before we are 
generous; and any act of injustice toward a brother shows a 
lack of love. 

After we have been for some time in the narrow way our 
powers of discerning between justice and injustice are keener 
than, when we first helieved, and when we see injustice on the 
part of another, it has a tendency to dampen our love for such 
an one. How often do we hear one say, "I am surprised that 
& brother or sister would be guilty of thus and so! It seems 


[6135] 


(2«2-263) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


a strange thing that we should have such trials among us." To 
this the Apostle Peter answers: ''Beloved, be not surprised at 
the fire among you, occurring to you for a trial,- as though 
some strange thing was befalling you." — 1 Peter 4:12. 
THE REMEDY TO BE APPLIED 

We are sure that it ia the desire of all the truly consecrated 
to be overcomers, to grow in the likeness of our Lord and 
Master and to put on love, which is the bond of perfection. 
How, then, may we do this, and what shall we do when we see 
these imperfections in the brethren which bring such a fiery 
trial amongst us? The Lord directed St. Peter to answer thi~s 
question. "Above all things have fervent love among yourselves
 , because love covereth a multitude of defects." (I Pet. 
4:8) The word "fervent" here means overspreading or 'covering
 up. In other phrase, the Apostle Peter says: Your brother 
has defects, and so have you; do not be looking at these defects
, but look at him as you would desire to have him look 
at you — as a new creature in Christ. Have amongst you this 
overspreading love which covers these multitudes of defects. 

Sometimes we hear of a brother who has served a class as 
elder for a number of years, and the class drops him from 
eldership for a period of a few months, subsequently again 
electing him to the position of elder; and he, believing that 
they have done him an injustice by setting him aside for a 
season, refuses to serve. Thus is his love for the Lord and for 
the brethren put to the test His conduct shows that he is 
not standing the test as he should. The opportunity for service
 should be accepted and used as unto the Lord. The Apostle 
Paul shows us the proper attitude, saying, "And I will very 
gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly 
I love you the less I am loved." (2 Corinthians 12:15) By 
so doing we manifest a love for God and for Christ Jesus and 
an unselfish desire to serve the brethren, and thereby we prove 
our love for them also. Growing in this love we shall ultimately 
be united in the bond of perfection. As thus we develop the 
precious fruit of the spirit, the peace of God will keep our 
minds and hearts through Christ Jesus. 

LOVE FOR OUR ENEMIES 

The Lord Jesus commanded that we should love our enemies, 
(Matthew 5:44, 46; Luke 6:27-32) If every one loved his 
enemies, soon there would be no enemies, During the Millennial
 reign of Christ many enemies will be transformed by being
 gradually raised up to perfection of character, where love 
will take the place of hatred. Those who remain perverse will 


be destroyed utterly. The Lord commands that the Christian 
shall now develop in his heart this feeling of love toward his 
enemies. 

In what way shall we love our enemies? With a love of 
fellowship, a sympathetic love? We answer, No; we have no 
sympathy with those who do not love God, and who are pursuing
 a wrongful course. How, then, shall we love them ? We 
answer, With a pity-love. We are to have sympathy for them. 
"God commendeth his love toward us in that when we were yet 
sinners Christ died for us/' He pitied mankind in their fallen 
condition. So, we must have in our hearts a keen desire to do 
good even to our enemies, if the opportunity presents itself. 
And even though they persecute us and say all manner of evil 
against us falsely for Christ's sake, and defame the good name 
of the Lord Jesus and of the brethren, yet we should remember 
that in blindness and ignorance they do it. Pity them for it. 
and leave their judgment to the Lord. 

THE REWARD OF THE FAITHFUL 

As we journey along in the narrow way, walking by faith. 
hoping for the glory of God, let us keep in mind the words 
of the Apostle Paul: "And now abideth faith, hope, love. 
these three; but the greatest of these is love.' 5 And having 
this in mind let xis progress unto the point of perfection in 
Christ Jesus. Thus doing we have the blessed assurance of the 
reward which God has in store for those that love him. The 
tests are now severe. We should expect it to be thus. These 
tests will grow in severity; but if we keep in mind the great 
reward which God has offered us, they will seem as nothing. As 
St. Paul puts it, These are but light afflictions and endure only 
for a moment, and are working out for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory. — 2 Cor, 4:17. 

"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heardj neither have entered 
into the heart of man the things that God hath prepared for 
them that love him!" How wonderful must be the glories of 
the kingdom of our God! How ^ranscendently beautiful thp 
things that he has in reservation for those who prove their 
loyalty even unto death, and who come off "more than conquerors
" through the merit of him that bought lis with his 
precious blood! To such the Lord says through the Apostle, 
"Blessed is the man that endureth temptation [tests], for 
when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life, which the 
Lord hath promised to them that love him." "Hearken, my 
beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of this world, 
rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised 
to them that love him!" — .Tames 1:12; 2:5. 


THE SON ALONE SETS FREE 

( If the Son, therefore, shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. } '—John 8:36. 


Jesus was here addressing Jews. They had the impression 
that they were free; but Jesus told them to the contrary, that 
they were still slaves, still in bondage. The Apostle Paul states 
that the entire race of Adam are slaves, sold under sin, sold 
into bondage. He explains that father Adam was the original 
transgressor, and that the sentence passing on him became 
a disability upon all his race, upon all human rights. "For 
by one man's disobedience many were made sinners." (Romans
 5:19) If any of Adam's children had been able to live 
above sin, and could have said, "Lord, even though Adam gave 
me an imperfect organism, yet I have kept thy law," we understand
 that such an individual would have been granted life 
everlasting. But no human being" could do this. "There is 
none righteous, no, not one." (Romans 3:10) God's requirement
 is that his law shall be kept fully. Although a member 
of the fallen race might keep the law in his mind, he could 
not keep it in his flesh. 

The Son has not as yet fully set any free. There is neither 
a free man nor a free woman in the world, in the full sense 
of that term. Even God's children realize that they have imperfections
 in the flesh; but they hope for the time when they 
shall be fully released from them. The Bible tells us that 
this time will come at the moment of our perfection in the 
resurrection, when we shall be made like our Lord and have 
perfect bodies. The most that we can have at the present time 
is freedom of mind. Mankind has been in bondage to sin, 
shackled by the fallen nature inherited from their forefather, 
Adam. 

For nearly two thousand years God had a special arrangement
 with the one nation of Israel. He proposed that this 
disability, which was resting upon the whole world, should 
be removed from Israel, and that he would not treat them 
the same as the rest of the world, but that they might be freed 
from condemnation and come back into his family, upon certain
 conditions stipulated. They thought this was a favorable 
offer, and that they would get a great blessing from it. The 
Lord had in mind that he would teach them a very important 


lesson, and that he would teach the angels and all of us the 
same great lesson ; namely, that they who go into sin cannot
 get free except in the way God has provided — and this way 
is through the sacrifice of Christ. 

DISABILITY TYPICALLY REMOVED 

So God made this covenant with the Jews, and agreed with 
them that if they would thenceforth walk in his ways and keep 
his statutes he would be gracious to them and blesa them, and 
they should be his people'. He made this provision for them 
in a typical way through typical sacrifices. But we see that 
this provision for sins was not one which really canceled the 
sins. The typical cancelation of original sin for the Jews was 
merely for a year in advance. It did not remove the disability 
entirely but merely relieved the nation therefrom for another 
year. They were unable through the year to keep the law, 
and the Lord's arrangement each year was in order that they 
might have another year of trial. Their sins were typically 
canceled afresh. 

If any one should keep the law, then the blessing of life 
w 7 ould go to him. If he failed to keep the law, then he would 
fail to gain the blessing promised on that condition. Year by 
year the Israelites tried to prove themselves worthy of eternal 
life. But the sin was deeper than the surface. It was not 
merely a weakness of intention, but of character. They could 
not keep the Law; and God wished them to know it, and wished 
us to know it. They nevertheless had a great blessing in the 
law, so that, when Christ came, they were the most advanced 
nation in the world, head and shoulders above all others. 
Having the only true religion, they had the blessings which go 
with true religion, aa far as they had faithfully conformed 
their lives to it. 

When Jesus came to the Jews, he accomplished a great 
work, which the Father had given him to do. The Father 
had promised to bless the world, and he sent his Son that he 
might accomplish this work of blessing through sacrifice. The 
death of Christ was the basis of all the real setting -free of 
the Jews and of all mankind from the death sentence that was 


[6136] 


September 


19*7 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(264-258) 


upon them. It was the basis of setting the Jew free not only 
from the Adamic penalty, but from the Sinaitic law additionally
. As a part of the Adamic family, the curse of death 
was upon the Jew. The curse was not removed by Moses (for 
Moses was not able to remove it) , or by anything that anybody 
had done prior to the coming of Jesus, 

THE CURSE OF THE LAW 

But the work of Jesus was so broad as to clear everything 
against any and all. Ordinarily, it would have been sufficient 
that Jesus should die in any manner; for the penalty upon 
Adam was merely that he should die. Therefore Jesus, to become
 the Redeemer of man, would have needed only to die. 

But the Jew had a special curse, or penalty, in the taw, to 
bo visited upon extreme cases of criminality. It read: "Cursed 
is every one that hangeth on a tree." (Galatians 3:13) So 
in order to redeem every Jew, it was necessary that Christ 
should suffer the extreme penalty that would come upon any 
Jew. This is the reason, the Apostle assures us, that Christ 
must be made a curse by hanging on a tree. He was not made 
n curse for the Gentiles, but for the Jews only. 

PURCHASE PRICE FOR WORLD NOT YET PAID 

However, the death of Christ was the one great settlementprice
 necessary for the sins of the whole world. But when 
Jesus died, the Just for the unjust, it did not bring us to God. 
It was only after he rose and ascended into the presence of 
God — entering the Most Holy, even heaven itself — and appeared
 in God's presence on behalf of those who would be of the 
church class, that the sins of these could be covered. The world 
has not yet been brought to God. Christ's merit has not yet 
been applied for them. The time for bringing the world back 
to God will be the next age — now, thank God, almost here! 

God's provision is that for a thousand years Christ will 
reign to bring the world into harmony with Jehovah. Some 
Trill need great chastisement, many stripes. It will be the 
work of that thousand years to instruct, to correct and to bring 
back to God as many as shall be willing to return. Their wills 
must come into harmony. But the matter will be left to their 
own decision. Many may then desire to be in harmony with 
God who do not now have this desire. One very important feature
 of Jesus' work during the Millennium will be to make 
known the marvelous riches of God's grace, that all may know 
Jehovah God, from the least of them to the greatest. They will 
have an opportunity to come back into that condition of mind 
and body which was originally possessed by the perfect man, 
plus all the experience gained during the six thousand years' 
reign of Sin. 

ONLY THE LOYAL WILL BE RECEIVED 

The work of Christ will not be accomplished for the world 
when they are awa-kened from death; that will be only a 
preliminary step. It will be necessary for them to be instructed
, to be chastised for sinful character and to be blessed 
for any well-doing, etc., and thus brought back to God. But 
the race will not become wholly free until the end of the thousand
 years, because each degree of alienation is so much of 
bondage that came upon them through Adam's fall — they are 
weak mentally, morally and physically. Mankind needs to be 
lifted out of all this degradation. Separation from God, alienation
 of mind, through disobedience, brought about the original 
bondage. And so we read that at the end of the Millennial age 
Christ will present to the Father all who are worthy. 

But the Scriptures assure us that any who fail to come 
back into harmony during the Millennium will not be delivered 
over to the Father, but will be destroyed during the Millennial 
reign. The Father does not desire any such. At the close of 
the Millennium, the Father will give all of the perfected ones 
a final test. He will say, "I condemned these once to death. 
I will receive back into harmony with myself only those who 
love righteousness and hate iniquity — none others. Those who 
again yield to sin will be cut off in the second death." 

The Apostle tells us, in Romans 8:21, that "the creation 


itself shall be delivere4 from the bondage of corruption into 
the glorious liberty of the sons of God." This has reference 
to the human creation. It shall be delivered from death and 
from slavery to sin during the thoasand years, by the great 
Emancipator who has already begun the work of purchasing 
the race, and who will complete the work in the near future, 
and will thus have a full right to deliver his purchased possession
. 

This is the glorious liberty wherewith all who accept God's 
terms shall be made free. This is the freedom wherewith the 
Son shall make them free. But we should apply our text 
especially to the church, for it was to this class that the Lord 
addressed these words. "If the Son, therefore, shall make 
you free, ye shall be free indeed." However, the only ones 
of any class who will be made free will be those who accept 
the terms of salvation. 

JEWS FREED IN A DOUBLE SENSE 

The Jews will be made free in a double sense; first, free 
from the condemnation of the law — upon certain conditions, 
They must become dead to the old law, must recognize that 
they could never gain life under it. If they will not become 
dead to the law, any such cannot gain eternal life. They can 
have eternal life in no other way than by accepting Christ's 
sacrificial work on their behalf." Some Jews accepted Christ 
at the beginning of this age and some have accepted him since. 
These realized that the law could not make* them free, could not 
make thorn acceptable to God. And so they gave up hope of 
attaining anything through the law, and laid hold on Christ, 
asking what they must do to have everlasting life. Jesus told 
them that they must die to their own will — not only die to 
the law — and must take up their cross and follow him and 
thereby copy the pattern he set them in his own course. As 
many as did this became free. So far as their minds were concerned
, they became new creatures. They had this freedom 
of mind in an earthen vessel, however, and they could not do 
in the human body all that they wished to do. 

But the Lord said that it was a part of the test upon them 
that they fight a good fight against the sins of the mortal body. 
If they were faithful in fighting a good fight against the flesh, 
he would give them proportionate honors on the spirit plane. 
This is the requirement of all his disciples. And he promises 
that all those who shall overcome shall become associates with 
him in his kingdom for the uplifting and blessing of the world 
and shall be his peculiar treasure forevermore. All these 
were under bondage to sin; all were under the death sentence 
—both Jew and Gentile. All these needed to be set free from 
sin and death, and the Jew also from the Sinaitic law. It is 
the San who sets these free! 

GENTILES FREED, BUT NOT FROM THE LAW 

How did the Gentile need to be set free? They did not need 
to die to the Mosaic law, because they never were alive to 
the law, never having been placed under it. But they did need 
to accept by faith the fact that Christ had died for their sins, 
and they needed to die to sin, and to give up the earthly nature. 
To come under the present call, they needed also to present 
their bodies living sacrifices, and to take up their cross and 
follow Jesus. 

All 'true disciples who heed the Word of the great Master, 
and continue to be his faithful pupils, are set free, not only 
from superstition and ignorance, but also from the service of 
sin. They come to have a correct appreciation of their own 
natural infirmities and blemishes. They come into harmony 
with the divine mind, and love the truth. Hence their freedom 
is a great blessing instead of an injury. It brings humility instead
 of pride and boastf ulness ; patience and self-control instead
 of anger and strife; generosity, benevolence and love 
instead of spitef ulness and selfishness; joy and peace instead 
of discontent and bitterness of spirit. Truly, the Son alone 
can make us free, and he whom the Son makes free is free 
indeed! 


TO THE WORK 


We have received letters of inquiry from many sections of 
the field regarding the general condition of the work and the 
outlook for the future. The friends everywhere are naturally 
very much interested in knowing how the work haa been 
progressing since Brother Russell^s passing beyond. The Society
 is glad to advise that since January 1 every month has 
shown an increase over the corresponding month of the year 
1916 and that the eight months — November to June, inclusive
 — show a large increase in all of the branches of work 
over the same eight months of the previous year. * This seems 
to us very strong evidence that the blessing of the Lord has 
been resting upon the work centered here at Brooklyn. The 
inquiries from those becoming interested are also on the increase
, showing tli at there is a great desire on the part of 
many to understand the conditions as they exist in the world 
today. Ifoe work at the Bethel and Tabernacle is^in good 
order, and the laborers are very desirous of cooperating to 
the extent of their ability. The Society believes that the outlook
 for the future is very encouraging and trusts, by the 
Lord's grace, to see a great deal accomplished during the coming
 six months. It urges upon the friends everywhere to put 
forth every effort to "work while it is called day." Now is 
the opportune time for presenting to our inquiring neighbors 
and friends and acquaintances that which will satisfy them as 
nothing else could do — viz., the truth. Whether it be by tracts 
or Studies in the Scriptures— 4he latter, if possible-^-or the 


[6137] 


(267-268) 


T H 11 WATCH TOW E R 


Brooklyn, N, V. 


Scenarios, let each be diligent to the full extent of his or her 
ability. The Society especially recommends the presenting of 
the seventh volume to your neighbors— not to the ministers, 
because this would only arouse them to more bitter opposition
 — hut to those who might have ears to hear. In presenting 


the seventh volume it is urged that the other six be mentioned 
also that, if possible, the whole seven may be secured. The Society
 will be glad to hear from friends everywhere as to their 
opportunities. "Go ye also into the vineyard"; "He- that 
reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal." 


It is urged that those having business with the Pilgrim De 
partment, respecting meetings, conventions and funerals, should 
address the Society in care of the Pilgrim Dept., otherwise 
there is likely to be a delay. 

The sending out of the seventh volume has raised the number
 of letters received during the last three weeks to 30,000. 
This has taxed the office force to the utmost. The Society 
would like to make individual acknowledgment of the thouSOME
 TIMELY HINTS 

sands referring to this volume, but finds this impossible. We 
trust the dear friends will accept this as an acknowledgment 
of their letters and of the Society's expression of their appreciation
 and love. Several hundred volumes have come back 
to us due to damaged labels en route. If you have not received
 a copy this may be the cause. All orders will receive 
prompt attention. 


THE GOODNESS AND SEVERITY OF GOD 

September 30. — Daniel 9:3-19. 

DIVINE JUSTICE MANIFESTED — THEN DIVINE LOVE — THE GOSPEL AGE A PABEN THESIS IN THE DIVINE PLAN — THE BLESSINGS COMING 
UPON MANKIND DURING THE INCOMING AGE — LOVE TRIUMPHANT OVER JUSTICE — GOD'S SEVERITY ILLUSTRATED IN HIS DEALINGS 
WITH ISRAEL — WHY THE LAND OF PALESTINE LAY DESOLATE TOR SEVENTY YEARS — DANIEL \S PRAYER TOR DIVINE MERCY UPON HIS 
PEOPLE — KEY TO TIME PROPHECIES. 

"The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. M — Psalm 103:8 
God's severity consists in his insistence upon absolute knowledge of the Lord, and understanding of his gracious arrighteousness
 — his refusal to approve sin in any degree or 
sense. The very first statement of the divine law is that 
death, destruction, must be the wage, or penalty, for transgression
 against his righteous regulations. For six thousand years 
the Lord has maintained his original position — has refused 
to sanction sin or to permit sinners to live. At first such' an 
unchangeable attitude seems severe, especially when we consider
 that all mankind were born in sin and shapen in iniquity, 
infested with weakness and surrounded by evil influences. It 
seems severe on God's part to insist upon perfection when all 
our experiences teach us that it is impossible for fallen humanity
 to attain absolute righteousness in deed, word and thought. 
Indeed, the Scriptures confirm our experience; for the Apostle 
reminds us that "there is none righteous, no, not one."— Romans
 3:10. 

While the goodness of God is not seen in his severity, yet 
they stand side by side, although wholly separate. God's 
goodness— his generosity, his mercy, his kindness, his love— is 
not manifested in the sentence pronounced upon father Adam in 
ISden, nor in the execution of its penalties upon humanity, but 
in the ^reat gift of his love— our Lord Jesus Christ and the 
redemption provided in him — a redemption coextensive with the 
fall of man and the condemnation incurred by our first parents. 
The Apostle expresses the thought pointedly in the words: "In 
this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that 


God sent his Only Begotten Son into the world, that we might 
live through him." (I.John 4:9) God's love was not previously
 manifested. For more than four thousand years only 
the severity, the justice, of the divine character was seen, 
although to Abraham and subsequently through the prophets 
of Israel a hint was given that God had kindly sentiments 
toward the fallen race, which in due time would bring blessings
 to all the families of the earth. 

THE GOSPEL AGE A PARENTHESIS 

The period between our Lord's first and second advents 
is in some respects a parenthesis in the divine plan, during 
which the church is especially dealt with. The redemption 
of the world and its reconciliation with God, based upon divine
 goodness expressed in the death of the Redeemer, wait 
for further expression to the world until the end of the Gospel 
age and the opening of the Millennial age — "the world to 
come." When the morning of that new day shall dawn, the 
goodness of God will be seen by mankind more distinctly than 
ever before. 

Indeed, it may be said that as yet the world has seen nothing
 of the goodness of God. It has seen merely his severity, 
his justice, executed against the entire human family for the 
last six thousand years. But a comparatively small proportion
 ofmankind has even heard of the grace of God in Christ, 
the only "name under heaven given among men, whereby we 
must be saved." (Acts 4:12) And even those who have 
heard to some extent have been measurably deceived by the 
great adversary in respect to the nature of the penalty for ain 
and the fullness and wideness of the mercy extended to men 
in the person of our Redeemer. 

In that new dispensation the facts will all be made clear. 
The blessings then coming to the world will be those of peace, 
righteous government, helpful influences, restraint of evil, 


rangements and purposes. All these blessings wdll be most 
convincing proofs of God's sympathy with mankind and of his 
mercy in Christ. The adversary who now deceives mankind 
will then be bound, that he should deceive the nations no more 
until the thousand years are finished. The Word of God, 
which in general is now a sealed book to the world, will then 
be opened; and as a result the knowledge of the Lord shall 
cover the whole earth as the waters cover the sea. 

Nevertheless, we are not to understand that this triumph 
of God's mercy and goodness then displayed will in any wise 
imply a change in his character or in his attitude towards sin. 
God never changes. (Malachi 3:6) Our Lord Je3us is "the 
same yesterday, today and forever." (Hebrews 13:8) When 
we come to understand the matter thoroughly, this unchangeablenees
 on God's part is a guarantee that the blessings to be 
bestowed under his arrangements will be everlasting, unending. 

Throughout the Millennial age the goodness and the severity 
of God will be displayed side by =dde to every creature. All 
must learn the lesson that God is kind, just, generous and full 
of blessing to all who are in harmony with him and with the 
principles of righteousness, but that he is and always will be 
like a consuming fire to all who are not in accord with his 
righteous arrangements for all his creatures. 
QCABTEELT EEVIEW 

In the studies of the paat quarter we have an exhibition of 
the severity of God's dealings with his covenant people when, 
notwithstanding his repeated expostulations, warnings and 
chastisements they wilfully pursued a course in violation of 
their national vows. Unlike any other nation in the world, 
Israel was brought into special relationship w T ith God, He 
chose them to be his people, and favored them above all other 
nations by giving them his law, by raising up for them judges 
and prophets, and by especially guarding and directing them 
in so far as they submitted to his will, as well as by warning, 
counseling and chastising them when they became disobedient. 

On the other hand, Israel as a nation entered into a solemn 
covenant with the Lord, saying, "All that the Lord hath spoken 
we will do." (Exodus 19:1-8) For the faithful keeping of this 
covenant God promised them all manner of earthly blessings 
and ample protection from all their national enemies. (Deu- 
(teronomy 28:1-14; . Leviticus 26:1-13) But corresponding 
curses were pronounced, to go into effect if the people disregarded
 their covenant. 

It was in fulfilment of this covenant on God's part that 
the downfall of Judah came to pass. Backsliding Israel, the 
ten-tribe kingdom, had previously been carried away captive. 
(2 Kings 17:1-24) Judah had not profited hy this example 
of the Lord's displeasure nor by the warnings of his prophets, 
but had outrivaled her sister kingdom in corruption. When 
her cup of iniquity was full, the Lord poured upon her the 
merited punishment, due alike to king and people; for "neither 
Zedekiah nor his servants nor the people of the land did 
hearken unto the words of the,. Lord which he spake by the 
Prophet Jeremiah." — Jeremiah 37:2. 

DANIEL'S PRAYER FOB HIS PEOPLE 

The seventy years which followed the overthrow of Judah 
are frequently referred to as the seventy years of captivity; 
but the Scriptures designate them the seventy years of desoia- 

[6138] 


SBmifBJtE 1 ( 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(268-269) 


tion of the land — a desolation which had been predicted by the 
Prophet Jeremiah. (Jeremiah 25:11, 12) The completeness 
of the desolation is shown in Jeremiah 39:8-10 and in 2 
Chronicles 36:17-21. Although the kin^ of Babylon permitted 
certain of the poor of the land to remain, and gave them vineyards
 and fields, yet it was the Lord's purpose that the land 
of Israel should be desolate for seventy years; and it was so. 
Later in the same year the governor whom the king of Babylon 
had appointed was slain, and the entire population speedily 
removed into Egypt for fear of the wrath of the king of 
Babylon.— 2 Kings 25:21-26; Jeremiah 41:1-3; 43:5, 6. 

The reason why the land must be desolate for exactly 
seventy years is a Very interesting study; and the Scriptures 
clearly state it to be "to fulfil the word of the Lord by the 
mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths; 
for as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath to fulfil three 
score and ten years." (2 Chronicles 36:21) Tor a detailed 
explanation see Studies isr the Scriptures, Vol. 2, Study VI. 

The Prophet Daniel was a close student of prophecy. Accordingly
 as the seventy years drew to a close he understood 
the matter. During this period he had been shown many 
visions, as recorded in Chapters 2, 4, 7 and 8 of his prophecy, 
all of which showed great prosperity and exaltation to heathen 
or Gentile kingdoms. But his special interest was in his own 
nation, and he had not been informed concerning Israel's future
. Knowing, however, that the period of Judea's desolation
 was nearly complete, he prayed earnestly for the return 
of God's favor to his people, and for the fulfilment of the 
promise made to the fathers — 'the Abrahamic covenant of blessing
 to all the families of the earth. 

Daniel saw not the scope of the divine plan as we may 
now behold it. Nevertheless his earnestness and his faith in 
the promise were pleasing to God, who therefore revealed to 
him something more concerning the vision related in Daniel 8^ 
an increase or further elaboration of it, in the features which 
especially pertained to natural Israel. In this former vision a 
period of 2300 days had been mentioned. Daniel had misunderstood
 this period to mean a prolonging of the seventy years 
desolation, and was praying over the matter, as recorded in 
today's study. 

THE KEY TO TIME PROPHECIES 

While he was thus praying, the angel Gabriel was sent 
to explain further the misunderstood vision. This explanation 
(Daniel 9:20-27) is of great importance for two reasons: (1} 
it marks the date of our Lord's first advent; (2) it furnishes 
a key to some other prophecies whioh have been hidden in 
like manner — a day for a year. This prophecy was so worded 
that Danied and other Jews might, if they chose, think it incredible
 and in due time forget it; or it might be remembered 
by those who "waited for the consolation of Israel," and who 
might infer the time to be symbolic. (Ezekiel 4:6) Certain 
it was that faithful Israelites knew to expect Messiah. It is 
even written that all men were in expectation of him (Luke 
3:15), although they were not all able to receive him in the 
way he came. 

The marked -off period of Jewish history was declared by 
Gabriel to be seventy weeks from the going forth of a decree 
to build Jerusalem — not the temple, but the city. During this 
period the city would be rebuilt under unfavorable circumstances
 in troublous times; sin would be finished by the making 
of a reconciliation for iniquity; and righteousness would be 
established — not like that justification accomplished year by 
year with the blood of bulls and goats, but the true and everlasting
 righteousness, brought about by the sacrifice of Christ. 
Daniel was also informed that he who would introduce the better
 sacrifices would thereby cause the typical sacrifices and 
oblations of the Law Covenant to cease. 

During this period Messiah, the long-expected Savior of 
Israel would come; and sixty-nine symbolic weeks are given 
as the measure of the time to his presence. After his coming 
there would remain one symbolic week, the last, the seventieth 
of this promised favor. In the midst of this week, it was 
foretold, he would cause the typical sacrifices to cease, by 
making "his soul an offering for sin." (Isaiah 53:10-12) These 
seventy weeks, or four hundred and ninety days, represented 
four hundred and ninety years, each symbolic day representing 
a year. And being so fulfilled in this, the only time-prophecy 
directly relating to the first advent, it furnishes a key to 
other prophecies which were also hidden in symbolic numbers 
— a day for a year — until their due time for solution. 

It should, be noticed that the sixty-nine symbolic weeks, 
or four hundred and eighty-three years, reach unto Messiah 
the Prince, and not to the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem. The 
Hebrew word .Messiah, corresponding to the Greek word Christ, 
signifies the Anointed, and is a title rather than a name. Our 
Lord was no? the Anointed, the Messiah, the Christ, until after 
his baptism. He was anointed with the holy Spirit immediately
 upon coming out of the water. This was when he attained
 manhood's estate, which under the law was at thirty 
years of age. Hence the sixty-nine weeks, or four hundred 
and eighty-three years, ended in the autumn of A. D. 29. Our 
Lord's ministry covered three and one-half years, ending with 
his crucifixion in the Spring of A. D. 33 — "in the middle of 
the week." The remainder of the seventieth week extended, to 
the Fall of A. D, 36, the date of the conversion of Cornelius, 
the first Gentile to receive the Gospel. 


OUR LIGHT AFFUCTION 

'We are troubled on every side yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast 
down, but not destroyed, always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus. " — 2 Corinthians 4:8-10. 

For others not Christians to be thus troubled would mean 
great distress; for these have no hope beyond this present life, 
But for Christians to be troubled does not mean that they experience
 it to the extent of despair, or of being unreconciled; 
for they take their troubles to the Lord in prayer. Jesus is 
the great Yoke-fellow of each of his followers, and he bears the 
weight of the burden. He has said to them: "Take my yoke 
upon you, and learn of me; ... . for my yoke is easy and my 
burden is light." (Matthew 11 ;29, 30) And those who have 
thus come under the yoke of discipleship have proven the verity 
of the Master's word's, and can sing with the spirit: 


In our text the Apostle Paul was evidently describing his 
own personal experiences, though in a broader sense he meant 
also those who were his particular companions. In a still 
broader sense, his w T ords would include all followers of Jesus; 
for the Master warned us in advance that whoever would live 
godly should suffer persecution. The Apostle was finding that 
these very sufferings which Jesus had foretold were his own experiences
. — .John 16:2, 3; 2 Timothy 3:12. 

All of the Lord's followers do 'not receive persecutions to 
the same extent. Some have more trouble, some have less. 
These variations seem to depend in some degree on our natural 
talents. For those who, like the Lord, are more prominent, 
the persecution will be greater. They will be the special 
targets at which the enemy will aim their darts. The Apostle 
expresses this thought in his Epistle to the Hebrews. There 
were some who suffered persecution in a more public way, and 
others who shared sympathetically with them, and who suffered 
also as their companions. — Hebrews 10:33, 34. 

Some may be troubled who are not the open targets of the 
enemy. Some may be persecuted and cast out who are not in 
the forefront of the battle. They might have avoided this suffering
 by disassociating themselves from those who are 
prominent in the service, and who are the special objects of 
attack and calumny. Thus they might have escaped the 
ignominy and contempt which they have received through 
espousing the Lord's truth and his" cause. In all these experiences
 mentioned by the Apostle the difference is seen 
between those who ere the Lord's faithful followers and those 
who are not, between those who endure joyfully and those who 
count their sufferings grievous tind undesirable. 


"His yoke is easy, his burden is light; 
Fve found it so, I've found it so; 
He leadeth me by day and by night, 
Where living waters flow!" 

A3 in the case of the Apoetle, we may be in great perplexity 
pt times; for in some of our experiences the adverse conditions
 are severe. But the Apostle never got into that mental 
condition where he was hopeless. The Lord is the captain of 
our salvation; thus reasoned St. Paul. And the Lord had 
promised that the afflictions should work out for him far 
greater glory. So he concluded that if these things were to 
work out the greater glory, then he would rejoice, instead of 
despairing. 

In our text St. Paul says, that, though sometimes cast 
down, he was not destroyed. He mentions in one of his Epistles 
(Romans 9:2) that he had great heaviness and continual sor- 


[61391 


(270-271) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


row in his heart for his kinsmen according to the flesh, the 
Jewish nation, because of their unfaithfulness to their covenant 
with God. He also telh us, in this same Epistle from which 
our text is taken, that out of much affliction and anguish of 
heart he wrote unto the church at Corinth, with many tears, 
because of his love for them, and because one of their number
 had by his wrong course caused grief to the Apostle. But 
when he thus sorrowed, it seemed to be because of his interest 
in and care for others, and not because of his own troubles. 
His was a brave, courageous heart, fully anchored in God. 
"WHY HAST THOTJ FOBSAKEN ME?" 

The child of God may be persecuted, but he will not be 
forsaken, even though the outward experiences may seem for 
the time to indicate that he is forsaken. It might be asked, 
If Jesus was the Son of God, why would the Father permit 
his being beaten, his having enemies spit in his face, buffet 
and persecute him? We reply, The Master knew that there 
was a reason for all this, else the Father would have hindered 
it; and he submitted fully to his every experience. The Father's 
love for him, which he could not doubt, upheld him in all his 
trials and sore afflictions. In the Garden of Gethsemane the 
Master suffered very great sorrow and anguish of soul ; but as 
soon as he had received from the Father the assurance of his 
continued favor, he was no more distressed. On the cross he 
was indeed forsaken for a very brief period, when he cried: 
"My God! My God! why hast thou forsaken me?" But this 
was a necessary experience of our Lord. It is not necessary 
for us, although some might have a similar feeling as death 
approaches. 

Jesus was the perfect One, and experienced to the full the 
penalty of father Adam's sin. As God withdrew himself entirely
 from Adam the sinner, so it was necessary that this 
One should experience the complete cutting oft from the 
Father, that he should be utterly forsaken by God, for a 
moment. And we see that this was just at the last moment 
of his life. Apparently it broke the Master's heart. He had 
not, perhaps, known that he would be utterly forsaken. To 
One who had been in such close and perfect fellowship with the 
Father, and was so dependent upon him, this was a most bitter
 experience, as his dying cry of anguish testified. We sometimes
 speak of heart-breaking experiences, yet we use this expression
 in a metaphorical sense. But in the case of Jesus, it 
seemed to be an actual breaking of the heart. When the 
soldier's spear was thrust into his side, water and blood came 
forth, thus indicating that the heart was literally ruptured. 

SUFFERING WITH OHBIST A CAUSE FOR REJOICING 

In many respects the Apostle's sufferings were along the 
same lines as those of our Lord. But like the Master he was 


of good courage. Summing up his experiences he saya : "Always 
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus." The 
dying of Jesus was manifested in the Apostle's sufferings. Our 
Ix>rd adopts the bodies of his disciples as part of his own; 
their flesh is counted as his flesh. Thus the sufferings of Jesus 
in the flesh have been going on for more than eighteen hundred 
years since he died. The though that any of our experiences 
would be counted in as a part of the sufferings of the Master 
should enable us to rejoice in such tribulation, knowing that 
these sufferings will unitedly "work out for us a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory/' — -2 Corinthians 4:17, 
18. 

If we joyfully endure afflictions for the sake of the Lord 
and his truth, if we gladly suffer shame, ignominy, persecution
 and trial, we shall thus have experiences most like our 
beloved Head and Exemplar; and we may be sure that in proportion
 to our patience, faithfulness and joy in these experiences
 will be our future reward when our place in the 
kingdom shall be assigned to us. "As star differeth from star 
in glory, so also is the resurrection of the dead." — 1 Corinthians 
15:41, 42. 

When it is remembered that our severe troubles and sufferings
, our chiselings and polishings, are but for a moment, as 
compared with the disciplines of those who will be dealt with 
in the incoming age, and especially in comparison with the 
ages of glory, blessing and unmingled joy of our eternal future 
if we are faithful — when it is remembered also that in proportion
 to our trials and difficulties we are granted more 
grace, according to the exceeding riches of our Lord's loving 
favor — then we can see that we, the Father's precious jewels, 
now being cut, ground and polished preparatory to mounting 
in his great diadem of glory, are truly highly favored above 
all men. Thus we may well take joyfully the spoiling of our 
goods — worldly reputation, etc. — knowing the glorious outcome
 when our God shall have fully made up his jewels, his 
loved and his own. 

Let us note the fact that it is only the strong, the seasoned 
and developed ones, who are able to bear the severest testings, 
the sharpest blows. It is a mark of special favor if our faithfulness
 shall bring us trials, buff e tings and adverse experiences. 
Remember that "rarest gems bear hardest grindings," and let 
this comfort and inspire us in every difficulty and trial. When 
the grinding and polishing process is over, the gem will shine 
the more resplendent because of the painful experiences endured 
in loving, patient submission and trust. 


THE AURORA CONVENTION 


This has been the best one yet, was the expression of many 
who attended the convention at Aurora, 111., August 8 to 12. 
Surely, it was good to be there, for the spirit of the Lord was 
manifest every day and at each session! There seemed to be 
a spirit of sacred seriousness and devotion more deep than at 
any previous convention, so far as we know. We presume that 
this, to a large extent, was due to the fact that we are drawing
 close to the end of our journey, causing everyone to watch 
and pray; and also to a feeling of deep thankfulness, as foretold
 by our Lord: "When ye see these things, lift up your 
heads and look up, for your redemption draweth nigh." Surely, 
with such a hope as that held before the church, everyone whose 
eyes have been anointed with the eyesalve of truth can rejoice 
greatly. The discourses were all helpful and encouraging, and 
the benediction of the Lord seemed to rest upon the speakers 
as they gave forth words of cheer, encouragement and admonition
. The program was carried out with but very little change, 
as follows: 

Wednesday, the opening day, wa3 designated "Fellowship 
Day," and the forenoon was devoted to an address of welcome 
and a response by the chairman, followed With praise and testimony
. In the afternoon there were discourses by Brother 
Bohnet, Brother Reimer and Brother Zink — all in harmony 
with the topic of the day. The topic for Thursday was "Our 
Sacrifices." In the morning, after the usual opening services, 
there were discourses by Brother Saphore and Brother Crist. 
It being impossible for Brother Martin to be present, Brother 
Hazlett filled the vacancy. The afternoon was devoted to discourses
 by Brother Barber and Brother Burgess. Friday was 
known as "Victory Day," and in the morning there were discourses
 by Brother Batter son and Brother Hooper ; in the afternoon
 by Brother Baeuerlein, Brother Robie and Brother Bowin. 


Saturday was "Harvesters' Day." Following the opening service
 was a praise and testimony meeting for the colporteurs and 
pastoral workers. It was refreshing to hear the m &ny testimonies
 indicating the Lord's blessing and guidance. This was 
followed by a discourse on baptism by Brother Van Amburgh, 
after which about seventy symbolized their consecration by 
water immersion. The afternoon was devoted to discourses by 
Brother Hudgings, Brother Rutherford and Brother Woodworth
. Sunday was known as "Kingdom Day." There were 
discourses in the morning by Brother Toole and Brother Graham
 and in the afternoon, for the public, by Brother Rutherford
. It was estimated that about twenty -five hundred were 
present. At 6 in the evening was the love feast for the 
brethren, at which thirteen or fourteen hundred were present. 

The zeal and earnestness evidenced on the part of the friends 
as they began to see their opportunities for heralding the coming
 of the kingdom by the distribution of the seventh volume 
was indicated by the disposal of nearly 1,000 in less than half 
an hour. Each seemed desirous of being found on the "firing 
line." 

Not least among the pleasures of the convention were the 
beautiful grounds at Fox River Park, which is about three 
miles outside of the city of Aurora. The location was ideal, 
quiet, retired, the auditorium good and the surroundings very 
suitable for convention purposes. The weather was delightful. 
The service and love of the Aurora friends were evidenced 
on every hand by their care in selecting places of entertainment
 for the visiting brethren. The attendance was larger 
than anticipated, starting with about 1,000 and closing with 
about 2,000. May the blessing of the Lord rest richly upon 
the dear Aurora friends and those who cooperated with them 
in making the convention so pleasant along temporal lines! 


[6140] 


LETTERS OF INTEREST 


HELPED BT OBITIOISM 
I>EAE BBETHBEN: — 

How I have awaited this opportunity to thank you for 
your service in passing upon my answers to V. D. M. Questions
! I not only received a rich blessing in trying to answer 
the questions, but what a wonderful help your criticism has 
been! For instance, question No. 12, "What will be the fate 
of the finally incorrigible?" I answered, "Second death." 
The criticism on the answer was, "Indefinite." At first I 
wondered how that could be. But since, some one has given 
me one of Haldeman's pamphlets criticizing Pastor Russell. 
He says, "After the first death there is a resurrection both 
of the just and unjust. After the second death there is no 
resurrection. As the soul survives, but has no resurrection 
body, then those who take part in the second death continue 
to exist as disembodied souls." I surely see why question No. 
12 needs a definite answer, for none but Bible Students know 
that death means complete destruction of being, which is everlasting
 in the ease of the second death, "Christ dieth ho more." 
I see, too, how answer to No. 4 was indefinite. In question 2 
I failed to refer to Studies, the wonderful books that helped 
me out of gross darkness into marvelous light. I assure you 
that I shall study to give more clear-cut answers to all who ask 
for a reason for our glorious hope. 

I was a Baptist Sunday School teacher once. I know well 
what they believed and taught. I have to laugh at Dr. Haldeman
 ; he is so hopelessly mixed up trying to discover some 
way out of the ridiculous plight his doctrine places him in, 
since Pastor Russell has turned the light on. Again thanking 
you, I am, 

Yours in his service, Mbs. James Wbight. — Ohio, 

NEVER BEAD ANYTHING SO GOOD 

Deab Bible House Bbetiiben: — 

I won't bother you but for just a moment. I can't keep 
from saying a few words of appreciation. But let me thank 
you for sending the seventh volume. It is grand I I have read 
since receiving it Revelation and I have never had anything 
do me so much good. I wish I could help you. But you 
have my prayers. I have vowed to put forth greater zeal, and 
to strive harder for the mark. My love is too great to put in 
words for all of God's gifts. So I will close, hoping soon to 
see you all. 

Through the merit of the dear Lord. 

WM. BlGGEBSTOFF.—lfan. 
GRATITUDE FOR PASSING A SUCCESSFUL EXAMINATION 
Deab Brethren ix Christ: — 

I have received your report on my answers to V. D. M. 
Questions. I cannot find words to express ray joy to you 
when I noted I had received the required 85% or more. I 
thought the best I could do was to lift my heart in humble 
gratitude to God and to our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the 
Great Examiner of the V. D. M?s I will very carefully search 
up the citations omitted and study the incomplete questions. 
Thanking you for your service and praying God's blessings 
on all your labors, 

I am yours in the Anointed, J. J, Lynch. 


READ THE VOLUME IN SIX DAYS 

Deab Bbetiiben : — 

The volume reached me 0. K. It was a most joyful surprise
. I was only six days reading it through, and today, 
the seventh day, I began canvassing for it; have taken some 
orders. 

It would be impossible to measure the worth of the seventh 
volume in dollars and cents; however if I were so fixed 
financially, I would take more pleasure in remitting $60 than 
60c, which you will find inclosed in stamps. 

Your brother in the service of the King of kings. 

Thos, Holden. — Mich. 

THINKS IT A WONDERFUL BOOK 
Deab Brethren: — 

I received the seventh volume a week or ten days ago, and 
it is a wonderful book, full of light as to how we should walk 
during the remainder of our pilgrimage. I cannot thank the 
Lord enough for this timely help. Find herewith sixty cents 
in payment for the book. I am hoping that the work will be 
issued in pocket size, aa I have the other six volumes so, but 
if not I am going to send for ten or a dozen copies soon as I 
am able. 
Yours in the Lord, D. D. Downing. — Kansas City, Mo, 

7TH VOLUME THE TOPIC OF CONVERSATION 
Deab Bbethben: — 

Herewith enclosed please find Post Office Money Order, covering
 cost of the seventh volume, "The Finished Mystery." It 
was the sweetest surprise of my life. "The Seventh volume" 
is now the topic of the day among the friends here. 

You evidently anticipated our anxiety to get this volume, 
and I want to thank you very kindly for your consideration in 
sending this wonderful book to me in the manner you did. 

With much Christian love to you, dear brethren, I remain, 

Your fellow servant, G. G. Nybeck. — Minn. 

7TH VOLUME CAME AS SWEET SURPRISE 

Deably Beloved Brethren in Chbist : — 

Not before, hut just when we needed it, came the seventh 
volume. Praise ye the Lord! God bless the memory of "'that 
servant!" How sweet to know that he has held high the banner
 of the Lord, faithful even unto death; and won an immortal
 crown of glory, and to he forever with the Lord, whom 
he loved and served so well! Find enclosed price of the volume. 
Thank you for sending it right along. Although I had been 
thinking incessantly of it the past few weeks, it came as a 
sweet surprise. I was sewing when it was laid in my lap, but 
when I looked in the end cover, I said with great joy: "Thank 
the Lord, for the finished mystery"! And now, dear one3 in 
him, it remains for us to make our calling and election sure. 
He has provided the whole armor, in the use of which we may 
conquer by his grace. So let us strive to keep the weeds out 
of the garden of our heart, that the flowers of love may have 
room to enlarge. I am your isolated sister in that blessed hope, 

Mbs. K, M. Reed. — Md. 


DANIEL IN THE LIONS' DEN 

[The first fifteen paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled "Daniel in the Den of Liona," published in issue 

of July 15, 1899. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled "Greater Is He That Is on Our Part." 

published in issue of October 1, 1905. Please see the articles named.] 

