Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Taking a Firm Stand in School Is Rewarded
THE Bible foretells: “All your sons will be persons taught by Jehovah, and the peace of your sons will be abundant.” (Isaiah 54:13) In an extended way, “all your sons” can be applied to the entire body of God’s servants on earth, including the very young. Today, Christian parents make sure that their children are “taught by Jehovah” at home and at Christian meetings.
When attending school, however, young Christians are faced with difficult challenges. Often they find it necessary to take a strong stand based on what they have learned from the Bible. When they do, the results can be beneficial to students and teachers alike, as shown by the following experience from Micronesia.
On the small western Pacific island of Tol in the Chuuk Islands, the teachers in the local school told all the children to prepare for and participate in a school Halloween celebration. The Witness pupils were aware that the celebration could involve decorations and costumes portraying ghosts, goblins, and witches—all related to spiritistic traditions. These children could not conscientiously participate.a
From their Bible-based training at home and in the Christian congregation, they knew that such practices are displeasing to God, even when done merely for entertainment. To help explain their stand more clearly, the children invited Barak, one of the Witness missionaries on the island, to speak to their teachers.
After hearing the explanation, the teachers arranged for a second meeting, at which Barak could speak to the entire school faculty. At this meeting, Barak presented facts to show the true nature of Halloween. He drew his information from several Watch Tower publications as well as from other sources. Teachers and administrators were amazed at what they learned about the origin, history, and religious nature of the celebration. They chose to hold a staff meeting to decide how to resolve the situation.
A few days later, an unexpected decision was announced. All preparations for Halloween were being canceled. The school would simply not celebrate Halloween that year. What a favorable outcome resulted from these young Witnesses’ determination to do what is right in school! Young ones never need to be afraid or ashamed to take a clear stand for Bible truth.
Around the world, Jehovah’s Witnesses teach their children to work hard in school. Young Witnesses are also trained to live by Bible principles and to share their hope and beliefs with other students as they have opportunity. Even when the results are not as favorable or immediate as they were in this case, youths can have the confidence and satisfaction that come from doing what is right. And more important, they can be sure that their heavenly Father is pleased and will bless them for their faithful obedience.
[Footnote]
For more information on Halloween and its spiritistic origins, see the November 22, 1993, issue of Awake!, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.

