Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Expanded Facilities to Match Kingdom Increase
DEDICATION day for recently expanded branch facilities of Jehovah’s Witnesses was a very happy day in the Caribbean island of Jamaica. This expansion had become necessary because of Jehovah’s blessing on the faithful efforts of the brothers in preaching the good news in this beautiful tropical island.
A missionary home was established in Jamaica as early as 1946. With the missionaries spearheading the work, the increase in publishers was rapid, so that in just ten years the average number of Witnesses reporting monthly grew from 732 to 3,216. In order to care for the increase, it became necessary to arrange for new facilities.
In 1954 suitable land was obtained and construction began on a sturdy new two-story building in a quiet suburban area of Kingston. It was completed in May 1958. The number of publishers that year rose to a peak of 4,367.
The ‘planting’ and ‘watering’ continued and Jehovah “kept making it grow,” so that by 1983 the number of publishers had grown to over 7,000, creating the need for further expansion. (1 Corinthians 3:6) The Branch Committee, with the approval of the Governing Body, decided to expand the present facilities. Over 250 brothers from all over the island came to help out. Skilled and unskilled workers volunteered their services as masons, carpenters, electricians, and plumbers. Their ages ranged from 10 to 86. Some contributed financially to the project, others contributed food for the workers, and still others opened up their homes to provide accommodations for volunteers who came from far away. In one year the project, consisting of adding a third floor of five rooms and a recreational area, a room on the second floor, and 400 square feet (37 sq m) of storage space, was completed, ready for use by the 11 members of the Bethel family.
Milton Henschel, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, gave the dedication talk on February 22, 1986. He spoke on the theme “The Triumphal Procession.” (2 Corinthians 2:14) Those listening to the dedication program totaled 2,949. Of these, 380 were located in the Kingdom Hall and other parts of the building, and the others were tied in by telephone and radio to other Kingdom Halls in the city and to a school auditorium.
Most of those invited to the branch Kingdom Hall were brothers and sisters who had been in the truth for 30 years or more. Many expressions of appreciation were heard for the fine addition to the building. It is our hope that many more of the “great crowd” of “other sheep” will yet join the triumphal procession as the new branch facilities are used in caring for the Kingdom increase in Jamaica.

