Remember Your Grand Creator in Your Youth
“DISCONTENTED Youth: A Fact of International Life.” So read the headline of an article in The Star of Johannesburg, South Africa. The caption for the article read: “With huge populations of youths now confronting limited opportunities that are being even further reduced by worldwide recession, dissatisfaction of youth in bulging cities has become a conspicuous fact of international life. In the riots in Miami, in San Salvador, in Managua, in Teheran and in Cape Town there was one common aspect​—in each case the first to kill and to be killed were the youth.”
That was published some ten years ago, and circumstances have become worse since then. Why such discontent among young people worldwide? The growing instability of this system of things is definitely a factor. Unemployment has reached epic proportions. And with rapidly deteriorating family life, what security is there for young people? No wonder some of them lash back at a world beyond their control. Is this not because they lack a sure hope on which to anchor their lives?
One would expect the world’s religions to infuse such a hope. Yet, one youth wrote: “I am very confused. . . . I have many friends, belonging to many different religions, and they are just the same as me. I am really so confused I do not know what to believe anymore. Please, could you give me some advice?” What advice would you give such a young person?
Youths who stick close to God’s Word and the true Christian congregation are spared such confusion and heartache. Whereas most young people do not have a sure hope for the future, Christian youths trust in Jehovah God and his sure Word of truth. Hence, they have the prospect of surviving the end of this system of things with everlasting life in view. Thereafter, on an earth cleansed of injustice and wickedness, they will form part of the foundation of the “new earth” in which “righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Peter 3:13; John 17:3) For the realization of such glorious prospects, young people are admonished to ‘remember their Grand Creator.’ (Ecclesiastes 12:1) And the best advice that can be given is that they become and remain an integral part of the Christian congregation. Why is this?
The majority of you young people in the Christian congregation have believing parents who love you and care for you. Each congregation has its appointed elders, who are keenly interested in your spiritual welfare. Such help and care should not be minimized. The truth from God’s Word, along with theocratic direction, will give you security, freedom from frustration, and a sure hope for the future. All of this will help you to ‘hold faith and a good conscience’ and cling to a hope that is like an anchor preventing a vessel from experiencing shipwreck in stormy seas.​—1 Timothy 1:18, 19; compare Hebrews 6:19.
Steer Clear of Worldly Enticements
In spite of the manifold spiritual blessings that you young ones can enjoy in the Christian congregation, the tendency of some is to pursue the ways of the world. It is as if they feel they are lacking something worthwhile that can be found only in the world outside the Christian congregation. But does the world really have anything worthwhile to offer?
After spending more than 40 years in the full-time ministry, one of God’s servants put matters this way: “The only part of my life that I regret is the part that I lived before I came into the truth. I was then a part of the world. I lived only for the world. When I reached the age of 18 and looked back over my life, I realized that it was empty. There was no aim, no purpose, to my life. The worldly pleasures I thought I enjoyed really brought only frustration and sorrow. I began to search for the truth. I found it and a year later started to engage in the full-time service. I had no money, just a year’s experience in the truth and faith that Jehovah would back me up. Now when I look back over my life, two thirds of which I have spent in full-time service, I am extremely happy. I will never want to exchange what I have gained from serving Jehovah for anything the world has to offer.” Indeed, this echoes the feelings of thousands of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
So why long for things that other Christians have left behind? Why yearn for the things of a world that is heading for destruction? (1 John 2:15-17) As a young person, perhaps you feel that serving Jehovah is too restrictive and will cause you to lose out on the enjoyment the world offers. But is it wise to view your parents and the elders as too restrictive when they want to help you to please Jehovah and gain everlasting life?
If a mother who is sending her child to a local store reminds him to stop and look both ways before crossing the street, would you consider her to be overly restrictive? Rather, is she not lovingly trying to protect her child? Suppose the child ignored the warning and was struck by a car and killed? Would you still feel that the mother had been too restrictive? Why, you might think that she should have taken more precautions to protect the life of her child! Similarly, the reminders from God’s Word and his organization are given lovingly, not as restrictions but for our protection.
Growing up in a Christian home is not enough to make you able to withstand the pressures of this world. You also need to be personally convinced of the truth of God’s Word. Such personal conviction and love for the Creator form a basis for dedicating your life to God. This personal conviction is also necessary in order for you to be able to defend your faith before others. (1 Peter 3:15) Being guided by God’s Word is the basis for a successful life. (Joshua 1:8; Psalm 119:9) But for success in life, you also need good training.
Giving Specific Training
Surely, you Christian parents would be delighted to see your children take a firm stand for the truth and remain united with you in true worship. It is primarily the father’s responsibility to bring children up “in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.” (Ephesians 6:4) But can you spot areas wherein you need to improve in training them? Are you spending enough time with your children? Do you do things as a family? And do you enjoy wholesome recreation together?
Do not forget that your setting the right example has a powerful effect on your children. If you want them to take the truth seriously, then that is the way you should view it. (3 John 2-4) And if you want them to develop deep respect for Jehovah’s organization and the elders, then you should always have such a healthy attitude yourself.
Although child training is primarily the duty of parents, elders also have a responsibility toward young ones in the congregation. In caring for God’s flock, overseers also need to shepherd the lambs. (1 Peter 5:1-3) What a fine example Jehovah has set in tenderly caring for even the little ones! (Isaiah 40:11) Responding to his example, Christian undershepherds will also want to display warm, loving interest in young people and make them feel a part of the congregation. Some youths have expressed the desire that the elders talk to them more often and help them in the field ministry.
Training a young person means more than giving him head knowledge of the Scriptures. From his heart, he must hate what God hates and love what God loves. (Amos 5:14, 15) If he is to remember his Creator in youth, he needs to be Scripturally disciplined in walking in Jehovah’s way of righteousness. (Proverbs 22:6; 2 Timothy 3:16) Parents should not hold back the needed discipline. Some parents who want to keep their child’s friendship at all costs are inclined to overlook wrongdoing, playing down its seriousness. They become influenced by the world’s permissiveness. But it is the loving parent who is attentive to reports that his child has been misbehaving and gives proper discipline as needed. (Proverbs 13:24) Really, what Christian parent wants to keep a friendship based on permissiveness but lose his child for lack of proper discipline?​—Proverbs 22:15.
Have a Purpose in Life
Jehovah God made us so that we derive our greatest joy and satisfaction from serving him. Think of the tremendous field that you youths can cultivate. About half the population of the world is 20 years of age and younger. These young people are floundering in the sea of humanity. Whereas they have no hope, you Christian youths have a sure hope and something worthwhile to share with them. Through your fine Christian conduct and your zeal for Jehovah’s service, you may attract many of them to the truth. You can thus help them on the way to life.
What more worthwhile goal can you have than that of devoting your life to the service of Jehovah God? Have you thought of taking up the lifesaving preaching work on a full-time basis? Perhaps you can share in spreading the good news as a pioneer, or you can serve at one of the Watch Tower Society’s branch offices where Bible literature is produced. Even if you cannot do that, should you not make the worship of Jehovah the focal point in your life, thus remembering your Grand Creator? You have a worthwhile work to do. Until the end of this system of things, therefore, be determined to have ‘plenty to do in the Lord’s work.’​—1 Corinthians 15:58.
So press onward you Christian youths. Remember your Grand Creator now, and he will preserve you when he brings this godless world to an end. Yes, Jehovah will protect you at that time and bless you with an endless, glorious future.

