Why Jehovah’s Witnesses Call at Your Home
MANY persons wonder why Jehovah’s witnesses keep calling at their homes. Perhaps you are one of those persons. Really, the answer is simple. Jehovah’s witnesses love God, and in his Word the Bible he has instructed those who serve him to talk to other people about him and his loving purposes. Furthermore, they love you as their neighbor. For that reason they want to share with you something that has brought them peace of mind, an understanding of the significance of world conditions and a reliable hope for a permanently peaceful world.
The Bible long ago foretold the turmoil and trouble that the nations have experienced since the outbreak of World War I as well as the outcome. (Luke 21:10, 11, 31) It also outlines the course that we must take as humans during this crucial time in order to have God’s approval and be preserved to live in his new system of things. (Zeph. 2:2, 3) It is urgent to act. Your life and the lives of your family are involved. That is one reason why Jehovah’s witnesses call at your home, knowing that, if your heart is righteously inclined, you will be grateful for their visit.
Of course, not everyone appreciates it when Jehovah’s witnesses call. There are persons who, as the Lord Jesus said, “have loved the darkness rather than the light, for their works were wicked.” (John 3:19) The message of the Bible disturbs them, and they push it away. Even some who are deeply religious react harshly when Jehovah’s witnesses call. As they hurriedly shut the door, they frequently remark that their priest or minister has told them to slam the door on Jehovah’s witnesses and not to listen. But why? Some of them begin to wonder. Is there something in the Bible that their clergymen do not want them to know?
Other persons are simply indifferent. They are so concerned with materialistic pursuits that they have no time for spiritual interests. They are like those people in the days of Noah concerning whom Jesus Christ said: They were “eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark; and they took no note until the flood came and swept them all away.” Jesus said that it would be the same in our day. (Matt. 24:38, 39) But while there is yet time, people have the opportunity to heed the message of warning about the impending destruction of this wicked system of things. With earnest concern for their welfare, Jehovah’s witnesses continue to call on them.
Jehovah’s witnesses do not force their message on anyone. If a person does not want to listen, they go on to the next door. But when they are back in the territory again, they do not show any hard feelings against those who were indifferent or unkind to them last time. They call at their doors again. Perhaps some of them will be willing to listen. Circumstances in life cause attitudes to change. Such has been the case in countless thousands of instances.
Apparently you are not a person who shoves away the Bible’s message as published by Jehovah’s witnesses; that is why you are reading this magazine. As shown on the inside cover of this issue, there are millions more like you, because 4,850,000 copies are regularly printed in seventy-one languages. If you enjoy this magazine, there is something else that we believe you will enjoy just as much, and it does not cost even as much as the small contribution that you gave for this copy of The Watchtower. In fact, it is a service that is absolutely free.
What we have in mind is a free home study of the Bible, an hour each week, at a time convenient to you. Just what could you expect to learn in the course of perhaps a year of such weekly Bible discussions? Well, in a carefully planned program currently being used by Jehovah’s witnesses world wide, these points are covered:
Evidence that God is indeed alive and that the Bible truly is his Word. This is followed by a condensed coverage of the entire Bible, highlighting the principal ideas and showing how it all ties together and how it makes clear the purpose of God. Having laid this fine foundation, they focus attention on specific Bible topics and questions that have perplexed people everywhere; for example, How did the universe and living creatures, both human and spirit, come into existence? What does the Bible show the soul to be? What happens to that soul at death? Why must man die? Will it always be this way? Does the Bible’s promise of a resurrection mean that you will actually be able to enjoy the companionship of your deceased loved ones again? Where will they be raised​—in heaven or on earth? What conditions will prevail then? How do the prophecies of the Hebrew Scriptures and accounts concerning such men as Abraham, Moses and David affect us today? Is God a person, or three persons in one God? Are you obligated to keep the Law given through Moses? What about the Ten Commandments? the sabbath day? Why has God permitted wickedness to continue for so long? Will unrighteousness come to an end? When? How can we be sure? This is only a sampling of the stimulating questions that are given satisfying answers.
It is to provide to all persons, whether they belong to a church or not, such fine instruction from their own copies of the Bible that Jehovah’s witnesses call at their homes. Jehovah’s witnesses in your community would count it a privilege to conduct such a free home Bible study with you. Next time they call at your door, ask them about it. It is with a desire to be of service to you in this way that they call.
Gaining such Bible knowledge is vital to you and to your family now. Jesus Christ and his apostles showed that it can open up the way to everlasting life in God’s righteous new system of things. But the time left in which to act is short. Avail yourself of the opportunity now. Jehovah’s witnesses will be glad to help you.​—John 17:3; 2 Pet. 3:13.

