From Our Readers
Disabilities  The article “Young People Ask . . . Why Do I Have to Suffer With a Disability?” (May 22, 1993) dealt with this problem realistically. I’m disabled in both legs and very sensitive when people look at me with an air of pity. What hurts my feelings the most is when someone gives me a donation​—as if I were a beggar! What consoles me is to know that Jehovah does not see the physical condition but “sees what the heart is.”​—1 Samuel 16:7.
A. A. A. S., Brazil
I must take exception to your reference to cerebral palsy as a disease. Cerebral palsy is a condition caused by damage to the brain, usually occurring before, during, or shortly following birth. It is neither progressive nor communicable. It is not a disease and should never be referred to as such.
L. Z., United States
We are sorry if our choice of words gave offense. We used the word “disease” in the very general sense given in “Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary,” namely, “a condition . . . that impairs the performance of a vital function.” ​—ED.
Female Mutilation  Thank you for exposing what a demonic and vile practice female genital mutilation is! (“Millions Are Suffering​—Can They Be Helped?” April 8, 1993) If just one child can be spared the agony of this silent, hideous crime, then publishing the article will have proved worthwhile.
J. C., United States
My eyes filled with tears at the thought that parents cause defenseless children such suffering. News like this is not published in our press, so I thank you for keeping us up-to-date.
C. C. G. M., Brazil
Homework  Thank you very much for the article “Young People Ask . . . What Can I Do About So Much Homework?” (April 8, 1993) I read the article at a time when I was really under stress with much homework. I didn’t have time to relax or prepare for Christian meetings. I am now applying your suggestions.
M. H., United States
Emigrating  I’m pleased to express my gratefulness for the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Move to a More Prosperous Country?” (April 22, 1993) I’m 16 years old and have thought of moving to a country where I might have a better chance in life. But after reading the article, I feel that it does not matter where we live. If we let Jehovah’s Kingdom come first in our lives, we will surely be prosperous [spiritually] since Jehovah will help us.
V. L. A., Brazil
Rape  I had mixed emotions when I received the March 8, 1993, issue on “Rape​—A Woman’s Nightmare.” You see, my mother, a full-time evangelizer for many years, was the victim of a terrible assault and attempted rape in her own home. Reading the articles has helped the healing process.
P. G., United States
I am the assistant director of the local “Family Violence and Sexual Assault Services.” One of your young ministers got us started reading Awake! when he brought in the issue on child abuse. (October 8, 1991) We now subscribe. I want to let you know how impressed I was with your issues on domestic violence and rape. They were well written and researched very thoroughly.
D. G., United States

