Announcements
“PRINCES’ JUST RULE” WITNESSING PERIOD
“Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in justice.” (Isa. 32:1, AS) These heartening words point to the administration of a righteous government, now at hand. Without here questioning the motives of many who have held public office in an effort to benefit their fellow men, all will acknowledge that such have been in the minority, and their efforts have brought no permanent blessings. How thrilling, then, to point to God’s kingdom and its servants, the “princes”, whose rule is for the honor of God and the blessing of all its subjects! The just rule of these “princes”, under the King of righteousness, Christ Jesus, is now being announced. As a means of informing persons of good will, Awake! magazine is being offered during October on a subscription basis ($1 a year, 24 issues) together with a premium of three inspiring booklets on Bible themes. Join in passing the good news on to others, taking subscriptions wherever you can, and forwarding them, together with your report, to the Society.
BE SURE TO READ THESE!
Three timely booklets containing a wealth of up-to-date Scriptural information that is so essential to one who wants to make full use of the knowledge that the Scriptures provide for our day. Each deals with a matter of the most vital concern to those persons of good will who, living in the present evil system of things, see the need for praying with more understanding and earnestness than ever, “Let your kingdom come. Let your will come to pass, as in heaven, also upon earth.” The titles will impress their real importance upon your mind: “Can You Live Forever in Happiness on Earth?” “Will Religion Meet the World Crisis?” and “Evolution versus The New World”. The booklets may be had for 5c each, or 15c for the three, postpaid.
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY ANNUAL MEETING
The regular annual meeting of the members of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society (Pennsylvania Corporation) will be held on Wednesday, October 1, 1952, at ten o’clock in the forenoon at the Society’s Pittsburgh office in the Wabash Building, 410 Liberty Avenue, Pittsburgh 22, Pennsylvania. The usual notice by letter will be mailed to all the members of the corporation advising them of the meeting, and the letters will be accompanied by proxy forms. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not. The notices and proxies are mailed out September 1, 1952, and the members should expect to receive them so they can return the proxies by the 15th of the month.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 26: Obedience Leads to Life.
Week of November 2: Loyalty the Test.

