From Our Readers
Lateness  I greatly appreciated the article “Are You Always Late?” (June 8, 1989) You recommended anticipating waiting periods and bringing along reading material so as to be productively occupied while waiting for others. Your suggestions have proved to be practical indeed.
I. D., Nigeria
Bullies  Although I don’t get threatened with getting beaten up in school, I do get picked on a lot because my mom comes from a different country and looks different. Your article on school bullies (August 8, 1989) told me to ignore them, and that has helped me. I also realize now that a lot of those kids come from broken homes and are passing on their frustration to other kids. I’m so glad you are able to understand the younger generation.
M. D., United States
Oil Spill  When I saw the title “Oil Spill!” (September 22, 1989) I was a little skeptical. I had read much about the spill in the newspapers and magazines and wondered what Awake! could possibly add. Well, after reading the fact-filled, freshly angled article, the wondering stopped. You also went beyond where newspapers and magazines go and showed that the true answer to mankind’s problems will be in God’s new world.
C. K., United States
Special Needs  I am almost 14 and just wanted to thank you for the August 22, 1989, article on helping those with special needs. When I was in elementary school, we had three deaf children in our class, and people acted as if they didn’t exist and would talk about them because they couldn’t hear. So some of us got together and learned how to communicate with them. When the other kids saw how neat it was to do that, they started too! I hope one day to interpret for the deaf at conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
A. B., United States
Religious History  I am grateful for the series “Religion’s Future in View of Its Past.” I come across many people with varied religious backgrounds. These articles will help many to trace religion from start to present.
D. S., United States
I’m reading the series on religious history. I sure have learned a lot, more than I ever did in school.
B. J., United States
Dying Children  My ten-​month-​old granddaughter came down with diarrhea. The hospital sent her home, and she got worse each day. I remembered your article on saving children by using a formula for Oral Rehydration Therapy. (September 22, 1988) I followed the instructions, and the next day she began to regain her strength. The diarrhea stopped, and she completely recovered.
R. M., United States
Pet Care  I work at an animal shelter and often give lectures to educate the public in the responsibilities of pet care. I was thrilled to receive your article “Can You Really Care for a Pet?” (June 8, 1989) the day before a big school presentation. My colleagues were very impressed with the article and would like to use it in our fall newsletter. Too often people choose a pet because they are caught up in the emotion of the moment. It was impressive, though, the way you presented the realities and responsibilities a person must weigh before choosing a pet.
C. S., United States

