Be an Example in Fine Works
 1. Why do we need to be especially conscious of our conduct at the district convention?
1 When we gather in large numbers at district conventions, the way we act and how we treat others become especially noticeable to onlookers. Each of us, therefore, needs to give special attention to the Bible’s admonition: “Be sound in mind, in all things showing yourself an example of fine works.” (Titus 2:6, 7) Extra effort may be required to ‘keep an eye, not in personal interest upon just our own matters, but also in personal interest upon those of the others.’ (Phil. 2:4) Let us consider some areas in which we can apply this encouragement at our upcoming “Give God Glory” District Convention.
 2. What should we bear in mind in connection with rooming arrangements?
2 Rooming Arrangements: An excellent opportunity for us to display fine works is when making rooming arrangements. Please reserve only the hotel room you plan to use. Be sure to make the appropriate deposit in advance. During the busy check-in and checkout times, it is especially appreciated if we display the fruitage of God’s spirit. (Gal. 5:22, 23) For example, it may not be possible for everyone to obtain a nonsmoking room, even if you requested this when you made your reservation.
 3. How can we “work what is good toward all” at the hotel?
3 Our personal interest in others should be seen in our use of any complimentary breakfast arrangements. It is not appropriate to take to the convention site food that has been provided for hotel guests. It is appreciated when we conscientiously observe hotel rules and show consideration for the staff by leaving in the room a customary tip. In these ways we “work what is good toward all” and thus give a fine witness to others.​—Gal. 6:10.
4, 5. How can children bring praise to Jehovah, and what responsibility do parents have?
4 Parents and Children: In a world where so many youths are ill-mannered, our children stand out as different, and this brings praise to Jehovah and his organization. At times, however, problems have resulted when children were not properly supervised. (Prov. 29:15) Parents should not leave their children unattended at the hotel, including the swimming pool, or at the convention site.
5 Before the convention some parents have found it helpful to review with their children the kind of behavior that is expected of them. (Eph. 6:4) They help their children understand that genuine Christian love “does not behave indecently” or “look for its own interests.” (1 Cor. 13:5) The district convention is a time set aside to be taught by Jehovah, and children as well as adults can show respect for this arrangement by their conduct both at the convention site and elsewhere.​—Isa. 54:13.
 6. What effect can our fine conduct have on others?
6 Our fine conduct can do much to counter misconceptions and attract people to true worship. (Matt. 5:16; 1 Pet. 2:12) May all of those with whom we come in contact at our district convention receive a favorable witness by the way we act and how we treat them. In this way we will ‘show ourselves an example of fine works’ and glorify Jehovah.​—Titus 2:7.
[Box on page 4]
Be Considerate of Others
▪ Reserve only the room you plan to use
▪ Be patient during check-in and checkout
▪ Do not abuse breakfast arrangements
▪ Properly supervise your children
▪ Leave an appropriate tip

