Gathering Together to Praise Jehovah
 1. What is the convention theme, and why is Jehovah worthy of our praise?
1 Jehovah is almighty in power, unsearchable in wisdom, perfect in justice, and the personification of love. As Creator, Life-Giver, and Universal Sovereign, he alone is worthy of our worship. (Ps. 36:9; Rev. 4:11; 15:3, 4) This summer’s “Give God Glory” District Convention will strengthen our resolve to praise him as the only true God.​—Ps. 86:8-10.
2, 3. How will good planning enable us to benefit fully?
2 Good Planning Needed: For us to benefit fully from the spiritual feast Jehovah has in store, good planning is essential. (Eph. 5:15, 16) Have you completed your arrangements for lodging, transportation, and time off from work or school? Do not leave these important matters to the last minute. If you delay in asking for time off, you may miss a portion of this joyful occasion. All of us need to be present for every session.
3 Make it your aim to arrive early at the convention site each day. That will enable you to be settled in your seat before the opening song and will help you to be in the proper frame of mind to receive the instruction that is presented. Doors will open at 8:00 a.m. each day. Please do not save seats other than for those in your immediate family or car group.
 4. Why is it requested that all of us bring a lunch to the convention?
4 It is requested that all bring a lunch rather than leave the convention site to obtain food during the noon break. Your cooperation with this arrangement contributes to a peaceful atmosphere and allows more time for association with fellow believers. (Ps. 133:1-3) Please bear in mind that glass containers and alcoholic beverages are not permitted in the convention facilities.
 5. How can we begin preparing our hearts for the convention?
5 Listen and Learn: Ezra prayerfully prepared his heart to receive the word of God. (Ezra 7:10) He inclined his heart to Jehovah’s teachings. (Prov. 2:2) We can begin preparing our hearts for the convention even before we leave home by meditating on the convention theme and discussing it with our family.
 6. What can help us maintain our focus on the program? (See box.)
6 In a large auditorium, there can be many sights and sounds to grab our attention. Such distractions can easily turn our minds away from the speaker. When that happens, valuable information is lost. The suggestions found in the accompanying box can help us to improve our concentration.
7, 8. How can we show consideration for others, and what provision is available for those who are hard-of-hearing?
7 Show Consideration for Others: Cameras and camcorders may be used during the program, but to avoid distracting others, do so only from your seat. Cell phones and pagers must be set so that they do not disturb others. For the benefit of those who are hard-of-hearing, the program will be broadcast in the vicinity of the convention site via FM radio. An announcement providing necessary details will be made at the beginning of the first session. You will need to bring your own small FM receiver with earphones. No personal equipment should be connected to the convention site’s electrical or sound systems.
8 How we look forward to gathering together to praise Jehovah! May we be determined to glorify him by attending every session, by listening attentively, and by applying what we learn.​—Deut. 31:12.
[Box on page 3]
Listening at Conventions
▪ Ponder the talk titles
▪ Look up scriptures
▪ Take brief notes
▪ Isolate points to apply
▪ Review what you learn

