Return Visits Lead to Bible Studies
 1. Why is the return visit work so important?
1 Jesus commissioned his followers not only to preach but also to “make disciples . . . , teaching them.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) A preacher proclaims, but a teacher does more. He instructs, explains, and offers proof. One way we teach others is by making return visits on interested ones with a view to starting Bible studies with them.
 2. On whom should we call back?
2 On whom should you make return visits? Be sure to call back on all who accept literature or who show even a spark of interest in the good news. If you find interest when witnessing in a public setting, seek to obtain the person’s address or telephone number so that the interest can be cultivated. Be optimistic about starting Bible studies. Continue to search for those who will accept an offer to study the Bible, and you will likely find them.​—Matt. 10:11.
3, 4. What is involved in making effective return visits?
3 Show Personal Interest: Preparation for an effective return visit begins on the initial call. Successful evangelizers take note of what interests the householder, and they use that as a basis for further discussions. Some find it advantageous to raise a question at the conclusion of the call in order to prime the householder for the next visit. Our sincere interest in people keeps us thinking about them even after we have left the door, and it prompts us to call again without delay. If possible, try to return while the interest is still fresh​—perhaps even within a day or two.
4 When making a return visit, seek to build on your previous discussion. Make it your aim to share at least one upbuilding Scriptural point each time, and be willing to listen. Get to know the householder better. Then on subsequent visits, share the truths from God’s Word that most directly address his concerns.
 5. What simple approach could be used for starting Bible studies?
5 Be Bible-Study Conscious: Make return visits with the objective of starting a Bible study. How can this be done? Mention that you would like to share an interesting point, and open to a paragraph in the Knowledge book or Require brochure that you think will appeal to the person. Read the paragraph, consider the question, and discuss one or two of the cited scriptures. This can be done right at the doorstep in five to ten minutes. Conclude by raising the next question and making arrangements to continue the discussion at another time.
 6. How can we show that we appreciate the importance of making return visits?
6 Cultivating all interest we find is a vital aspect of our ministry. Therefore, set aside time in your weekly schedule for making return visits. Doing so will add to the effectiveness of your ministry and bring real joy.

