Service Meeting Schedule
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer months. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the “Give God Glory” District Convention. Where appropriate, use 15 minutes on the last Service Meeting before attending the convention to repeat pointed counsel from this month’s insert that applies locally. During the month of October, an entire Service Meeting will be arranged to review highlights of the convention program. In preparation for that discussion, all of us can take meaningful notes at the convention, including a list of specific points that we wish to apply personally in our own life and in the field ministry. Then we can encourage others by explaining how we have applied the suggestions.
Week Starting April 14
Song 20
15 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to feature the April 15 Watchtower and the April 22 Awake! In each presentation, both magazines should be offered as a set, even though only one is featured.
10 min: Question Box. Talk by an elder.
20 min: “Shining as Illuminators.”a Conclude with a five-minute talk based on the June 1, 1997, Watchtower, pages 14-15, paragraphs 8-13. Emphasize why we avoid any secrecy when it comes to the Kingdom message.
Song 134 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 21
Song 25
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: “Gathering Together to Praise Jehovah.”b Use the questions that are provided. Urge all to be present for every session, from Friday morning through Sunday afternoon. Stress the need to apply what we learn rather than just to hear. Consider the note above regarding what is planned for a Service Meeting in October, when there will be a review of district convention highlights. Encourage all to take notes.
20 min: “Make Room for It.”c Include interview of one or two who are making good use of their singleness to advance Kingdom interests. Have them comment on what helps them find contentment in their service.
Song 35 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 28
Song 51
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for April. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to feature the May 1 Watchtower and the May 8 Awake!
15 min: “Be an Example in Fine Works.”d Use the questions that are provided. Stress the need to abide by the rooming arrangements that have been put in place for our benefit. Explain why good conduct on the part of everyone is essential.
20 min: “Return Visits Lead to Bible Studies.”e To be handled by an elder, using the questions provided. Invite audience to include brief field service experiences that support the points being made. When discussing paragraph 5, reenact an experience from the local territory in which a Bible study was started.
Song 89 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 5
Song 120
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly review suggestions offered in the April 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 2, in the part entitled “Planning Ahead for Summer.”
20 min: “Well-Arranged Dress Shows Reverence for God.”f To be handled by an elder. Use the questions that are provided. Have each paragraph read aloud by a brother who is a capable reader.
15 min: A Good Report​—A Cause for Rejoicing. (Prov. 15:30) Audience discussion showing what the congregation accomplished as a result of the special effort put forth during March and April. Invite congregation to relate positive experiences they had in the following areas: (1) helping an interested one to attend the Memorial, (2) serving as an auxiliary pioneer, (3) encouraging an inactive publisher to resume his activity with the congregation, (4) helping a new one to begin publishing, and (5) cultivating the interest of those who attended the Memorial. Arrange some of these comments in advance. Give commendation, and encourage all to persevere in these efforts in the future.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

