Well-Arranged Dress Shows Reverence for God
 1. How can we express appreciation for our upcoming district convention?
1 Soon we will have the privilege of being Jehovah’s guests at the 2003 “Give God Glory” District Convention. How thankful we are to Jehovah for inviting us to such a rich spiritual feast! We can demonstrate our reverence for him and our appreciation for his spiritual provisions by the way we dress and groom ourselves.​—Ps. 116:12, 17.
 2. Why is it important for us to be clean and neatly groomed?
2 Clean and Orderly: Our appearance should reflect the standards of our God, who is clean and orderly. (1 Cor. 14:33; 2 Cor. 7:1) Our person, hair, and nails should be clean, and we should be neatly groomed. Sloppy grooming is common today. However, just because a movie star or sports hero looks disheveled is no reason for a Christian to do so. If we follow fads, people may have difficulty seeing the distinction between those who are serving the true God and those who are not serving him.​—Mal. 3:18.
 3. How can we ensure that our appearance will be in harmony with the counsel found at 1 Timothy 2:9, 10?
3 Dress That Befits Christian Ministers: When the apostle Paul wrote to the Christian overseer Timothy, he encouraged “women to adorn themselves in well-arranged dress, with modesty and soundness of mind, . . . in the way that befits women professing to reverence God, namely, through good works.” (1 Tim. 2:9, 10) To ensure that our attire is well-arranged requires careful thought. Clothing should be neat, clean, and modest​—not gaudy, sensuous, or provocative.​—1 Pet. 3:3.
4, 5. What cautions should Christian men and women heed?
4 Paul also cautioned against going overboard with “styles of hair braiding and gold or pearls or very expensive garb.” (1 Tim. 2:9) Being balanced in the use of jewelry, makeup, and other adornments is a wise course for Christian women to follow.​—Prov. 11:2.
5 The counsel Paul directed toward Christian women also applies in principle to Christian men. Brothers should avoid styles that reflect the thinking of the world. (1 John 2:16) For example, in some lands baggy, oversized clothing is popular, but this style does not present a fitting appearance for a minister of God.
 6. Why should we maintain a high standard in our dress and grooming when traveling to and from the convention, while at the convention, and following the sessions each day?
6 During Leisure Activities: When attending the program, most brothers and sisters set an excellent example in the matter of dress and grooming. However, reports indicate that some become lax when traveling to and from the convention or when engaging in leisure activities after the sessions. Really, our personal appearance​—whether during the program or at other times—​influences how others view God’s people. Since we wear our convention badge cards, we should always dress in a way that befits Christian ministers. This often moves others to compliment us and opens the way to give a witness.​—1 Cor. 10:31-33.
 7. What effect can our well-arranged dress and grooming have on others?
7 Just as a kind smile enhances the appearance of our face, so well-arranged dress and grooming dignifies the message we bear and the organization we represent. Some who observe us during the “Give God Glory” District Conventions this year may be moved to inquire why we are different and may eventually say: “We will go with you people, for we have heard [and observed] that God is with you people.” (Zech. 8:23) May each of us show our reverence for Jehovah by our dress and grooming.
[Box on page 5]
Present a Dignified Appearance
▪ When traveling
▪ At the convention
▪ During leisure activities

