“Make Room for It”
1 Once, when speaking with his disciples about marriage, Jesus referred to singleness as ‘a gift.’ Then he said: “Let him that can make room for it make room for it.” (Matt. 19:10-12) Some years later, the apostle Paul wrote about the advantages of singleness and encouraged others to follow his example in remaining unmarried. (1 Cor. 7:7, 38) Many today have ‘made room’ for singleness and are enjoying its advantages. What are some of these?
2 Serving “Without Distraction”: Paul understood that singleness afforded him the opportunity to serve Jehovah “without distraction.” Likewise today, a single brother can reach out for Ministerial Training School, and a single person is generally freer to enter the pioneer work, learn another language, move to where the need is greater, serve at Bethel, or be available for other special privileges of service. He may have more time and opportunities to engage in deep personal study and meditation and to commune with Jehovah in heartfelt prayer. The unmarried person usually has more time to give of himself in assisting others. All such activity is to one’s “personal advantage.”​—1 Cor. 7:32-35; Acts 20:35.
3 Such undistracted service to God brings rich rewards. After 27 years in Kenya, a single sister wrote: “There were so many friends and such a lot of work! We did things together [and] visited one another. . . . I was able to use the extra freedom and mobility that singleness affords to keep busy in the ministry, and this has brought me great happiness.” She added: “Over the years my relationship with Jehovah has deepened.”
4 Making Room for It: Jesus said that the motive for cultivating the gift of singleness should be “on account of the kingdom of the heavens.” (Matt. 19:12) As with any gift, singleness must be used properly to bring joy and benefits. By seizing the opportunities that singleness brings and by relying on Jehovah for wisdom and strength, many unmarried people have come to understand the value of making room for the gift.

